SISSETON, SOUTH DAKOTA MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
Sisseton, South Dakota 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 5, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

PREFACE 
    The Sisseton, South Dakota Municipal Code, originally published by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. in 2003, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. 
    The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the Code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 5, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ord. No. 651, passed April 9, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This Code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this Code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the Code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This Code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this Code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the Code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this Code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the Code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. No. 272, § 1, 1992)) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 5 a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the Code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a Code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new Code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the Code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior Code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new Code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
    As of Supplement No. 5, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the Code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the Code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 5 this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 5, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this Code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the Code text is amended. 
Insertion Guide. 
    Each supplement to the new Code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the Code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the Code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the Code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this Code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement Number 5, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2, 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in Codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your Code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this Code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Codified." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Not codified." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Codified/
Not codified Supp. No. 605  9-13-2010 Not codified 7 606 12-13-2010 Not codified 7 607 12-27-2010 Not codified 7 608  2-28-2011 Not codified 7 609  2-28-2011 Codified 7 610 Not passed 7 611  9-12-2011 Not codified 7 612 12-12-2011 Not codified 7 613 12-27-2011 Not codified 7 614  7- 9-2012 Codified 7 615  9-10-2012 Codified 7 616  9-10-2012 Not codified 7 617 12-10-2012 Codified 7 618 12-10-2012 Not codified 7 619 12-27-2012 Not codified 7 620  7- 8-2013 Codified 7 621  7- 8-2013 Codified 7 622  7- 8-2013 Codified 7 623  8-12-2013 Codified 7 624  9- 9-2013 Not codified 7 625  9- 9-2013 Not codified 7 626 12-23-2013 Not codified 8 627  7-14-2014 Not codified 8 628  8-11-2014 Codified 8 629  9- 8-2014 Not codified 8 630 11-10-2014 Codified 8 631 11-10-2014 Codified 8 632 11-10-2014 Codified 8 633 12-29-2014 Not codified 8 634  9-14-2015 Codified 9 635  9-14-2015 Not Codified 9 636 12-28-2015 Not Codified 9 637  2- 8-2016 Codified 9 638  4-11-2016 Not Codified 9 639  4-11-2016 Codified 9 640  4-11-2016 Not Codified 9 641  9-12-2016 Not Codified 9 642 12-29-2016 Not Codified 9 643 12-29-2016 Not Codified 9 644  6-12-2017 Codified 9 645  8-28-2017 Codified 9 646  9-11-2017 Not Codified 9 647 12-28-2017 Codified 9 648 12-28-2017 Not Codified 9 649 12-28-2017 Not Codified 9 650 12-28-2017 Codified 9 651  4- 9-2018 Codified 9  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted the "Sisseton Municipal Code" as compiled, edited and published by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. 
(Ord. 565 § 1, 2004) 
1.01.020 - Title-Citation-Reference. 
    This code shall be known as the "Sisseton Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Sisseton Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or in equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Sisseton Municipal Code." References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "municipal code" and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections and subsections as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 565 § 2, 2004) 
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Sisseton Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 565 § 3, 2004) 
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 565 § 4, 2004) 
1.01.050 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the Code. 
    The last ordinance included in this code is Ordinance 557, passed January 13, 2003. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 557, but prior to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 558, passed July 14, 2003; 559, passed August 11, 2003; 560, passed September 8, 2003; 561, passed August 26, 2003; 562, passed September 22, 2003; 563, passed September 22, 2003 and 564, passed December 8, 2003. 
(Ord. 565 § 5, 2004) 
1.01.060 - Effect of Code on past actions and obligations. 
    The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 565 § 6, 2004) 
1.01.070 - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be in-valid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 565 § 7, 2004) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Sisseton, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
    "City" means the city of Sisseton, or the area within the territorial limits of the city, and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    "Council" means the city council of the city. "All its members" or "all councilmembers" means the total number of councilmembers holding office. 
    "County" means the county of Roberts. 
    "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes and case law of the state of South Dakota, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    "May" is permissive. 
    "Month" means a calendar month. 
    "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
    "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    "Owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    "Person" means and includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    "Personal property" means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
    "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    "Property" means and includes real and personal property. 
    "Real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    "State" means the state of South Dakota. 
    "Street" means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city, which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
    "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, mean and include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    "Written" means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
    "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 522 § 1, 2002) 
1.04.020 - Interpretation of language. 
    All words and phrases are construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law are construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 522 § 2, 2002) 
1.04.030 - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules apply in the ordinances of the city unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 522 § 3, 2002) 
1.04.040 - Acts by agents. 
    When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirements are construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 522 § 4, 2002) 
1.04.050 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
    Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 522 § 5, 2002) 
1.04.060 - Computation of time. 
    Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it is also excluded. 
(Ord. 522 § 6, 2002) 
1.04.070 - Construction. 
    The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 522 § 7, 2002) 
1.04.080 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 522 § 8, 2002) 
Chapter 1.08 - CITY BOUNDARIES 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - City boundaries. 
    The corporate limits of the city are declared to be such as have been legally established and amended by law and ordinances of the city as shown on the official map on file in the office of the finance officer. Such map shall be incorporated in the ordinance codified in this chapter by reference and adopted as the official map showing the boundaries and limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-1-1) 
Chapter 1.12 - CITY WARDS AND PRECINCTS 
Sections: 

1.12.010 - Ward boundaries. 
    The ward boundaries of the city are declared to be such as have been legally established and amended by law, ordinances, and resolutions of the city as shown on a map on file in the office of the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 2-2-1) 
1.12.020 - Voting precincts. 
    The city council may combine or separate the voting wards within the city to establish voting precincts for the purpose of any particular election by ordinance as provided by state law. 
(Ord. 544, 2002: prior code § 2-2-2) 
Chapter 1.16 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.16.010 - Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city is guilty of an infraction unless the violation is made a misdemeanor by ordinance. 
B.  Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment 
C.  Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
D.  Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and such person shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. 523 § 1, 2002) 
1.16.020 - Restitution. 
    The court in imposing sentence on a defendant who has been found guilty of a misdemeanor shall order, in addition to the sentence that is imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section, that the defendant make restitution to any victim in accordance with the provisions of SDCL 23A-28. 
(Ord. 530, 2002) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapter 2.04 - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Duties. 
    The mayor and city council shall have such authority and perform such duties as are prescribed by the statutes of the state of South Dakota and city ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code § 1-2-4) 
2.04.020 - Regular meetings. 
    The regular monthly meetings of the city council of the city shall be held at the municipal building in the city on the second Monday of each month at 6:30 p.m., except when Monday is a legal holiday, and in that case the meeting shall be held at 6:30 p.m., on a specified date. 
(Ord. 510, 1999; prior code § 1-2-1) 
2.04.030 - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the city council may be held at any time on call of the mayor, or in case of his or her absence or inability to act, then by the president of the council; or in case both the mayor and president of the council refuse to act, then by four of the aldermen. In case of a special meeting, it shall be the duty of the person or persons calling the same to issue notice thereof to the aldermen, and it shall be the duty of the chief of police to serve such notices upon the aldermen before the time specified for such meetings. 
(Prior code § 1-2-2) 
2.04.040 - Adjournment of meetings. 
    Any regular or special meeting may be adjourned to meet at a later date to be fixed at the time of adjournment. 
(Prior code § 1-2-3) 
2.04.050 - Committees. 
    The mayor may appoint such committees of the members of the city council as he or she deems desirable to accomplish an efficient division of the work and duties to be performed by the council. 
(Prior code § 1-2-6) 
2.04.060 - Boards and commissions. 
A.  The city council shall have the authority to create such boards and commissions as are allowed under the statutes of the state of South Dakota as it may consider necessary and desirable and shall make such bylaws, rules, and regulations as are necessary for the orderly transaction and conduct of its business of which a record shall be placed on file in the office of the city finance officer. 
B.  The city council shall have the authority to create a municipal housing and redevelopment commission pursuant to SDCL Chapter 11-7. Pursuant to SDCL 11-7-11, a commission shall consist of five commissioners, three of which shall be residents of the area of operation of the commission, and two members who may be residents from the surrounding rural area of the commission. 
(Prior code § 1-2-7) 
(Ord. No. 639, 4-11-2016) 
2.04.070 - Salaries. 
    The salaries of the mayor and city council members shall be fixed by ordinance and the amounts shall be placed on file in the office of the city finance officer. 
(Prior code § 1-2-8) 
Chapter 2.08 - CITY OFFICERS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Appointive officers-Method of appointment. 
    All appointive officers shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council at the first regular meeting in May, and shall hold office until their successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Prior code § 1-1-1) 
2.08.010 - Appointive officers-Salaries-Bonds. 
A.  The following offices or positions of the city, as heretofore created, are continued, and the amounts of salaries and bonds to be furnished them shall be fixed by ordinance or by resolution of the city council, and shall be adjusted as deemed necessary by resolution of the city council of the city, and the amounts shall be on file at the office of the finance officer: attorney, chief of police, police officer, engineer, superintendent of water works, superintendent of streets, liquor store manager, public works director, and such other officers as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
B.  The salaries of such designated officers or employees shall be paid biweekly excepting that the city attorney shall be paid a monthly retainer and the city engineer quarterly on a per job fee basis. 
C.  In addition to the officers provided for above, there shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council, all employees of the city, and such other personnel, professional and otherwise, required and necessary for municipal purposes. 
D.  All compensation for the personnel shall be prescribed by resolution at any time prior to or after appointment. 
(Prior code § 1-1-2) 
2.08.030 - Compensation-Employees other than appointive. 
    The compensation of city employees not named above shall be fixed by resolution at any time regardless of the time when any city employee may have been appointed. 
(Prior code § 1-1-3) 
Chapter 2.12 - CITY ATTORNEY 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - City attorney. 
A.  The city attorney shall attend council meetings and such other meetings as requested by the mayor, draw ordinances and other documents which the mayor or the city council shall direct. As part of his or her retainage responsibilities, the city attorney shall offer professional legal advice on matters brought before the city council. 
B.  From time to time, the city attorney may be called upon to render extraordinary services to the city. This shall include but not be limited to representation of the city in courts or administrative hearings, providing legal services concerning major improvements or construction being done by the city and any task which takes an amount of time not contemplated by the amount of the monthly retainer paid to the city attorney. 
(Prior code § 1-2-5) 
Chapter 2.16 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Chief of police. 
    Under the direction of the mayor and city council, the chief of police is responsible for planning, organizing, and directing the functions of the police department. The chief of police determines policies to be followed by personnel in the department with respect to public relations, and enforcement of law and ordinances. The chief of police also assists in the development of regulating ordinances and laws regarding public safety. The chief of police coordinates municipal law enforcement activities with those of other agencies, analyzes budgetary problems and submits an annual budget, administrates personnel policies and training requirements, and makes recommendations on all appointments, promotions, discipline, and dismissals made in the department. The chief of police maintains a liaison with municipal officials, civic groups, and citizens on law enforcement concerns. 
(Prior code § 1-4-1) 
2.16.020 - Code of conduct. 
    Each police officer, when on duty, shall wear the insignia of his or her office on his or her outer garments in a conspicuous place, except when occasion may require that it not be exposed; and must be quiet, civil, and orderly in his or her conduct and deportment and refrain from violent, profane, obscene and insolent language, and abstain from intoxicating liquors, insubordination and dereliction of duty; and it shall be the duty of the chief of police to make complaint to the mayor or city council of any violation of this section immediately upon obtaining knowledge thereof. 
(Prior code § 1-4-2) 
2.16.030 - Contract with Roberts County. 
    The city council is authorized to contract with Roberts County to care for either county or city prisoners, for joint dispatching services, and such other terms as may be agreed upon between the city council and the county commissioners of Roberts County. 
(Prior code § 1-4-3) 
Chapter 2.20 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Established. 
    There is established an executive department of the municipal government of the city which shall be known as the Sisseton Fire Department and shall embrace one chief, one assistant chief, and at least three captains for each company and such other members, pipe persons, truck persons, assistants, and employees, and such companies or hook and ladder persons as the city may see fit to establish. 
(Prior code § 1-5-1) 
2.20.020 - Qualifications of firefighters. 
    All members of any company shall be able-bodied, of good moral character, and no person shall be recognized as a member of any company who shall not have been duly elected as such by a majority of the active members of the fire department. 
(Prior code § 1-5-2) 
2.20.030 - Rules. 
    The fire department may adopt such constitution, bylaws, and rules for its regulation and government, subordinate to the ordinance of the city as it may deem best calculated to accomplish the object of its organization. 
(Prior code § 1-5-3) 
2.20.040 - Duties of the chief. 
    The chief of the fire department shall have direct supervision and control of all fire apparatus and equipment owned and maintained by the city for fire extinguishment or prevention, or for the public safety; and he or she shall have sole and absolute control over all persons and property connected with the fire department. 
(Prior code § 1-5-4) 
2.20.050 - Destroying buildings in case of fire. 
    The chief of the fire department may direct that any building or structure be pulled, cut down, or removed, or he or she may take such other steps as he or she may deem necessary to arrest the progress of any fire. 
(Prior code § 1-5-5) 
2.20.060 - Resisting officer at fire. 
    It is unlawful for any person to hinder or resist any officer or member of the fire department or any police officer in the discharge of his or her duties at any fire, or to conduct him or herself in a disorderly or noisy manner at any fire, or without reasonable excuse to refuse to obey any lawful order of the chief of police, or any firefighter in any manner relating to the extinguishment of any fire. 
(Prior code § 1-5-6) 
2.20.070 - Taking apparatus without leave. 
    No fire apparatus or equipment shall at any time or upon any pretext be taken, used, or removed without permission of the chief of the fire department. 
(Prior code § 1-5-7) 
2.20.080 - Injury to apparatus. 
    It is unlawful for any person without permission of the chief of the fire department to drive any wagon, cart, or other vehicle across any fire hose belonging to the city, or to destroy or otherwise damage any fire apparatus or equipment. 
(Prior code § 1-5-8) 
2.20.090 - Removal from office. 
    Any officer of the fire department whether elected or appointed may be removed from office by the city council for gross incompetence or inefficiency in office by the two thirds vote of the members thereof. 
(Prior code § 1-5-9) 
2.20.100 - Meddling with hydrants. 
    It is unlawful for any person to meddle or interfere in any manner with any fire hydrant except by permission of the chief of police, chief of the fire department, or the city council. 
(Prior code § 1-5-10) 
2.20.110 - Fire calls-Fees. 
A.  Minimum Charge per Fire Call. The minimum charge for fire calls and/or emergency calls answered by the Sisseton Fire Department is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
1.  A fire call and/or emergency call shall be charged anytime a report of a fire and/or emergency is received by the Sisseton Fire Department and at least three fire fighters and one fire truck respond by leaving the fire hall for the fire reported. 
2.  This charge shall apply to all fires and/or emergencies inside or outside the city limits of the city. 
B.  Maximum Charges. The maximum charge for trucks and firefighters for any one fire is five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
1.  Any fire and/or emergency requiring the Sisseton Fire Department to be out of the fire hall for over one hour is billed at five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
2.  These charges apply to all fires and/or emergencies inside or outside the city limits of the city. 
C.  Additional Charges. 
1.  Special chemicals. Any special chemicals used will be billed at cost in addition to any other fees charged including the maximum fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
2.  Other equipment. Any other equipment owned by the city used by the fire department to respond to a fire call and/or emergency call shall be billed at the rate approved on a year-to-year basis by city council and retained at the City Finance Office at City Hall. 
3.  These charges apply to all fires and/or emergency calls inside or outside the city limits of the city. 
4.  If the fire department is requested to guard the premises until it can be inspected by the fire marshal and/or other investigator there shall be additional per hour charges from the time the fire department would normally have withdrawn until the fire department is allowed to leave the premises. 
D.  Reason for Charges. This section has been executed in an attempt to keep tax levies for fire protection as low as possible. The more money collected under this section, the lower the amount of tax money required to fund the fire department. 
1.  This section should minimize fire calls where fires can be handled without the fire department. 
2.  A reasonable effort shall be made to collect billings under this section if and when there appears to be some chance of collection. 
(Ord. 477, 1993) 
(Ord. No. 623, 8-12-2013) 
Chapter 2.24 - PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
Article 1. - Purpose and Use 

2.24.010 - Purpose of policies and procedures. 
    The policies and procedures for personnel administration are enacted by the municipality of Sisseton in order to further the following goals: 
A.  To provide a uniform and sound personnel administrative system throughout the municipality of Sisseton; 
B.  To inform employees of the general policies and procedures of the municipality and the benefits and obligations of employment with the municipality; 
C.  To ensure that all personnel actions are based upon employee qualifications (knowledge, skills and abilities) and job performance and are in compliance with federal and state law; 
D.  To serve as written documentation of the municipality's commitment to fair employment practices and equal employment opportunity; 
E.  To assist managers in carrying out sound, equitable and consistent personnel administration and in making effective use of their human resources; 
F.  To promote and encourage communication between the employer or supervisor and the employee; 
G.  To protect the rights of the employee and employer throughout the employment relationship and to ensure that the responsibilities of both parties are carried out. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.020 - Applications. 
    The personnel policies and procedures shall apply to all municipal employees except appointive officers unless specified in Article 12 of this chapter, elected officials, independent contractors and excluded classes as specified in this chapter. Appointive officers, as defined in SDCL 9-14-1, are addressed in Article 12 of this chapter. In the event of a conflict between these policies and any collective bargaining agreement or state and federal law, the terms and conditions of that agreement or law shall prevail. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.030 - Revision. 
    The municipality of Sisseton specifically reserves the right to repeal, modify or amend any of these policies at an aforementioned time without notice upon a majority vote of the governing board. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.040 - Disclaimer. 
A.  The municipality of Sisseton recognizes that South Dakota is an employment at-will state and the intent of this municipality is to maintain that employment at-will status of all employees. However, for municipal employees, due process procedures as specified in Article 9 of this chapter will be followed. 
B.  This chapter does not confer a contract of employment. The policies, procedures, rules, and benefits contained in this chapter are subject to change upon a majority vote by the council. These policies are provided as a reference of present policies and not a guarantee of employment or specific employment benefits. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
Article 2. - General Policies 

2.24.050 - Equal employment opportunity. 
A.  It is the policy of the municipality of Sisseton to recruit, hire, train, promote, discipline and discharge all applicants and employees equally and without regard to race, religion, creed, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, political affiliation, marital or veteran status, or any other basis prohibited by state or federal law. 
B.  Violations of this policy by any municipal employee may be cause for immediate disciplinary action. 
C.  Any employee who feels he or she has been discriminated against according to this policy should bring this concern to his or her supervisor or higher authority according to the grievance procedure specified in Article 9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.060 - Sexual harassment. 
A.  The municipality of Sisseton is committed to providing a work environment that is free from discrimination and harassment. To maintain this commitment, the municipality will not tolerate any form of harassment, including sexual harassment. 
B.  Under this policy, sexual harassment is defined as behavior of a sexual nature which is unwelcome and personally offensive to its recipient. It is a form of employee misconduct which is demeaning to another person and undermines the integrity of the employment relationship. 
C.  Unwelcome sexual advances, request for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when: 
1.  By threat or insinuation, either explicitly or implicitly, an employee's refusal to submit to sexual advances or refusal to tolerate or participate in unwanted conduct or communication of a sexual nature will adversely affect the employee's terms and conditions of employment, including but not limited to wages, advancement, evaluation, assigned duties, shift assignment, career development, etc.; 
2.  Any conduct or communication of a sexual nature has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with work performance or of creating a hostile, intimidating, or offensive employment environment that may be considered offensive to another employee, including but not limited to: 
a.  Repeated sexual flirtations, advances, or propositions, 
b.  Continual or repeated verbal abuse of a sexual nature, 
c.  Foul language, 
d.  Unwanted physical contact, 
e.  Graphic verbal commentaries about an individual's body or manner, 
f.  Sexually degrading words used to describe the individual, 
g.  The display of sexually explicit pictures, cartoons, or other materials. 
D.  Any employee who feels he or she has been sexually harassed or that his or her personal rights have been violated should immediately report the matter to the immediate supervisor unless the supervisor is the offending party. If the supervisor is unavailable, or the employee believes that it would be inappropriate to contact his or her supervisor, the employee should immediately contact the department head, mayor, or board president. 
E.  Any supervisor or manager who becomes aware of any possible sexual harassment shall immediately advise the mayor or board president. The municipality will make a thorough, confidential, and impartial investigation of the complaint. All complaints and investigations will be held personal and confidential. All employees must cooperate with any such investigation. The municipality will take prompt remedial measures to immediately end the offending action. 
F.  Sexual harassment of any kind in the workplace is prohibited by federal and state law, whether committed by supervisory or non-supervisory employees, and will not be tolerated. Retaliation or intimidation directed toward a complaining party is also prohibited by law and will not be tolerated by the municipality under any circumstances. A complaint of sexual harassment will not have any bearing on the terms and conditions of employment of the complaining party, including but not limited to wages, advancement, evaluations, assigned duties, shift assignments, career development, etc. 
G.  The municipality will not tolerate sexual harassment of or by any non-employees, such as customers, visitors, or others. 
H.  A formal complaint of sexual harassment may be initiated in lieu of, during, or following this informal process as provided by state or federal law. 
I.  All employees, including supervisors and managers, are responsible for reminding employees on a reoccurring basis of this policy, and all are responsible for assuring that this workplace is free of sexual harassment. 
J.  Violations of the above stated policy by any employer, supervisor, co-worker, or other employee may be cause for immediate disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.070 - Seat belt policy. 
    The municipality of Sisseton is committed to doing everything possible to prevent injury to employees, prevent damage to property and to protect the employees and the public from the results of accidents. The municipality realizes that safety belts are an important and efficient means to accomplish this goal. Thus, it is the policy that all municipal employees and their passengers shall be required to use seat belts when driving any city owned or leased vehicle (if equipped with seat belts) or while driving their personal vehicle on official municipal business. Failure to comply with this policy may result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.080 - Smoking. 
    It is the policy of the municipality of Sisseton that smoking shall not be permitted in city buildings, equipment or vehicles. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.090 - Outside employment. 
    Although the municipality does not forbid off hours employment by employees (unless such employment interferes or negatively impacts the performance of their duties with the municipality or results in a conflict of interest), no appointive officer or employee, unless officially assigned to special duty, shall be granted sick leave for any injuries or illness resulting from any employment other than that required in the course of his or her assigned duties. Also, workers' compensation insurance coverage will not be extended to outside employment. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.100 - Performance evaluations. 
A.  Performance evaluations are designed to provide the employee with a record of his or her performance, to encourage professional growth and to promote communication between the supervisor and employee. The performance appraisal will be conducted by the employee's immediate supervisor, department head. Performance appraisals will be conducted a minimum of twice during the employee's training period (at the mid-point and at the conclusion of the training period) and once each year thereafter. 
B.  The performance evaluations are to be structured to each employee's position. The purpose of the evaluation is to commend strengths, address weaknesses, suggest ways to improve, and discuss employee goals and objectives. Evaluations will be conducted in a private meeting between the employee and his or her supervisor, department head. Employees are required to sign their evaluations and will receive a copy. Signing does not imply agreement, but that the contents have been made known or discussed with the employee. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.110 - Personnel records. 
A.  Personnel File. 
1.  It is the policy of the municipality to maintain accurate and updated information on each municipal employee in its personnel files. The personnel file may include the following, but will not include any information contained in the confidential file listing (see Section 2.24.120): 
a.  Personal data sheet; 
b.  Letters of commendation; 
c.  Payroll deduction authorizations; 
d.  I-9 and W-4 forms; 
e.  Leave and absence slips; 
f.  Disciplinary actions; 
g.  Termination or discharge record; 
h.  Previous positions held with the municipality and rates of pay; 
i.  Work hour records; 
j.  Overtime records; 
k.  Performance appraisals. 
2.  The finance officer shall be responsible for maintaining all personnel records. In the absence of the finance officer, his or her designee shall assume responsibilities for such personnel records. 
3.  All employee records are confidential. Such records shall be accessible only to the individual employee, and the decisionmaking authority affecting the individual employee's employment status. 
4.  The employee or his or her representative shall have reasonable access to his or her personnel records upon request to the finance officer. The file will be made available to the employee's representative only upon express written authorization by the employee. 
5.  No written incident report or records of disciplinary action shall be placed in an employee's personnel file unless the municipality first advises the employee of its intent to enter such document into the file and affords him or her an opportunity to read and sign such material. Signing does not imply agreement, only that the contents have been made known to or discussed with the employee. 
6.  The employee shall have the express right to submit a letter of rebuttal to his or her file regarding any information contained in his or her file that is in dispute. 
B.  Changes of Name, Address, Telephone and Withholding Status. It is the employee's responsibility to inform the finance officer of any changes in name, address, telephone number or withholding status. An employee must immediately report any of the above or other pertinent changes. Intentional failure to report such information is grounds for disciplinary action. 
C.  Personnel Record Retention. Personnel records are maintained in accordance with the records retention and destruction manual for municipalities published by the State Bureau of Administration. The municipality permanently keeps an employee's name, social security number, dates of employment, positions held and salary history, all of which are listed in the municipality's employment history index. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.120 - Benefits, medical and confidential file. 
A.  The municipality of Sisseton maintains a complete confidential file on each employee. This file may include: 
1.  The employee's application and/or resume; 
2.  References and/or background checks; 
3.  Benefit forms (retirement, health and life insurance, etc.); 
4.  Exit interviews; 
5.  Injury reports and workers' compensation information; 
6.  Necessary medical examinations and records. 
B.  Access to this file is limited to the finance officer and on an absolute need-to-know basis only as deemed appropriate by the finance officer. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.130 - Employment references. 
A.  In compliance with the Federal Privacy Act, the municipality is required to protect the privacy rights of all employees. In following this Act, it is the municipality's policy to provide only the following information on both present and past employees: 
1.  If an employee has been employed with the municipality in municipal government service; 
2.  Dates of employment; 
3.  Current position or position at the date of separation from employment and other positions held; and 
4.  Verification of salary information. 
B.  All confidential employment information is given solely at the discretion of the municipality and on a need-to-know basis only. Additional information may be released, upon approval of the finance officer, and upon a written and signed disclosure and release request from the employee (see appendix four). The municipality may request written verification for the need of such employment information. 
C.  Due to the potential liability for the release of employment information, only persons authorized by the governing board shall give out such information. The governing board also reserves the right to instruct such authorized individual that no additional information be released on certain employees. All requests for information on an employee's employment shall be immediately directed to the person authorized by the governing board. 
D.  Board authorized personnel are the finance officer. 
E.  Providing employment references, including off-the-record remarks, without authorization in violation of the above stated policy may result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.140 - Executive session-Personnel discussion. 
    It is the policy of the governing board to recess into executive session to discuss personnel issues such as employee qualifications, competence, performance, and character or fitness. However, in accordance with South Dakota's open meeting law, no official action will be taken except in an open official meeting. Such sessions are called to protect the employer-employee relationship. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
Article 3. - Employee Classifications 

2.24.150 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Appointive official" means an individual who holds a position in the municipality as specified by S.D.C.L. 9-14-1 (see policy 12). 
    "Municipal employee" means anyone employed by the municipality who is not an appointive official. 
    "Regular full-time employee" means an employee who is employed by the municipality to work a predetermined schedule of at least forty (40) hours per week and has completed their employee-in-training period. 
Benefits: 
Vacation leave: Full benefit 
Sick leave: Full benefit 
Holiday pay: Full benefit 
Health insurance: Full benefit 
Personal emergency leave: Full benefit 
S.D. Retirement System: Participating 
    "Regular part-time employee" means an employee who is employed by the municipality to work less than forty (40) hours per week on a regular basis [and has completed his/her employee-in-training period]. 
Benefits: 
Health insurance: Full benefit - Employees working at least thirty (30) hours per week on a regular basis. 
S.D. Retirement System: Participating - Employees working at least 20 hours per week on a regular basis. 
Temporary or seasonal employee: An employee who is employed by the municipality to work for less than twenty (20) hours per week (part time) or less than six months. 
Benefits: No benefits. 
    "Employee-in-training" means an employee who is newly hired by the municipality in a regular full [or part] time position who is completing his/her six month training period (12 months for Police Department employees) (see policy 4.15). 
Benefits: 
Vacation leave: Accrue full benefits but may not use leave until completion of training period. 
    All other benefits are the same as their respective classification above. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 647, 12-28-2017) 
2.24.160 - Promotions. 
A.  It is the policy of the municipality to generally promote from within when such promotion is in the best interest of the municipality. Such promotions are at the sole discretion of the municipality and are based upon an employee's qualifications and merit. 
B.  The municipality reserves the right to announce and advertise any vacant position, even if there is a qualified employee who may be promoted. After reviewing all applicants, the municipality may choose to promote or hire from outside the department based upon the most qualified individual and the best interest of the municipality. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
Article 4. - Recruitment and Selection 

2.24.170 - Recruitment and hiring policy. 
A.  It is the policy of the municipality of Sisseton to recruit and fill job vacancies with the most qualified individual for the position. The municipality has three methods of recruiting qualified applicants to fill job vacancies in municipal employment. These are: (1) promotion from within, (2) transfer from within, or (3) open announcement and advertisement. 
B.  If in the best interest of the municipality, promotions or transfers of individuals already employed with the municipality shall be given first consideration. This consideration, however, does not entitle the individual to an automatic promotion or transfer to a higher level of employment. 
C.  All selections shall be based on merit and fitness to fill the job vacancy. All recruitment efforts are based upon equal employment opportunity and conducted without regard to race, religion, creed, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, political affiliation, and marital or veteran status. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.180 - Job announcement. 
A.  Announcements for regular full-time and part-time job vacancies shall be made according to the position. Announcements shall include the job title, a brief job summary, the minimum qualifications for appointment, the deadline for filing an application, and location to send applications (see appendix seven). 
B.  All announcements and advertisements shall state that the municipality of Sisseton is an "Equal Opportunity Employer." 
C.  Public announcement of employment opportunities will be advertised in the official newspaper, listed with the South Dakota Job Service and posted in a visible location in each department or city hall for all employees to read. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.190 - Applications for employment. 
A.  Individuals interested in applying for a specific position with the municipality must complete and submit a municipal application form. 
B.  A separate application must be submitted for each position in which the individual wishes to be considered. Applications will not be maintained on file for the purpose of aiding applicants in applying for future job vacancies with the municipality. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.200 - Eligibility. 
    To be eligible for employment with the municipality of Sisseton you must: 
A.  Be legally eligible to be employed in the United States as proven on the required I-9 form; and 
B.  Is registered for the selective service as required by federal law. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.210 - Qualifications. 
    The municipality maintains job descriptions on each position. This description establishes the minimum required levels of education and experience necessary to qualify for appointment. Each description may also detail desired skills or qualifications which are preferred by the municipality and will be given foremost consideration. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.220 - Veterans preference. 
A.  Preference in employment will be given to veterans who have served on active duty and been honorably discharged from the armed forces of the United States. 
B.  Preference shall be given where all other qualifications are equal. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.230 - Disqualification. 
    An applicant is disqualified from employment by the municipality if he or she: (1) does not meet the minimum qualifications for appointment, (2) knowingly has made a false statement on the application form or resume, (3) has committed fraud during the selection process, or (4) has failed to register for the selective service as required by federal law. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.240 - Selection. 
    Selection to fill a job vacancy is made on the basis of knowledge, skills, education, experience, and ability to perform the duties of the specific position. All selections are to be made without regard to race, religion, creed, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, political affiliation, and marital status. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.250 - Appointment of municipal employees. 
    Appointment of municipal employees is by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.260 - Employment offers. 
A.  After the proper authorities have selected an individual to fill a job vacancy, the individual will be notified of their selection by the appointing authority either in writing or by personal contact. An offer of employment shall be extended and a starting date established at this time. 
B.  There shall be no such offer or hint of employment with the municipality conferred to an applicant until the final decision has been approved. 
C.  When selection has been made, the individual selected must be made fully aware that his or her employment relationship may be terminated with or without cause, with or without prior notice, by either the municipality or the employee during the training period except for reasons illegal under state or federal law (see section 2.24.310, Employee-in-training period). The individual must also be notified that after the training period is completed, that employment is still at-will and the above will continue to apply but that due process requirements and grievance procedures will be followed and a two-week notice will be required prior to the employee voluntarily leaving his or her job (see Section 2.24.620(A), Resignation). 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.270 - Acceptance of employment. 
    After an individual has accepted employment with the municipality, the finance officer shall ensure that the necessary and proper paperwork is filed within the employee's personnel file. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.280 - Residency requirement. 
    All full-time employees of the City of Sisseton shall be required to reside within ten (10) miles of Sisseton city limits. This applies to all full-time employees. Any new, full-time employee shall be allowed six months to obtain residence within the allowed area of the City of Sisseton. Any employee in violation of the residency requirements will be subject to immediate termination. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 602, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 647, 12-28-2017) 
2.24.290 - Creating new positions. 
    If a new position is to be created, the mayor is to prepare a job description of the new position's duties, qualifications, etc., which is to be submitted to the city council for review and approval (see appendix ten). 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.300 - Employment of relatives (nepotism). 
A.  The municipality's policy in employment is to hire and promote on the basis of an individual's merit, knowledge, skills, and abilities and avoid circumstances of favoritism and discrimination. Thus, the employment of immediate family members within the same department or other areas where an immediate family member would hire, supervise, discipline or otherwise judge the performance of the above is prohibited. 
B.  Immediate family is defined as: parents, step-parents, spouse, children, step-children, brothers, sisters, step-brothers, step-sisters, grandparents, grandchildren or an individual who has acquired any of the above status through marriage. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.310 - Employee-in-training period. 
    Every employee hired by the municipality of Sisseton must complete a six month training period for the purpose of assessing the individuals' ability to perform their assigned duties. Police Department employees must complete a twelve (12) month training period. 
    Such employment may be terminated if either the municipality or the employee feels this is the appropriate action. There is no notice required of either party for such termination and no due process procedures will be held by the municipality for discharge during this time period. The only right for an employee to appeal or grieve a discharge action during this time is on the basis of a prohibited form of discrimination. 
    During this training period an employee shall accrue both sick and vacation leave at the regularly scheduled rate. Sick leave may used as necessary at this time, however, the employee is not entitled to use their accrued vacation leave until completion of their training period. An employee-in-training is entitled to paid holidays as observed by the municipality. 
    Employees receiving transfers, promotions etc. must complete a ninety (90) working day training period for assessing his/her ability to perform the duties of the new position assigned. During this time the employee will continue to receive all benefits as previously assigned. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 597, 12-22-2008; Ord. No. 647, 12-28-2017) 
Article 5. - Hours of Work 

2.24.320 - General policy. 
    It is the governing board's intent to create a standard work week within which an employee is expected to perform municipal services. The board also realizes that emergency and extenuating circumstances may arise in which an employee is required to work variable hours. Nothing within this policy is meant as a guarantee to the number of hours, either daily or weekly, that an employee may be required to work. However, it is the board's policy that every employee be treated equally and fairly when expected to work odd or extended hours. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.330 - Standard work week. 
    The standard forty (40) hour work week, unless otherwise stated, for the purpose of calculating pay and overtime shall begin at 12:01 a.m. Sunday and end on 12:00 a.m. (midnight) Saturday. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.340 - Standard work day. 
A.  The standard eight-hour work day for municipal employees, unless otherwise stated will begin at 8:00 a.m. and end at 5:00 p.m., including a one-hour break for noon lunch and a fifteen (15) minute break period in both the morning and afternoon. Break periods may not be accumulated for time off. 
B.  Emergencies may require that employees work more than eight hours in a day but shall be compensated with equal time off within the same work week (flex time) or through the accumulation of overtime, comp-time if over forty (40) hours are worked in the week. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.350 - Call back pay. 
A.  When an employee is called in to work he or she shall receive a minimum of one hour of work time to be applied to his or her total hours worked for the work week. 
B.  Pump Check. When an employee is required to be on call for pump-check he or she shall receive a minimum of two hours of work time to be applied to his or her total hours worked for the work week for each day on call. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.360 - Flex time. 
    The governing board reserves the right to authorize flexible work hours within the forty (40) hour work week in situations where it is appropriate or necessary. Employees must still adhere to the standard forty (40) hour work week unless flex time or overtime has been approved by their supervisor. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.370 - Overtime. 
A.  Eligible employees may be required to work overtime when determined necessary by their supervisor or the governing board. Overtime is defined as time that is worked in excess of the first forty (40) hours within the standard work week and does not include hours paid but not worked such as holidays, vacation days or sick days. 
B.  The employee shall have the option of selecting compensatory time off or overtime pay and the department head and finance officer shall be advised of that decision. 
C.  All overtime must be authorized by the employee's immediate supervisor. Overtime is to be authorized only if the work cannot be otherwise done during normal work hours. Insofar as possible, the opportunity to work overtime shall be distributed as equally as practicable by the municipality among the employees in each department. Accrual of overtime without authorization may result in disciplinary procedures. 
D.  Overtime compensation for all overtime eligible employees shall be at the rate of one and one-half (150%) of the employee's regular hourly rate. As stated above, time paid for but not worked (holidays, etc.) does not count toward hours worked for the purpose of calculating overtime hours. 
E.  However, if an employee is required to work on a holiday the municipality will follow the holiday policy as found in Section 2.24.600(D). 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.380 - Comp-time. 
    Authorized comp-time shall be administered within the same guidelines as overtime and be accrued at time and one-half. Comp-time must be used within one hundred eighty (180) days from the time in which it was accrued. 
    An employee must have a minimum of two hours of overtime in order to apply hours to comp-time. 
    The maximum amount of comp-time that may be accrued is eighty (80) hours. When the amount of comp-time reaches eighty (80) hours all overtime shall be paid in cash. 
    The municipality, within reason, may restrict the amount of comp time to be taken at one time during a time of the year when the employee is needed at work. 
    Upon separation from municipal service, the employee will be paid for any unused comp time at their final rate of pay. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 647, 12-28-2017) 
2.24.390 - Exemptions to overtime. 
    The following employees are exempt from the overtime standards as mentioned in the above sections: 
A.  Appointive officers (if determined to be FLSA exempt); 
B.  Police and fire personnel (if less than five within the department); 
C.  Swimming pool personnel (if operated for less than seven months). 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.400 - Attendance. 
A.  All municipal employees are expected to be at work on time and during their regularly scheduled hours. Employees who are unable to report for work on time are required to notify their immediate supervisor or the finance officer prior to their being absent, unless an emergency exists. If an emergency situation exists, the employee is expected to notify the proper authority as soon as reasonably possible. 
B.  Except in cases of an emergency, if an employee is absent more than three consecutive days without proper notification, the employee will be considered to have voluntarily resigned his or her position and/or may be discharged from municipal service by the appointing authority. 
C.  Failure to observe this policy may result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.410 - Time sheets or cards. 
    Each employee's time sheet is a record of his or her regular hours worked, overtime worked, and vacation or sick leave used for the purpose of calculating and issuing paychecks. Every employee and his or her supervisor must sign their time sheets to verify that all entries are accurate. Intentional falsification of time sheets may result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.420 - Time clocks. 
    Time clocks are used by the municipality for recording work time of all designated employees specified by the governing board. Each employee required to use a time clock must punch in and out promptly and have his or her supervisor and finance officer initial changes necessary to correct time records. It is absolutely forbidden to punch another employee's time card. Such action may result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
Article 6. - Compensation 

2.24.430 - Pay period and pay day. 
    Municipal employees are paid on a bi-weekly schedule. Paychecks are issued on the first Wednesday following the end of the bi-weekly pay period. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.440 - Early paychecks. 
    The municipality does not grant early paychecks to employees under any circumstances. If an employee is to be absent on pay day, it is his or her responsibility to ensure that his or her paycheck is properly handled. If no arrangements are made prior to the employee leaving, the paycheck shall be given to the employee at the earliest possible time upon his or her return. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.450 - Time sheets. 
    Each employee is responsible to ensure that his or her time sheets are correct and submitted on time. Any misrepresentation of time worked or falsification of any time sheet may result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.460 - Payroll deductions. 
    The municipality is required to withhold federal income tax and Social Security (FICA) from each employee's paycheck. Other deductions include: 
A.  Employee contributions to the South Dakota Retirement System; 
B.  Employee contributions to health insurance; 
C.  Other voluntary or mandated deductions. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.470 - Benefits. 
    Benefits that follow are those offered by the municipality to employees. These benefits are afforded according to individual employee classifications (see Article 3). 
A.  Health Insurance. The municipality will pay the full cost of the premium for group health insurance for all eligible employees (see Article 3). The city will pay a portion of the premium for family coverage consistent with current policy as adopted by resolution of the city council and on file in the office of the finance officer. 
B.  South Dakota Retirement System. For eligible employees (those who work twenty (20) or more hours per week for more than six months) participation in the South Dakota Retirement System is mandatory. A deduction of six percent (eight percent for Class B Public Safety) of the monthly salary is made in each payroll period of which is matched by the municipality toward the retirement of the employee. 
C.  Workers' Compensation. 
1.  The municipality of Sisseton participates in the SDML Workers' Compensation Fund. 
    This fund is designed to protect employees against medical costs and salary loss as a result of injuries while on the job. The municipality pays the contribution cost for this coverage. 
2.  If an employee is injured on the job, all work related medical costs will be paid as well as the compensation rate for salary loss as set by the state of South Dakota. 
D.  Extended Health Benefits. 
1.  In compliance with the South Dakota Continuation Law and COBRA (Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act) requirements, the municipality will offer continuing health care coverage on a self-pay basis to employees or their qualified beneficiaries following termination of employment (other than for gross misconduct), a reduction in hours, retirement, death, or change in familial status. These health benefits will be identical to the coverage offered to full-time employees. 
2.  For terminated or reduced-hour employees, the coverage may last up to eighteen (18) months, (twenty-nine (29) months for disabled employees or qualified beneficiaries if under federal COBRA requirements), or until they become eligible for other health insurance coverage, whichever is earlier. In the event of the employee's retirement, divorce, separation or death, the coverage may last up to thirty-six (36) months for a qualified beneficiary. The full policy monthly premium will be paid by the employee or the beneficiary to the municipality. The employee or beneficiary may waive all rights to continuation coverage, notification procedures and time limits are outlined in the continuation coverage "Notification of Rights" letter (see appendix three). 
E.  Medical Plan Extension-Repealed 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 647, 12-28-2017) 
2.24.480 - Changes of employee status and address. 
    It is the employees' responsibility to inform the finance officer of any changes in name, address, telephone number or change of withholding status. An employee must immediately report any of the above changes. Failure to report or the intentional withholding of such information may result in disciplinary procedures. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.490 - Travel and reimbursement of expenses. 
A.  General Policy. It is the policy of the municipality that employees be fully reimbursed for necessary and reasonable job related travel expenses. Every effort will be made to treat all employees fairly and equally when granting travel expenditures. 
B.  Travel Approval Required. All travel must be approved by the department head or governing board prior to the date of travel except in emergency instances. 
C.  In-State Travel Expenses. Per diem rates for approved in-state travel shall be paid at the current state rate. 
D.  Out-of-State Travel Expenses. Per diem rates for approved travel outside the state of South Dakota shall be paid at the current state rate. 
E.  Meal Allowance-Schedule for Computation. 
    The times for allowance of paid meals is as follows: 
1.  Breakfast: Leave before 5:31 a.m., return after 7:59 a.m.; 
2.  Lunch: Leave before 11:31 a.m., return after 12:59 p.m.; 
3.  Dinner: Leave before 5:31 p.m., return after 7:59 p.m. 
F.  Receipts Required for Lodging. Receipts shall be required for all lodging expenses which are to be reimbursed by the municipality. 
G.  Mileage Rate. When employees must use their private vehicles for approved travel, mileage shall be paid at the current state rate. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
Article 7. - Leaves of Absence 

2.24.500 - General policy. 
A.  Leaves of absence are considered a benefit and privilege offered by the municipality of Sisseton. Leaves are not granted automatically, but are to be requested by the employee. Every effort will be made to ensure that all employees are treated equally and fairly. In some instances it may not be possible to grant all leaves requested during busy times or emergency situations, however, every effort will be made to grant requests. 
B.  Employees anticipating a leave of absence are encouraged to apply for such leave as soon as possible and no later than two days prior to the leave being taken. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.510 - Vacation leave. 
A.  Paid vacation leave will be granted to all qualified employees (see Article 3). Vacation leave will accrue at a rate according to the following schedule: 
0 - 1 years 48 hours/year 2 - 4 years 88 hours/year 5 years 96 hours/year 6 years 104 hours/year 7 years 112 hours/year 8 years 120 hours/year 9 - 14 years 128 hours/year 15 years 136 hours/year 16 years 144 hours/year 17 years 152 hours/year 18 years 160 hours/year >19 168 hours/year  
B.  Employees on leaves of absence without pay or suspensions without pay do not accrue vacation leave benefits. Employees-in-training accrue vacation leave but may not take such leave until they have successfully completed such training period. 
C.  Vacation hours not used during the calendar year in which they are earned may be carried over into successive years. Eligible employees may accrue a maximum of double the hours earned that year. 
D.  Upon accrual above the maximum vacation leave hours, hours accrued will automatically be subtracted down to the maximum allowable hours without time being granted for leave. It is the employees' responsibility to ensure that hours are used on a timely basis according to this policy. 
E.  Upon separation from employment, an employee will be paid for any accumulated vacation time. Reimbursement for vacation leave will be at the employees' salary rate per their last day of employment. 
F.  When an employee's vacation time falls on a holiday, such time is not to be subtracted from an employee's vacation leave balance. 
G.  Vacation leave must be scheduled with the employee's immediate supervisor or department head at the earliest possible time prior to the use of such leave. The municipality reserves the right, within reason, to disapprove requested time for vacation leave for the purposes of maintaining the work force during heavy scheduled work periods. However, the municipality will make every effort possible to accommodate employee requests for time off. 
H.  Vacation leave will be granted on a first-come, first-served basis, based on operational needs. 
I.  The minimum amount that may be charged to an employee's vacation leave is one hour per leave period. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.520 - Sick leave. 
A.  Employees who are eligible for full benefits (see Article 3) shall accrue sick leave at a rate of eight hours of sick leave per month. 
B.  Employees on leaves of absence without pay or suspensions without pay who are absent for a full pay period do not accrue sick leave benefits. 
C.  Sick leave benefits not used during the calendar year in which they are earned may be carried over and used during the succeeding calendar years. There is no limit to the number of sick leave hours employees may accumulate. 
D.  Sick leave benefits shall be paid at the employee's regular rate of pay at the time the leave is taken. The minimum charge to sick leave is one hour per leave period. 
E.  An employee absent from work due to illness or disability shall notify his or her immediate supervisor or department head before scheduled to work, or as soon as possible if an emergency situation exists, and indicate the nature of the illness or disability and the expected length of absence. Failure to report an illness in a timely manner may be cause to consider the absence as unauthorized and without pay. 
F.  After three days of continuous sick leave, medical doctor approval may be necessary to prove that a legitimate illness exists. However, the immediate supervisor or department head may request a physician's statement concerning such absence at any time. 
G.  Any employee found to have abused his or her sick leave privileges may be subject to disciplinary action. 
H.  Sick leave is a benefit that provides for paid absences to cover approved visits to a physician or dentist and illnesses only of the employee, his or her spouse, any children and/or parents. 
I.  It is the policy of the municipality that upon voluntary resignation after ten (10) years of continuous service the employee shall be eligible for the payment of accrued sick leave. Such leave shall be paid at one-fourth the employee's current rate of pay upon separation in good standing from municipal service. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.530 - Extended leave for illness or temporary disability. 
    Employees may request approval to use accumulated sick leave and vacation leave for the purpose of paid release time to recover from an extended illness or temporary disability. For extended periods of illness or temporary disability, a medical doctor's certification of illness shall be required. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.540 - Leave without pay. 
A.  Employees may request leave without pay in extenuating circumstances. Such leave is at the sole discretion of the appointing authority and the governing board. It is the policy of the municipality that in circumstances such as these, vacation and/or comp-time leave will be used in full before such leave without pay is granted. No additional leave or other benefits shall accrue during such leaves without pay. 
B.  The employee may continue his or her group insurance coverage by pre-paying the entire premium during the affected period of the leave. Employees must arrange for such continuation of coverage with the municipality prior to the commencement of the extended leave without pay. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.550 - Maternity leave. 
    The municipality shall treat maternity leave the same as any other temporary disability. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.560 - Jury duty. 
A.  Municipal employees will be granted leave with pay for jury duty or if they are subpoenaed to testify in court. During such periods of absence, regular full-time or part-time employees will receive their regular rate of pay minus the jury duty pay or the employee may endorse the court payment, less documented mileage/expenses, to the municipality. 
B.  Employees who are absent from work due to jury duty will not be dismissed or suspended from employment; and shall retain and be entitled to the same job status and pay as he or she had prior to performing jury duty. Persons who are to be absent due to jury duty must notify his or her immediate supervisor in advance. If no prior notification is given the employee may be subject to disciplinary procedures. 
C.  Vacation and sick leave benefits shall accrue at the normal rate for eligible employees during jury duty. 
D.  Municipal employees involved in private litigation are required to use vacation leave. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.570 - Voting leave. 
    Municipal employees whose work schedule does not enable them time to vote during which time the polls are open shall be allowed up to one hour to vote. Such time shall be treated as regular work time for the purpose of pay and accrual of leaves. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.580 - Military leave. 
A.  Request for Military Leave of Absence. An employee who wishes to be granted military leave of absence must submit the request and a copy of his or her official orders or other records from the military service to his or her immediate supervisor or department head prior to the dates of attendance. If the reservist or National Guard member submits a copy of his or her official annual training schedule prior to beginning of the year's military activities, the employee need only submit separate requests and orders for those training duties not included on the annual schedule, or when the annual schedule is modified. 
B.  Active Duty. 
1.  An employee who enlists or is called into active duty for the military service of the United States or who, in time of national emergency, voluntarily enlists for active duty shall be granted military leave for the time necessary to permit completion of the military service. 
2.  In order to have re-employment rights, a person leaving active duty in the military service of the United States must apply to the municipality for re-employment within ninety (90) days after his or her separation from active duty, or within ninety (90) days after his or her release from hospitalization continuing after such separation for not more than one year. This applies to inductees and enlistees, as well as to reservists and National Guard members performing full active duty, as opposed to initial duty for training, or active or inactive duty training, or other active duty where different re-employment rights are defined by federal statute. 
C.  Reserve or National Guard Training Leave. 
1.  An employee who enlists as a reservist or a member of the National Guard shall be granted time off without pay for initial active duty for training, annual training encampment, weekend training drills, and other active and inactive training duty. 
2.  The reservist or National Guard member must report back to his or her civilian job at the beginning of his or her first regularly scheduled shift on the first day after the completion of initial active duty for training or other training duty plus the necessary travel time to return from the training site to the place of employment. He or she is also entitled to a reasonable rest time, and a reasonable time thereafter if return is delayed by factors beyond his or her control. If an employee fails to report to his or her job within this specified time period, he or she may be subject to the penalties which would be imposed on any employee who is tardy or absent without permission. 
3.  If an employee separates his or her employment with the municipality in order to enlist in the Reserves or National Guard, he or she must reapply to the municipality within thirty-one (31) days after his or her separation from initial active duty for training in the Reserves or National Guard in order to retain re-employment rights. 
D.  Federal Statute. An employee who participates in any branch of the military service of the United States is covered by and subject to federal statute, United States Code Title 38, Chapter 43, and all other applicable statutes. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.590 - Funeral leave. 
    All regularly scheduled full-time employees are eligible for funeral leave with pay. Time off with pay will be granted according to the following: 
A.  In the event of death of a member of the immediate family. (Immediate family is defined as an employee's spouse, parents, step-parents, children, step-children, brothers, sisters, step-brothers, step-sisters, grandparents, grandchildren and great grandchildren. The term also includes a spouse's equivalent of the above.) Not to exceed five days; 
B.  In the event of death of an aunt, uncle, nephew or niece, or spouse equivalent. Not to exceed one day. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.600 - Holidays. 
A.  The municipality of Sisseton recognizes and observes the following as paid holidays for eligible employees: 
New Year's Day January 1 Martin Luther King Jr. Day 3rd Monday in January Presidents' Day 3rd Monday in February Memorial Day Last Monday in May Independence Day July 4 Labor Day 1st Monday in September Native Americans' Day 2nd Monday in October Veterans' Day November 11 Thanksgiving Day 4th Thursday in November Christmas Day December 25  
and all other days proclaimed by the mayor. 
B.  When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday is observed as the paid holiday for eligible municipal employees. If a holiday falls on a Sunday, it is observed on the following Monday. 
C.  Employees ineligible for paid holiday leave will be granted a day off without pay in observance of a holiday. 
D.  Work on a Holiday. 
1.  An employee required to work on a paid holiday observed by the municipality will receive regular pay for those hours worked in addition to holiday pay. 
2.  A liquor store clerk who works on a part-time basis and is not eligible for holiday pay will receive double time for hours worked on a holiday. 
3.  A Police Department employee required to work on a paid holiday observed by the municipality will receive regular pay for hours worked and have the option to be granted an additional eight (8) hours to be added on to their vacation leave or paid an additional eight (8) hours of holiday pay. 
E.  Paid Holiday on Regular Day Off. If a paid holiday recognized by the municipality falls on an employee's regularly scheduled day off, the employee will be granted an additional eight hours to be added on to his or her vacation leave. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 647, 12-28-2017) 
Article 8. - Separation from Municipal Service 

2.24.610 - General policies. 
A.  Definitions. 
    "Involuntary separation" means layoff or discharge. Involuntary separation is not initiated by the employee. 
    "Voluntary separation" means written resignation, extended absence without proper notification, or retirement. Voluntary separation is initiated by the employee. 
B.  Return of Municipal Property. Municipal employees are expected to return all municipal property at the time of their departure from municipal service. The municipality reserves the right to withhold from the employee's final paycheck the amount for any property that is not returned or for which there is no explanation for the absence of the property. The municipality may take further action if necessary to recover municipal property. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.620 - Voluntary separation. 
A.  Resignation. A municipal employee may resign from municipal service by giving his or her appointing authority written notice of his or her resignation at least two weeks in advance of his or her leaving municipal service. In extenuating circumstances, the mayor may accept the employee's resignation as taking effect immediately. 
B.  Unnotified Absence. If an employee is absent for more than three consecutive days without proper notification in accordance with the attendance policy, he or she shall be considered to have voluntarily resigned his or her position in municipal service. Reinstatement upon presentation of extenuating circumstances or reason for such absence shall be at the discretion of the mayor. Any unnotified absence of less than three days may result in disciplinary action. 
C.  Retirement Age. There is no mandatory retirement age for municipal employees. However, all employees must continue to meet the performance requirements for their position. 
D.  South Dakota Retirement System. The municipality of Sisseton is a member of the South Dakota Retirement System (SDRS) and follows the retirement system law as set forth in SDCL 3-12. All eligible employees (see Article 3 and Section 2.24.470(C)) will be members of the SDRS and all benefits will be administered through the SDRS office in Pierre. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.630 - Involuntary separation. 
A.  Discharge Disciplinary Interview. In cases of discharge the employee will be granted full due process rights as set forth in Section 2.24.670(H). 
B.  Unemployment Compensation. The municipality follows the state of South Dakota unemployment laws as found in SDCL Title 61. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.640 - Exit interviews. 
A.  It is a policy of the municipality of Sisseton, for the finance officer to conduct an exit interview prior to an employee's separation from municipal employment. The exit interview is conducted for several purposes, including: (1) to resolve all outstanding matters between the municipality and the employee, (2) to advise the employee of the effect his or her separation will have upon all benefits and what benefits he or she has coming upon separation, and (3) to aid the municipality in gathering information to help improve the municipality's working environment and other employment relationships. 
B.  At the time of the exit interview, employees are expected to return all municipal property as specified in Section 2.24.610(B). 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.650 - Misconduct defined. 
    The following is a partial listing of employee misconduct that may result in disciplinary action up to and including immediate discharge. This list is not intended to completely list all employee misconduct that may result in the above, but rather is provided as a guideline by which employees can judge actions that will not be tolerated by the municipality. 
A.  Incompetent, inefficient, unreliable, unwilling, or incapable of fulfilling his or her job duties as assigned; 
B.  Inadequate performance of duties; 
C.  Neglect of duty; 
D.  Insubordination; 
E.  Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor offense which might adversely reflect on or create doubt about the moral character, credibility or reliability of the employee; 
F.  Theft or misappropriation of municipal property; 
G.  Failure to observe drug and alcohol policies of the municipality; 
H.  Failure to observe harassment policies of the municipality; 
I.  Knowing or wilful violation of municipal ordinances; 
J.  Unauthorized absences; 
K.  Habitual tardiness; 
L.  Abuse of sick leave; 
M.  Sleeping/loafing during working hours; 
N.  Drinking, gambling, fighting, swearing, and similar unprofessional activities, while on the job; 
O.  Sexual harassment, acting in a way that could be construed as such, for example, by using inappropriate language, keeping or posting inappropriate materials on his or her computer; 
P.  Engaging in false recordkeeping or communication of any kind, including false expense, attendance, financial or similar reports and statements; 
Q.  Disclosure of confidential information; 
R.  Offensive or inconsiderate conduct, or use of abusive language in public, or toward the public, municipal officials, or fellow employees while on duty; 
S.  Personal acceptance or appropriation of any fee, gift, tip or other gratuity or remuneration received solely for the performance of official duties in connection with municipal employment; 
T.  Knowing, intentional or repeated falsification of any application for employment or any municipal record, report or time sheet; 
U.  Wilful alteration, destruction or waste of municipal property, facilities, equipment or records; 
V.  Serious or repeated disorderly conduct or horseplay; 
W.  Threatening, intimidating, coercing or interfering with supervisors or other employees; 
X.  Deliberate attempts to injure another employee or fighting on municipal property while on the job; 
Y.  Unauthorized possession of firearms, explosives or any dangerous weapons while performing municipal work; 
Z.  Recklessness resulting in a serious accident while on duty, whether on or off municipal property. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.660 - Misconduct. 
    Employee misconduct will not be tolerated and may result in immediate disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
Article 9. - Disciplinary Action and Grievance Procedure 

2.24.670 - Disciplinary action. 
    Disciplinary actions shall be applied when the city council determines such actions are necessary. A disciplinary action may be in the form of oral reprimand, written reprimand, suspension, demotion or reassignment, or dismissal as defined below. The municipality may, but is not required to, apply these actions progressively: 
A.  Oral Reprimand. The mayor, council president or department head may orally reprimand an employee. This informal disciplinary consultation may be documented on an employee's performance appraisal or referenced in further progressive disciplinary actions. 
B.  Written Reprimand. The mayor, council president or department head may discipline an employee by written reprimand. 
C.  Suspension Without Pay. The mayor, council president or department head with approval of the city council may temporarily suspend an employee without pay for disciplinary purposes. Suspension shall be for no more than ten (10) working days. 
D.  Demotion or Reassignment. The mayor, council president or department head with the approval of the city council may reduce an employee's salary, assign the employee to a lower position, or change the employee's duties within his or her current position or use any combination of the above for disciplinary purposes. 
E.  Dismissal. The mayor, council president or department head with the approval of the city council may terminate an employee from municipal employment for disciplinary purposes. 
F.  Voluntary Separations and Grievances. Employees who voluntarily terminate their employment will have their grievances immediately dismissed. 
G.  Non-grievable Actions. Oral and written reprimands and terminations of employees during their employee-in-training period are not grievable except on the basis of a prohibited form of discrimination. 
H.  Disciplinary Interview. Before formal disciplinary actions are taken (suspension without pay, demotion, or dismissal), the mayor, council president or department head shall: 
1.  Notify the employee in writing of the proposed disciplinary action. The notice shall state the reason(s) for the action, including any prior disciplinary actions and the facts of any other incidents upon which the present disciplinary action is based; 
2.  Hold a disciplinary interview to give the employee an opportunity to present reasons, orally or in writing, why the action should not be taken; 
3.  Inform the employee in writing of the final decision, effective date of the disciplinary action, and his or her right to appeal such decision to the city council, as followed in Section 2.24.680(D), by filing a written notice of disagreement with the mayor or council president, within five working days of receiving the response. If the employee fails to appeal the decision within five working days the action shall become final. 
I.  Signing Requirements. 
1.  In all cases of formal disciplinary action the employee will be required to sign the written notice of discipline and such notice shall be dated and placed in the employee's permanent personnel file. If the employee refuses to sign the notice, a notation to that effect shall be made by the mayor, council president or department head with another city employee or official as a witness. The employee may submit a written statement of response to the disciplinary action which shall be attached to and remain with the disciplinary action in his or her permanent personnel file. Documentation of such discipline may be submitted to the mayor for review. 
2.  In all instances in this policy where an employee is required to sign, signing does not imply agreement with the action, only that the contents have been made known to or discussed with the employee. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.680 - Grievance procedure. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this grievance procedure is to provide a just and equitable method for the resolution of grievances without discrimination, coercion, restraint, or reprisal against any employee or group of employees who may submit to or be involved in a grievance. 
B.  Definition of a Grievance. A grievance is a complaint by an employee or a group of employees concerning the interpretation or application of the provisions of rules or regulations governing conditions of employment, personnel practices and procedures, or conditions which have not been resolved satisfactorily in an informal manner between the employee(s) and the city council. 
C.  Employee Notice of Disagreement. 
1.  If the employee disagrees with any action of the city council, he or she may within ten (10) working days (working days does not mean calendar days) from the date on which the employee became aware of the action or should have reasonably been aware of the action, submit to the city council a written notice of disagreement stating the reasons for disagreement and the action that he or she desires. 
2.  If the employee disagrees with the response to the grievance or the city council fails to respond to the grievance within five working days, the employee may file a written notice of disagreement with the mayor within five working days of receiving the response. If the employee fails to appeal the decision within five working days, the grievance shall be considered waived. 
D.  Appearance Before the City Council. At the next meeting (or a special meeting) of the city council following the employee's notice of disagreement, the grievant employee may appear before the city council in open or executive session to discuss his or her grievance. After the employee's appearance before the city council, the mayor or council president shall, in writing, furnish the decision of the city council to the grievant employee. If the grievant employee fails to appear before the city council on his or her scheduled date of hearing, he or she shall be deemed to have waived any disagreement with the decisionmaking authority decision and shall waive all rights to grieve such decision. 
E.  Appeal from the Decision of the City Council. If the grievant employee disagrees with the written decision of the city council as provided by the mayor, he or she may within thirty (30) calendar days (calendar days does not mean working days) after receipt of the decision, initiate an appeal to the State Department of Labor in accordance with the provisions of SDCL 3-18-15.2. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
Article 10. - Drug and Alcohol Abuse Policy 

2.24.690 - Municipality's commitment to drug and alcohol free workplace. 
A.  The municipality of Sisseton has a strong commitment to its employees to provide a safe, healthful, and productive work environment and to promote high standards of employee health. Consistent with the spirit and intent of this objective, the municipality will act to eliminate any substance abuse which could impair an employee's ability to safely and effectively perform a particular job and which increases the potential for accidents, absenteeism, substandard performance, and tends to undermine public confidence in the municipality's work force. The municipality's goals are to establish and maintain a work environment that is free from the effects of alcohol and drug abuse and to maintain the reputation and integrity of the municipality of Sisseton by preventing unacceptable behavior by its employees that discredits the municipality of Sisseton and its employees. 
B.  While the municipality has no intention of unreasonably intruding into the private lives of its employees, the municipality does expect employees to report for work in a condition to perform their duties, make the work environment safe for other employees, and represent a proper image to the citizens. It is clear that employee off-the-job, as well as on-the-job, involvement with drugs and alcohol can have an impact on the municipality's goals. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.700 - Drug and alcohol abuse policies. 
    Following are the policies of the municipality regarding drug and alcohol abuse: 
A.  The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use of controlled drugs or substances, or the use of alcohol while on duty, on or off business property owned or leased by the municipality is proper cause for disciplinary action. 
B.  Any illegal controlled drug or substance possessed while on duty by employees will be turned over to the appropriate criminal justice agencies and may result in criminal prosecution. This does not apply to public safety officers who are in possession of an illegal controlled drug or substance while acting in the line of duty. 
C.  It is not permitted for an employee to be under the influence of controlled drugs or substances or alcohol on the job, except as provided for in subsection D of this section. 
D.  The legal use of controlled drugs or substances prescribed by a licensed physician is not prohibited, but employees in positions where side effects of the prescribed medication could affect performance and safety on the job are required to make such use known to their supervisor. 
E.  The illegal use, sale, and possession of controlled drugs or substances while off duty and off municipal premises which results in a criminal conviction is unacceptable. Off-duty, alcohol-related, criminal convictions are also unacceptable. They may affect the job performance and the confidence of the public in the municipality's ability to meet its responsibilities. Such off-the-job conduct may be proper cause for disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.710 - Testing for drugs or alcohol. 
A.  The municipality may request that the employee undergo drug and alcohol testing if there is a "reasonable suspicion" that the employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol during work hours. "Reasonable suspicion" means an articulable belief based on specific facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts that an employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. Circumstances which constitute a basis for determining reasonable suspicion may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  A pattern of abnormal or erratic behavior which is so unusual that it warrants summoning a supervisor, department head or other individual for assistance; 
2.  Information provided by a reliable and credible source with personal knowledge; 
3.  Direct observation of drug or alcohol use; 
4.  Presence of the physical symptoms of drug or alcohol use; (i.e., glossy or bloodshot eyes, alcohol odor on breath, slurred speech, poor coordination and/or reflexes); 
5.  Possession of substances in violation of the municipality's drug and alcohol policy. 
B.  The employee, where "reasonable suspicion" exists, may be asked to submit to blood and urine testing by a qualified medical physician or hospital at the municipality's expense. Prior to testing, the proper authority shall secure a signed release statement from the employee to have the hospital/physician release medical information to the municipality (see appendix five). 
C.  An employee who refuses to consent to a drug and alcohol test when reasonable suspicion exists may be subject to disciplinary action. 
D.  A positive result from the drug and/or alcohol test confirming the reasonable suspicion may result in disciplinary action. 
E.  The proper authority is required to detail in writing the specific facts, symptoms, or observations which led to the reasonable suspicion. This documentation shall be given to the finance officer and placed in the employee's personnel file only if confirmed by the drug and/or alcohol test (see appendix five). 
F.  All information from an employee's drug and/or alcohol test is confidential, and only those with a need to know are to be informed of the results. Disclosure of test results to any other person, agency, or organization is prohibited unless written authorization is obtained from the employee. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.720 - Drugs to be tested for. 
    The following drug groups were selected based on the ability of each drug to adversely affect physical/mental performance. All are controlled substances under state and federal law. 
A.  Alcohol, ethyl; 
B.  Amphetamines/methamphetamines (i.e., speed); 
C.  Barbiturates (i.e., to include but not limited to amobarbital, butabarbital, phenobarbital, cecobarbital); 
D.  Cocaine, cocaine metabolites; 
E.  Benzodiazepines; 
F.  Opiates (i.e., to include but not limited to codeine, heroin, morphine, hydromorphone, hyrocodone); 
G.  Phencyclidine (PCP); 
H.  THC (Marijuana) metabolite. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.730 - Employee responsibilities. 
A.  An employee must not report to work while his or her ability to perform his or her job duties is impaired due to on or off duty alcohol or drug use. Employees called in for emergency duty to work outside their regular work schedule must not report to work impaired by off-duty alcohol or drug use. 
B.  An employee must not possess or use alcohol or illegal drugs or prescription drugs without a prescription during working hours or while subject to duty, on breaks, or during meal periods. 
C.  An employee must notify his or her supervisor, before beginning work, when taking any medication or drugs, prescription or non-prescription, which may interfere with the safe and effective performance of duties or operation of municipal equipment. 
D.  An employee must notify his or her immediate supervisor of any drug or alcohol related criminal statute conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace no later than five days after such conviction. Any violations of the above stated policy may result in immediate disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.740 - Management responsibilities and guidelines. 
A.  Supervisors and department heads shall not physically search the persons of employees nor shall they search the personal possessions of employees without the freely given consent of, and in the presence of, the employee. 
B.  Supervisors and department heads shall notify the appropriate law enforcement agency when they have reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee may have illegal drugs in his or her possession or in an area jointly or fully controlled by the municipality. 
C.  Any supervisor or department head encountering an employee who refuses to consent to a drug and/or alcohol analysis when "reasonable suspicion" has been identified, shall remind the employee of the requirements of the policy and that he or she may be subject to disciplinary action. The reason(s) for the refusal shall be considered in determining the appropriate disciplinary action. Where there is reasonable suspicion that the employee is under the influence of alcohol or drugs, the manager or supervisor should direct the employee to remain at work for a reasonable time until the employee can be safely transported home. 
D.  Nothing in this policy shall be interpreted as constituting any waiver of or limitation on the municipality's responsibility to maintain discipline, or the right to invoke disciplinary measures, nor the employee's right to due process and the processing of grievances concerning such disciplinary measures in accordance with the grievance procedure set forth in Article 9. 
E.  Whenever disciplinary action is used in this policy, it shall include but not be limited to: oral reprimand, written reprimand, suspension, demotion or discharge. 
F.  Each employee will be given a copy of the municipality's policy on drug and alcohol substance abuse. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
Article 11. - Americans with Disabilities Act 

2.24.750 - Grievance procedure. 
A.  The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) provides comprehensive civil rights protection to individuals with disabilities in the areas of employment, public accommodations, state and local government services and programs, and telecommunications. Title II of the ADA states, in part, that "no otherwise qualified disabled individual shall, solely by reason of such disability, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subject to discrimination" in programs or activities sponsored by a public entity. 
B.  The municipality of Sisseton has adopted this grievance procedure to provide prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action prohibited by the U.S. Department of Justice regulations implementing Title II of the ADA. 
C.  Any individual who believes that he or she or a specific class of individuals with disabilities has been subjected to unlawful discrimination on the basis of that disability by Sisseton may, by himself or herself or by any authorized representative, file a complaint. 
D.  Complaints should be addressed to: Sisseton City Council, 513 Veterans Avenue, Sisseton, SD 57262 (605)698-3391. 
1.  A complaint must be filed in writing and contain: the name and address of the individual or representative filing the complaint, a description of the alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the entity of the nature and date of the alleged violation, and be signed by the complainant or authorized representative. Complaints filed on behalf of third parties must describe or identify the alleged victims of the discrimination. 
2.  The complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged violation occurs. This time may be extended for good cause shown. 
3.  The city council shall promptly conduct an informal, but thorough, investigation of the complaint. All interested parties shall be afforded an opportunity to submit evidence relevant to the complaint. 
4.  A written determination of the validity of the complaint and a description of the resolution shall be issued and a copy forwarded to the complainant no later than ten (10) days after completion of this investigation. The finding shall include: findings of fact and conclusions of law, a description of a remedy for any violation found, and a notice of the rights available to both the entity and the complainant, including the complainant's right to file a private suit. 
5.  Files and records of all complaints filed shall be maintained. 
6.  The complainant may request a reconsideration of the complaint in cases where he or she is dissatisfied with the resolution. The request for reconsideration must be made to Sisseton City Council within ten (10) days of the original finding. 
7.  Nothing in this grievance procedure shall be construed as preventing an individual from pursuit of other remedies including filing the complaint with any federal agency he or she believes is appropriate or with the U.S. Department of Justice. This procedure also does not preclude the individual's right to file a lawsuit in federal district court. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
Article 12. - Appointive Officials 

2.24.760 - Definition. 
    An appointive official is an individual who holds a position in a municipality as specified in SDCL 9-14-1 (see Section 2.24.770). 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.770 - Appointive officials to be appointed. 
A.  First Class Municipality. The appointive officers in a first class municipality are the finance officer (auditor, treasurer), attorney, engineer, chief of police and such other officers as provided in municipal ordinance. 
B.  Second and Third Class Municipalities. The appointive officers in second and third class municipalities are the finance officer (auditor, treasurer) and other such officers as provided by municipal ordinance. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.780 - Appointment of appointive officials. 
A.  Aldermanic. The mayor appoints all municipal officials with the approval of the common council. 
B.  Commissioner and Trustee. Appointment of municipal officials are made by a majority vote of the members elected to the governing board. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
2.24.790 - Applicable policies to municipal officials. 
    The following articles of this chapter shall apply to municipal officials: 
    Article 1: All sections; 
    Article 2: All sections; 
    Article 3: All sections; 
    Article 4: Not applicable; 
    Article 5: Applicable if you determine such officials are covered by FLSA; 
    Article 6: All sections; 
    Article 7: All sections; 
    Article 8: Not applicable; 
    Article 9: Not applicable; 
    Article 10: All sections; 
    Article 11: All sections. 
(Ord. 571 (part), 2005) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY 

3.04.010 - Salaries. 
    The salaries of the various officers shall be paid from such funds as may be from time to time designated by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 1-3-1) 
3.04.020 - Waterworks revenues. 
    All revenues of the city received from the operation of the city waterworks shall be paid into the city treasury and shall be credited to the water fund of the city. 
(Prior code § 1-3-2) 
3.04.030 - Liquor revenues. 
    All revenues of the city received from the operation of the city liquor store shall be paid into the city treasury and shall be credited to the liquor fund of the city. Revenues from approved licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be credited to the general fund. 
(Prior code § 1-3-3) 
3.04.040 - Service revenues. 
    All revenues of the city received from the operation of the parks, airport, sewer service, and garbage collection shall be paid into the city treasury and shall be credited to such special funds as may be designated by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 1-3-4) 
3.04.050 - Miscellaneous revenues. 
    All revenues of the city received from licenses, fines, and other fees shall be paid into the city treasury and credited to the general fund unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance. 
(Prior code § 1-3-5) 
Chapter 3.08 - PROPERTY TAXES 

3.08.010 - Established. 
    Pursuant to Article XI, Section 2 of the South Dakota Constitution and SDCL 9-21A, it is hereby the intention of the city to create two classes of property, urban and rural, for the purposes of ad valorem property taxation within the city. 
(Ord. 553 § 1, 2002: Ord. 346 § 1, 1977) 
3.08.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Urban property" is all platted property developed for commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes within the corporate limits of the municipalities of the city. 
B.  "Rural property" is all property platted or unplatted property not developed for commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes within the commercial limits of the city. 
(Ord. 553 § 2, 2002: Ord. 346 § 2, 1977) 
3.08.030 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to taxes levied for the payment of bonds. 
(Ord. 553 § 3, 2002: Ord. 346 § 3, 1977) 
3.08.040 - Rural classification. 
    The rural class of property includes only such platted or unplatted lands as in the judgment of the city council are rural in nature, are used or usable for agriculture and are not developed for commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes as the aforementioned reasons are not benefited to the same degree as other land by municipal services financed by general taxation. 
(Ord. 553 § 4, 2002: Ord. 346 § 4, 1977) 
3.08.050 - Urban classification. 
    The urban property includes all lands within the municipality not included in the rural service district. 
(Ord. 553 § 5, 2002: Ord. 346 § 5, 1977) 
3.08.060 - Rural classification-Application. 
    An individual may apply in writing to the city council of the city for a rural classification. For a tract of land to be included in the rural property classification, it must have the approval of a majority of the members of the city council. 
(Ord. 553 § 6, 2002: Ord. 346 § 6, 1977) 
3.08.070 - Mill levy and assessed value. 
    The mill levy and assessed value on the rural land classification annexed or contained within the municipal boundaries of the city shall not exceed the average mill levy and average assessed value on the unannexed agriculture land in adjoining townships in the county as long as the land within the municipal boundaries or that is annexed remains in the rural property designation. 
(Ord. 553 § 7, 2002: Ord. 346 § 7, 1977) 
3.08.080 - Discretionary tax formula. 
A.  Residential Structures. Any new residential structure, or any addition to or renovation of an existing structure, located within a redevelopment neighborhood, which new structure, addition, or renovation has a true and full vale of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, added to real property shall qualify to be assessed pursuant to the discretionary formula described in subsection B. In order to improve the quality of housing, all real property located within the city limits of Sisseton, South Dakota shall qualify as property located in a redevelopment neighborhood. The redevelopment neighborhood is being established because the area includes buildings or improvements which by reason of age, deterioration, obsolescence, and dilapidation injuriously affect the area to the detriment of public health, safety, morals or welfare and because the development of housing is being prevented by the predominance of defective or inadequate street layout, faulty lot layout in relation to size, adequacy, accessibility, or usefulness, the deterioration of site improvements, and obsolete platting. 
B.  Discretionary Formula. Any real property qualifying for the discretionary formula pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed in accordance with SDCL 10-6-55 with the following reductions in place for the qualifying property: 
First Year 20%; 
Second Year 40%; 
Third Year 60%; 
Fourth Year 80%; and 
Fifth Year 100%. 
(Ord. No. 620, 7-8-2013) 
Chapter 3.12 - SALES AND USE TAX 

3.12.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide additional needed revenue for the municipality of Sisseton, Roberts County, South Dakota, by imposing a municipal retail sales and use tax pursuant to the powers granted to the municipality by the State of South Dakota, by SDCL 10-52 entitled: Uniform Municipal Non-Ad Valorem Tax Law, and Acts amendatory thereto. 
(Ord. 561 § 1, 2003; Ord. 559 § 1, 2003; Ord. 500 § 1, 1997) 
3.12.020 - Effective date and enactment of tax. 
    From and after the first day of January, 2006, there is imposed as a municipal retail occupational sales and service tax upon the privilege of engaging in business a tax measured by two percent on the gross receipts of all persons engaged in business within the jurisdiction of the municipality of Sisseton, Roberts County, South Dakota, who are subject to the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax Act, SDCL 10-45 and Acts amendatory. 
(Ord. 574, 2005: Ord. 561 § 2, 2003; Ord. 559 § 2, 2003; Ord. 500 § 2, 1997) 
3.12.030 - Use tax. 
    In addition, there is imposed an excise tax on the privilege of use, storage and consumption within the jurisdiction of the municipality of tangible personal property or services purchased from and after the first of January, 2004, at the same rate as the municipal sales and service tax upon all transactions or use, storage and consumption which are subject to the South Dakota Use Tax Act SDCL 10-46, and Acts amendatory thereto. 
(Ord. 561 § 3, 2003; Ord. 559 § 3, 2003; Ord. 500 § 5, 1997) 
3.12.040 - Collection. 
    Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL 10-52, and Acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the South Dakota Department of Revenue and Regulation in accordance with the same rules and regulations applicable to the state sales tax and under such additional rules and regulations as the secretary of revenue and regulation of the State of South Dakota shall lawfully prescribe. 
(Ord. 561 § 4, 2003; Ord. 559 § 4, 2003; Ord. 500 § 6, 1997) 
3.12.050 - Interpretation. 
    It is declared to be the intention of this chapter and the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same manner as all sections of the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax Act, SDCL 10-45 and Acts amendatory thereto, and the South Dakota Use Tax, SDCL 10-46 and Acts amendatory thereto, and that this is considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax. 
(Ord. 561 § 5, 2003; Ord. 559 § 5, 2003; Ord. 500 § 7, 1997) 
3.12.060 - Penalty. 
    Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed by this chapter and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned in the county jail for thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL 10-45, and Acts amendatory thereto, and SDCL 10-46, and Acts amendatory thereto are authorized for the collection of these excise taxes by the department of revenue and regulation. 
(Ord. 561 § 6, 2003; Ord. 559 § 6, 2003; Ord. 500 § 9, 1997) 
3.12.070 - Municipal gross receipts tax. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide additional needed revenue for the Municipality of Sisseton, Roberts County, South Dakota, by imposing a municipal gross receipts tax pursuant to the powers granted to the municipality by the State of South Dakota, by SDCL 10-52A, and Acts amendatory thereto. 
B.  Effective Date and Enactment of Tax. From and after the first day of July, 2016, there is hereby imposed a municipal gross receipts tax of one percent (1%) upon the gross receipts from the sale of leases or rentals of hotel, motel, campsites or other lodging accommodations within the municipality for periods of less than twenty-eight (28) consecutive days, the sale of alcoholic beverages as defined in SDCL 35-1-1, and establishments where the public is invited to eat, dine or purchase and carry out prepared food for immediate consumption. The tax applies to the gross receipts of all persons engaged in business within the jurisdiction of the Municipality of Sisseton, Roberts County, South Dakota, who are subject to the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL 10-45 and Acts amendatory thereto. 
C.  Collection. Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL 10-52A and Acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the South Dakota Department of Revenue and Regulation in accordance with the same rules and regulations applicable to the state sales tax and under such additional rules and regulations as the Secretary of Revenue of the State of South Dakota shall lawfully prescribe. 
D.  Interpretation. It is declared to be the intention of this ordinance and the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same manner as all sections of the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Act, SDCL 10-45 and Acts amendatory thereto, and that this shall be considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax. 
E.  Use of Revenue. Any revenues received under this ordinance may be used only for the purpose of land acquisition, architectural fees, construction costs, payment for civic center auditoriums or athletic facility buildings, including the maintenance, staffing and operations of such facilities, and the promotion and advertising of the municipality, its facilities, attractions and activities. 
F.  Penalty. Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed by this ordinance and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned in the municipal jail for thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL 10-45, and Acts amendatory thereto, are hereby authorized for the collection of these excise taxes by the Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. No. 609, §§ 1-6, 2-28-2011; Ord. No. 637, 2-8-2016) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

5.04.010 - Licenses-Generally. 
A.  Every person, firm, or corporation engaging in a trade, business or occupation as follows: pawnbroker, dealer in second hand goods, dealer in items designed for use with illegal drugs or cannabis, junkyards, alcoholic beverage dealers, within the city shall obtain a business license from the city. 
B.  Dogs, cats and bicycles must also be licensed if they are to be kept within the city. 
(Ord. 531, 2002) 
Chapter 5.08 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 617, §§ I-VII, adopted Dec. 10, 2012, repealed former Ch. 5.08, §§ 5.08.010-5.08.070, and enacted a new Ch. 5.08 as set out herein. Former Ch. 5.08 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 527, § § 1-7, adopted in 2002 and Ord. No. 599, adopted May 11, 2009. 

5.08.010 - Permit. 
    No person or persons shall within the limits of the city of Sisseton, vend, give away or deliver any intoxicating liquors or malt beverages without first having obtained a permit from the City Council of the City of Sisseton to do so. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a registered pharmacist in selling such liquors in compliance with the Laws of the State of South Dakota relating to the registered pharmacists selling the same under permit. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the city of Sisseton to engage in the business of selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquors or malt beverages without first having procured a license therefore from the City Council of the City of Sisseton. 
(Ord. No. 617, § I, 12-10-2012) 
5.08.020 - Operating agreements-Mark up on alcoholic beverage. 
A.  Liquor Licenses. All on sale liquor licensees within the City of Sisseton shall be required to enter into operating agreements with the City of Sisseton, and shall be required thereunder to purchase all alcoholic beverages sold in such establishments through the package liquor store owned by the City of Sisseton at a price of ten (10) percent over the wholesale price of said alcoholic beverages to the city, exclusive of freight charges. 
B.  Malt Beverage Licenses. All malt beverages sold within the City of Sisseton, whether through on-sale or off-sale licenses shall be purchased through the package liquor store owned by the City of Sisseton and all such malt beverages shall be marked up ten (10) percent as they are under the existing operating agreements with the on-sale liquor licensees. All liquor and malt beverage licensees will act in accordance with South Dakota Codified Laws as amended and any local regulations. 
C.  Authority to Close Establishment Failing to Make Report and/or Pay Ten (10) percent Mark-Up in a Timely Manner. 
1.  The ten (10) percent mark-up on all liquor and malt beverages sold by on-sale or off-sale licensees within the City of Sisseton shall be due and payable no later than the 10th day of the month following purchase. A monthly report on the form prescribed and furnished by the City of Sisseton shall be filed with the City Finance Officer at the office at the City Hall no later than 12:00 o'clock noon on the 10th day of each month. 
2.  This report shall show gross sales for the preceding month of liquor and/or malt beverages and a calculation of the ten (10) percent mark-up due to the city and shall be sworn to by the owner or manager of the establishment and said report shall be accompanied by a check for the full amount due the city. 
3.  Failure to report and/or pay the ten (10) percent mark-up, or selling or having on the premises of a licensed establishment, beverages procured from sources other than the municipal liquor store shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. 
4.  In addition to criminal penalties as hereinafter provided, any licensee who fails to report and/or pay the ten (10) percent mark-up, as set forth above shall be closed for business until said report is filed and said payment is made. 
a.  If a licensee fails to file a report or pay the ten (10) percent mark-up as provided above, the city council shall issue an order to show cause to said licensee citing him to appear before the city council at a time and place to be set forth in said order, no less than five days after service of said notice on said licensee. 
b.  At that hearing, the licensee shall be required to show cause why he has not filed the monthly report and/or paid the ten (10) percent mark-up for the month to the city. 
c.  Unless the report is filed and mark-up paid in full before the date and time set for said hearing, or unless the licensee shows good cause at said hearing for his failure to make the report and pay the mark-up, the city shall enter an order to the Chief of Police or any other law enforcement officer in the county to close said business until such time as said report has been filed and said mark-up is paid in full. 
D.  Conditions. As a condition of being granted a liquor license and/or malt beverage license, all such licensees agree to the conditions of this chapter and that all of their business records, including, but not limited to, till slips, purchase orders, receipts, deposit slips, checks, personal banking records, tax returns, tax records, and any and all other records relating in any way to the operation of liquor establishments and/or malt beverage establishments shall be open and made available for inspection by the City of Sisseton by and through its auditors, finance officer, attorney, police officers, mayor and council or other agents or representatives at any reasonable time by any law enforcement officer acting under color of his authority. 
    All water, sewer, garbage bills and other obligations to the City of Sisseton must be kept current. Being delinquent on any obligation to the City of Sisseton or being delinquent on real estate taxes at any time during the year shall constitute cause for non-renewal of a liquor license and/or malt beverage license or operating agreement. 
(Ord. No. 617, § II, 12-10-2012) 
5.08.030 - License to Sell Alcoholic Beverages and/or Malt Beverages. 
A.  The price of a license to sell alcoholic beverages within the City of Sisseton shall be set in the operating agreement between the liquor establishment and the City of Sisseton. 
B.  The price of on-sale and off-sale malt beverage licenses within the City of Sisseton shall be set from time to time by the State of South Dakota. 
C.  No license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages within the City of Sisseton shall be issued until an application therefore has been filed with the City Finance Officer and the person, firm or corporation making said application has been duly approved by the city council. 
D.  Upon approval of the applicant by the city council, and payment by the applicant of the license fee in full to the City Finance Officer, the City Finance Officer shall issue a receipt for said payment, which receipt shall be treated as the applicant's license to operate. Said receipt shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business. 
(Ord. No. 617, § III, 12-10-2012) 
5.08.040 - Minors. 
A.  Sales or gifts of alcoholic beverages to minors are prohibited. No person shall within the city limits of the City of Sisseton give away, sell or in any manner provide intoxicating liquors or malt beverages to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years or to any person intoxicated or who is in the habit of becoming intoxicated. 
B.  Minors are disallowed from the premises of liquor and malt beverage establishments. It shall be unlawful to allow any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age to enter, remain in or loiter in an on-sale liquor establishment or malt beverage establishment as well as to enter, remain in or loiter in the City Municipal Liquor Store. It shall be unlawful for any such under-aged person to attempt to gain entrance or enter said establishment or for any person to aid or abet any under-age person in an attempt to gain entrance to or enter into said establishment except as provided in the following instances: 
1.  This age restriction shall not apply to malt beverage licensees which obtain more than fifty (50) percent of their gross income from sources other than the sale of malt beverages. If said malt beverage establishment has a specific room exclusively for the sale of malt beverages, minors shall not be permitted to enter said room. 
2.  Minors shall be allowed to accompany their parent or parents or any adult so designated by their parent or parents into an on-sale liquor establishment or malt beverage establishment for the purpose of attending a wedding, anniversary or birthday dance or similar function. Minors shall be allowed to accompany their parent or designated person into a restaurant, supper club or other business that serves to the public, even though said business has an on-sale liquor license or malt beverage license. No minor shall be allowed to consume alcoholic beverages or malt beverages while attending any function or business described in this section, even in the presence of the parent or parents or the designated person. 
3.  Minors shall be allowed to enter a bowling alley even though said bowling alley shall have an on-sale liquor license or malt beverage license. If said bowling alley has a specific room exclusively for the sale of liquor or malt beverages, minors shall not be permitted to enter said room. No minor found to be in a bowling alley shall be allowed to consume alcoholic beverages or malt beverages even in the presence of the parent or parents. 
C.  The City Council may grant a variance from any portion of this section upon good cause being shown and not being in conflict with State Law. This variance shall be granted upon good cause being shown. The variance shall be granted for a period not to exceed one year. Any violation of the conditions under which said variance is granted shall be grounds for immediate cancellation of the variance and for any other action deemed necessary by the City. 
(Ord. No. 617, § IV, 12-10-2012) 
5.08.050 - Hours of business-Sales restricted to premises. 
A.  Malt Beverage License-Hours On-Sale. 
1.  It is unlawful for any on-sale light wine or malt beverage licensee or his or her agent(s) or employee(s) to sell, serve or allow to be consumed on the licensed premises within the city, any malt beverage, wine or other alcoholic beverages between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the same day with the exception that the hours of on-sale business on Sundays shall be between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on Sunday. No on-sale light wine or malt beverage licensee shall sell, serve or allow to be consumed on the licensed premises, any malt beverages, wine or other alcoholic beverage at any time on Christmas Day, or permit in the building where the business is carried on, any malt beverage, wine or other alcoholic beverage to be sold or consumed during the prohibited hours, except as hereinafter provided. 
2.  It is unlawful for any on-sale dealer of malt beverages, wine or other alcoholic beverages to allow such to be sold, mixed or consumed on the premises occupied by the dealer during any of the hours in which the sale of the malt beverage, wine or other alcoholic beverage is prohibited. 
B.  Liquor Licenses-Hours On-Sale. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any on-sale liquor licensee, his agent(s) or employee(s) to sell, serve or allow to be consumed on the licensed premises, within the City of Sisseton, any alcoholic beverage between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the same day with the exception that the hours of on-sale business on Sundays shall be between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on Sunday. No on-sale liquor licensee shall sell, serve or allow to be consumed on the licensed premises, any malt beverages, wine or other alcoholic beverage at any time on Christmas Day. 
a.  Each licensee desiring a Sunday on-sale liquor license shall apply for such license with the City Finance Officer and pay a fee of $200.00 for such license which fee shall be submitted with said application. 
C.  Malt Beverage and Liquor Licenses-Off Sale. It shall be unlawful for any off-sale malt beverage or liquor licensee, their agent(s) or employee(s) to sell any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the same day with the exception that the hours of off-sale business on Sundays shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on Sunday. All alcoholic beverage and/or malt beverage sold off-sale must be out of the licensed premises by 1:00 a.m. with the exception of Sunday sales which must be out of the licensed premises by 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on Sunday. No off-sale malt beverage or liquor licensee shall sell any malt beverages, wine or other alcoholic beverage at any time on Christmas Day. 
D.  Special Events Licenses. The City of Sisseton has authority to issue a special alcoholic beverage license in accordance with SDCL 35-4-124, as amended from time to time. The applicant must make their request for a special alcoholic beverage license in writing to the Finance Officer setting forth the special event for which said license is requested, which type of alcoholic beverage license is requested, and the date and times of operation. The Finance Officer shall present the written request for special alcoholic beverage license to the City Council. The City Council shall determine whether or not to grant the special alcoholic beverage license, and shall notify the applicant in writing as to the Council's decision. If the request for special event license is granted, the written permission shall designate which type of alcoholic beverage license(s) is/are granted, the date and specific hours within which the special alcoholic beverage license is granted, and the rules and/or restrictions related to the issuance of the special event license. A license fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a malt beverage license, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for an on-sale wine license, and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for an on-sale liquor license shall be paid by the applicant upon approval of the special alcoholic beverage license. Each fee is individual to each license, and if more than one license is granted, the applicant must pay the total of the costs associated with licensing. A fee waiver will be considered by the City Council upon request by the applicant. The applicant must also present proof of insurance and hold the City harmless from any liability arising from the special event. 
E.  Unlawful to Remain on Premises After Closing. It shall be unlawful for any person, excluding employee(s), manager(s) and owner(s) to remain in an on- or off-sale malt beverage or liquor establishment after 1:30 a.m. It shall be unlawful for any employee(s), manager(s) and owner(s) to remain in an on- or off-sale malt beverage or liquor establishment after 2:10 a.m. without permission of a law enforcement officer. 
F.  Serving Alcoholic Beverages Outside of Building is Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any on-sale dealer within the City of Sisseton to serve malt beverages, wine or other alcoholic beverages outside of the building or structure for which the license is issued. 
G.  Unlawful to Leave Establishment With Alcoholic Beverage in Possession-Exceptions. It shall be unlawful for an on-sale malt beverage establishment, a liquor establishment or any employee(s), manager(s) or owner(s) thereof to allow any person to leave the licensed premises within the City of Sisseton with any container of alcoholic beverage in their possession, except for the sale of unopened containers of malt beverage, where the licensee has sold the same under a malt beverage off-sale license. 
(Ord. No. 617, § V, 12-10-2012; Ord. No. 644, 6-12-2017) 
5.08.060 - Authority of Law Enforcement to Close Establishment. 
    If, in the opinion of a law enforcement officer, the conduct of individuals in an on-sale liquor establishment or malt beverage establishment constitutes a threat to the peace and safety of the citizens of the City of Sisseton, any such law enforcement officer may close said establishment for the remainder of the operating day. Such action and the reasons therefore must be promptly reported to the Mayor and the City Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 617, § VI, 12-10-2012) 
5.08.070 - Penalties. 
    Any person or on-sale liquor establishment or malt beverage establishment found to have violated this chapter shall be subject to: 
A.  A fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) or a jail sentence not to exceed thirty (30) days or both. Each day of violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. As to the sale of malt beverage not purchased through the municipal liquor store, each bottle or container sold shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  The City Council, Chief of Police, City Attorney, Mayor, or Finance Officer may forward, without notice to the licensee, any alleged violation of this Ordinance directly to the South Dakota Secretary of Revenue for its review and potential implementation of additional penalties. 
(Ord. No. 617, § VII, 12-10-2012) 
Chapter 5.12 - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
Sections: 

5.12.010 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons as principal, clerk, agent, or servant to sell any item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory, or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs, as defined by the South Dakota Codified Laws, without obtaining a license. Such licenses shall be in addition to any or all other licenses held by applicant. 
(Prior code § 7-3-1) 
5.12.020 - Application. 
    Application to sell any item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory, or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, be accompanied by affidavits by applicant and each and every employee authorized to sell such items that such person has never been convicted of a drug related offense. 
(Prior code § 7-3-2) 
5.12.030 - Fee. 
    The fee for such license shall be in an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 7-3-3) 
5.12.040 - Minors. 
    It is unlawful to sell or give items as described in Section 5.12.060 in any form to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Prior code § 7-3-4) 
5.12.050 - Records. 
    Every licensee must keep a record of every item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory, or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs which is sold and this record shall be open to inspection of any police officer or Roberts County law enforcement officer at any time during the hours of business. Such record shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the name and quantity of the product, the date and time of the sale, and the licensee or agent of the licensee's signature. Such records shall be retained for not less than two years. 
(Prior code § 7-3-5) 
5.12.060 - License guidelines. 
    Every license must adhere to these provisions regarding display of items. 
A.  Paper. White paper or tobacco oriented paper not necessarily designed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs may be displayed. Other paper of colorful design, or names oriented for use with illegal cannabis or drugs and displayed are covered. 
B.  Roach Clips. Roach clips are designed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs and therefore covered. 
C.  Pipes. Pipes if displayed away from the proximity of nonwhite paper or tobacco oriented paper, and not displayed within proximity of roach clips, or literature encouraging illegal use of cannabis or illegal drugs are not covered; otherwise, covered. 
D.  Paraphernalia. Other items and paraphernalia designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs if displayed with roach clips or literature encouraging illegal use of cannabis or drugs are covered. 
(Prior code § 7-3-6) 
5.12.070 - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount set forth in Chapter 1.16, and each day during which any person, firm, or corporation shall be engaged in business in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed and constituted a separate and distinct offense. 
(Prior code § 7-3-7) 
Chapter 5.16 - JUNKYARDS AND JUNK DEALERS 
Sections: 

5.16.010 - Definitions. 
    The term "junkyard" means any area or lot where two or more unusable automobiles, old metal, rags, waste paper, green hides, or used electrical and/or gas appliances of all descriptions shall be loaded or stored. The term is also defined as any business for the sale or purchase of salvage material, goods, wares, or merchandise and secondhand goods, including motor vehicles and accessories for motor vehicles or a salvage or wrecking yard or store, also including used electrical and/or gas appliances of all descriptions. 
    The term "junk dealer" means any person or persons, firm, or corporation engaged in business as a dealer or trader of junk, rags, waste paper, old iron, brass, copper, tin, empty bottles, junked automobiles or parts thereof, used electrical appliances and/or gas appliances of all descriptions, or other articles which from worn condition are rendered useless for the purpose designed, or is engaged in whole or in part in the business of purchasing, processing, and selling used automobiles, motor vehicles, and other machinery which are brought to his or her place of business and cut and sorted in accordance with their metallic content and sold, or what is commonly known as salvage operations. 
(Prior code § 7-7-1) 
5.16.020 - Junkyard maintained within city limits. 
    No building, place, or lot where junk, junked automobiles, parts thereof, used electrical and/or gas appliances of all descriptions, or other worn-out machinery of any kind is bought, sold, or stored, shall be established or maintained within the city without special permission having been granted by the city council of the city. 
(Prior code § 7-7-2) 
5.16.030 - License required. 
    No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer or operate a junkyard within the city or within one mile thereof without first having secured a license. 
(Prior code § 7-7-3) 
5.16.040 - Application for license. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation desiring a license to operate as a junk dealer shall make application in writing to the city council and the application shall state: (a) name, post office address, and length of time applicant has resided in the city; (b) the premises where the business is or will be located or conducted, described by lot and block number or by legal description; (c) any other information the city council may require. 
(Prior code § 7-7-4) 
5.16.050 - Annual fee. 
    Every junk dealer or operator of a junkyard shall pay an annual fee as shall be set by resolution of the city council for each establishment or place of business which shall include one junkyard, and a further fee as shall be fixed by the city council for each additional junkyard, and the operator of the junkyard shall at all times keep the junkyard and his or her place of business in such condition so that the same will not become offensive or obnoxious, and the premises shall at all times be free of rodents. 
(Prior code § 7-7-5) 
5.16.060 - Municipal finance officer to issue license. 
    Upon filing of the application together with the necessary license fee, the council, if they deem such applicant a fit and proper person to engage in such business, may by majority vote grant such license and thereupon such license shall be issued by the finance officer in the manner provided for the issuance of licenses. 
(Prior code § 7-7-6) 
5.16.070 - Revocation of license. 
    The city council has the right to revoke any license granted under this chapter if it determines upon investigation and after hearing that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, provided that notice of the hearing shall be served upon the licensee named in the license at least five days before the hearing, either by personal service of a copy of the notice or by mailing a copy of the same to the person at the address given in the application. Should any license granted under this chapter be revoked, no refund of the license fee shall be made. 
(Prior code § 7-7-7) 
5.16.080 - Daily record of purchases. 
    Every junk dealer shall keep a daily written record of all articles and quantities purchased by him or her setting forth the name, residence, age, and occupation of the person from whom each article or articles were purchased and the name of the employer of such person, the date and hour the purchase was made, the price paid, and such other information as the chief of police with the approval of the city council requires. Such record shall at all times be opened for the inspection of police officers or any officer of the law to make investigation and also for securing evidence in connection with any violation of law. 
(Prior code § 7-7-8) 
5.16.090 - Written report to chief of police upon request. 
    Every junk dealer upon being served with written notice to do so by a member of the police department, shall report to the chief of police, giving a written description of all goods, articles, and things purchased or received by him or her in the course of business as a junk dealer and covering such a period of time as may be specified in the notice. Such written report shall state the amount paid for each item and the name, residence, and general description of the person from whom the goods, articles, or things were received. 
(Prior code § 7-7-9) 
5.16.100 - Restrictions of operations. 
A.  No junk dealer shall carry on a business at or from any other place than the premises designated and described in the application and license, and all junk of any kind described shall be kept wholly within the boundaries of such premises. 
    It is unlawful for any junk dealer to burn junk or refuse on the premises covered by such license or any other place within the city. 
C.  The wrecking and dismantling of old cars for the purpose of securing parts shall be done wholly inside of the buildings occupied by the junk dealer or within an enclosure and shall not occur upon any highway or city street or alley or outside of the premises described in the application and license. 
D.  In all cases where the business of a junk dealer is to be conducted on a vacant lot or lots or in a partially enclosed structure, the council shall have the right to inspect and determine whether or not the appearance of the lot or lots distract from the sightliness of the area in which such premises may be located, and in the event the council finds that the appearance of the lot or lots does distract from the appearance of the area in which located, no license shall be granted until such lot or lots have an enclosure with a tight, well constructed and well painted fence of at least ten (10) feet in height or of a sufficient height to cut off the public view and must not be located nearer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any state or federal highway. After the construction of such fence it shall at all times be suitably maintained and kept in good repair by the licensee. 
E.  In no event shall any licensee permit any advertising matter of any sort to be placed upon the fence, except that such licensee may use and not exceed fifty (50) square feet of the fence for the purpose of advertising his or her business. 
F.  No goods, material, wares, merchandise, motor vehicles, or accessories for motor vehicles or any salvage goods, wares, merchandise, or materials including used electrical and/or gas appliances of all descriptions shall be kept, stored, or placed for a longer period than one day outside of such building or fence. 
(Prior code § 7-7-10) 
5.16.110 - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating this chapter shall be fined according to the penalties described in Chapter 1.16 
(Prior code § 7-7-11) 
5.16.120 - Purchasing junk from minors. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons, firm, or corporation to purchase or receive from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years any article, goods, or things commonly known and classed as junk, any bottle, pipe or pipe fittings, lead, iron or brass, tools or implements, or any goods or wares of a secondhand character, or any rubber, overshoes, boots, or rubber goods of any nature, either secondhand or new without the written consent of such minor's parent or guardian, which writing shall be kept by such person or persons, firm, or corporation and be subject to the inspection of any police officer of the city. 
(Prior code § 7-7-12) 
5.16.130 - Junkyard in areas where children play. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to leave unattended or to abandon in any public place or in any location that is accessible to children within the city limits of the city, or any location which is in plain view from adjacent property and from the public streets and alleys within the city, any junked cars, car bodies, wrecked cars, abandoned and unusable cars or bodies therefrom, and any other unsightly trash or junk which would be dangerous for children to play in, around, or upon and which is or tends to be unsightly and which does lower or tends to lower the value of adjacent property because of its unsightliness, unless those responsible for parking, abandoning, or leaving the old car bodies, junked cars, wrecked cars, or other unsightly junk first build a solid fence at least ten (10) feet in height around the area in which the junked cars, old car bodies, and other junk is to be placed, the fence to have a gate thereon to be securely fastened so small children cannot get in or among the old cars, junked cars, car bodies, or other junk where they could or may be injured. 
(Prior code § 7-7-13) 
Chapter 5.20 - MOTOR CARRIERS OF PASSENGERS 
Sections: 

5.20.010 - License required. 
    No person or corporation shall engage in the transportation of passengers by motor carrier upon the public highways from place to place within the City, without procuring a license therefore from the City. The City Council shall have authority to deny or revoke said license based upon cause. 
(Ord. 433 § 1, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 645, 8-28-2017) 
5.20.020 - Application for license. 
    Application for license shall be accompanied by proof that the applicant has complied with the laws of the state of South Dakota in relation to such occupation and by an undertaking or indemnity insurance , to be approved by the City Council, obligating the applicant to pay and final judgment not exceeding the sum of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for property damage; two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for accidental death or injury to a person and not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for accidental death or injury in one accident to more than one person, which undertaking or insurance shall be in force for the license period and may only be cancelled on ten (10) days notice to the City Council and shall terminate on full termination of the applicants engagement as a public motor carrier unless new undertaking or indemnity insurance is furnished to take effect forthwith on termination of the former undertaking or indemnity insurance. 
(Ord. 433 § 2, 1987) 
5.20.030 - License fee. 
    The license fee for the period of one year, commencing and ending on July 1st of each year, for the first vehicle shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and for each additional vehicle ten dollars ($10.00). The license for any part of a year shall be the same as for a year. 
(Ord. 433 § 3, 1987) 
5.20.040 - License transfers. 
    On written request of the licensee and proposed transferee and the approval of the City Council such license may be transferred to another person or corporation. 
(Ord. 433 § 4, 1987) 
5.20.050 - License number. 
    License number shall be affixed to the licensed vehicle in a conspicuous place and there maintained during the licensed period. 
(Ord. 433 § 5, 1987) 
5.20.060 - Prohibitions. 
    No alcoholic beverages or controlled substances shall be allowed to be transported in any vehicle licensed under this chapter except that paying passengers may transport unopened alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 433 § 6, 1987) 
5.20.070 - Inspections. 
    All vehicles operated as motor carriers of passengers under this chapter shall be subject to inspection of mechanical and physical condition and subject to search at any time by any law enforcement officer having jurisdiction in Roberts County. Applicant agrees to these conditions as a condition of his or her license. Any license granted hereunder may be suspended for refusal to comply with this section. 
(Ord. 433 § 7, 1987) 
5.20.080 - Penalty. 
    Any violation of the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be punishable on conviction by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of operation in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 433 § 8, 1987) 
Chapter 5.24 - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
Sections: 

5.24.010 - License required. 
    No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer within the city, without first obtaining a license to do so from the city finance officer. The application for such a license shall contain all pertinent information required by the finance officer and shall be issued and governed in accordance with this chapter, except secondhand goods dealers exempted under Section 5.24.030. 
(Prior code § 7-2-1) 
5.24.020 - Definitions. 
    "Pawnbroker" means any person, firm, or corporation who engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal property, other than the basis of action, securities, or evidence of indebtedness; or purchases personal property with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell it back at a stipulated price. 
    Any pawnbroker may effect the purchase of secondhand personal property for resale purposes under the terms of this chapter by acquiring any pawn ticket of his or her own issued by transfer. 
    "Secondhand goods dealer" means any person, firm, or corporation, other than a pawnbroker or dealer in precious metals and precious gems, who purchases, collects, trades, sells, or deals in the following secondhand goods: business machines, tape recorders and tapes, all radio transmitters and receivers, musical instruments, cameras and camera accessories, power tools, sporting goods, stereos, stereo equipment and records, tools and tool boxes, television sets, weapons, bicycles, radios, microwave ovens, and jewelry. 
(Prior code §§ 7-2-2, 7-2-3) 
5.24.030 - Exceptions. 
    The definition of "secondhand goods dealer" shall exempt the following transactions: 
A.  Any person, firm, or corporation selling new, unused articles, and any receiving or taking in used articles or trade from the purchasers of the new articles against the purchase price of the new articles which are sold for their market value. 
B.  Any person collecting antique items of personal use only. 
C.  Casual and occasional sales of used household goods by the owner thereof to the public, on a non-receiving basis, if the seller, at time of sale, is now engaged for profit in the business of selling goods of that or a similar nature; this category includes those sales commonly referred to as "garage sales." 
D.  Any person, firm, or corporation dealing exclusively in the resale of used automobiles. 
E.  Any person, firm, or corporation that operates a junk yard for wrecked automobiles. 
F.  Transactions involving goods sold on consignment. 
G.  Transactions in secondhand goods at stores or events sponsored by nonprofit corporations or associations or fraternal or religious organizations. 
(Prior code § 7-2-3) 
5.24.040 - Identification required. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation applying for a pawnbroker's license or a secondhand goods dealer's license, must, before their application will be considered, come to the Sisseton Police Department and furnish adequate identification. No license under this chapter shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony; no license under this chapter shall be issued to any corporation, one or more officers, or directors of which have been convicted of a felony. 
(Prior code § 7-2-4) 
5.24.050 - Bond required. 
    Each pawnbroker doing business in the city shall furnish a good and sufficient bond, with a surety to be approved by the city council, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned for faithful observance of this chapter and conditioned for the safekeeping or return of all articles held in pledge of such pawnbroker. 
(Prior code § 7-2-5) 
5.24.060 - Separate license and bond for each place of business. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation conducting several or separate places of business shall pay the appropriate license fees and procure the appropriate licenses and bond for each place of business. The above mentioned proprietor's license shall be sufficient for all clerks, agents, and employees engaged at the place named in the license. 
(Prior code § 7-2-6) 
5.24.070 - Suspension, revocation of license. 
    A license issued to a licensee under this chapter, who has violated the provisions of this chapter, may be suspended for a prescribed period, or revoked in the event of failure on the part of the licensee to comply with the provisions of this chapter after ten (10) days written notice and a public hearing. 
(Prior code § 7-2-7) 
5.24.080 - Fixed premises. 
A.  No person shall engage in business as a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer unless the person has a fixed premises where the business is conducted, either on a continuing basis or from time to time, and unless the person has first obtained a license to engage in that business at that premises. 
B.  For the purpose of this section, "fixed premises" shall include any nonmobile premises where such business is conducted and the pawned or purchased secondhand articles are held, whether or not that premises remains in the same location during the period the license is in effect. 
(Prior code § 7-2-8) 
5.24.090 - Change in location of licensed premises. 
    If, during the effective period of a license issued under this chapter, a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer changes the location of the licensed premises within the city, such dealer shall inform the city finance officer of such change of location and shall have the new premises to be licensed noted on the license. There shall be no additional fee charged for changing the location of the licensed premises. 
(Prior code § 7-2-9) 
5.24.100 - Records required of pawnbrokers. 
    Every pawnbroker shall keep books or records of pawn tickets in a manner satisfactory to the chief of police, where he or she shall accurately and intelligibly enter, in ink, in the English language, at the time of purchasing or receiving any personal property, and after requiring and observing identification from the person seeking to pawn the property, a record of the following information: 
A.  The name of the person from whom the property is purchased or received, his or her place of residence, and his or her date of birth; 
B.  A detailed and accurate description of each article, which shall include, if available, the manufacturer's name, style, model number, serial number, engraved initials, or other identifying marks; 
C.  The date and time of transaction; 
D.  The amount necessary for redemption; 
E.  The date when the article is to be redeemed; 
F.  Any mortgage or bill of sale taken, or receipt of pawn ticket given. 
    Every pawnbroker shall also record the date of disposition or redemption from pawn of the article or any part or portion thereof. The disposition report shall be located in the same book and at the same place where the receiving records of the article are located. 
(Prior code § 7-2-10) 
5.24.110 - Records required of secondhand goods dealer. 
    Every secondhand goods dealer shall keep books or records for those articles listed in Section 5.24.020 in a manner satisfactory to the chief of police or his or her designee, where he or she shall accurately and intelligently enter, in ink, in the English language, at the time of purchasing or receiving any article or item, the following information: 
A.  The name of the person from whom the property was purchased or received, his or her place of residence, and his or her date of birth; 
B.  Date and time of the transaction; 
C.  A detailed description of the item which shall include, if available, the manufacturer's name, style, model number, serial number, engraved initials, or other identifying marks; 
D.  If the seller is not known personally to the dealer or the dealer's agent, the dealer is required to obtain the person's drivers license number and the state of issuance or, if available, the identifying number from at least one form of government issued identification; 
E.  The amount paid for the article. 
(Prior code § 7-2-11) 
5.24.120 - Copy of records delivered to the chief of police. 
    It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand goods to make out and deliver on the 1st and 15th of each month to the chief of police, a legible and correct copy of all records of personal property or other valuable things received, deposited, purchased, or placed on consignment during the preceding time period. The records provided to the chief of police shall include the following: 
a.  The time when the personal property or other valuable thing was received, deposited, purchased, or consigned; 
b.  A serial number or other identifying number for any item of personal property or other valuable thing received, deposited, purchased, or consigned with a serial number or other identifying number; 
c.  A description of the person or persons, and clear, color photograph of one legal form of picture identification of the person or persons by whom such article was left in pledge or from whom the same was purchased or taken on consignment. 
(Prior code § 7-2-12) 
(Ord. No. 615, 9-10-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 615, adopted Sept. 10, 2012, amended § 5.24.120 title to read as herein set out. Former § 5.24.120 title pertained to copy of records delivered daily to chief of police. 
5.24.130 - Inspection of records or license and pledged property. 
    The books or records required to be kept by pawnbrokers or secondhand goods dealers shall be open to the inspection of city police officers during reasonable business hours. The pawnbroker shall produce and show any article pledged in connection with any loan. The licenses required for pawnbrokers or secondhand goods dealers shall at all times be on display in a conspicuous place and available for inspection by city police officers during reasonable business hours, unless the license is being taken to the city finance officer to have a change of location recorded. 
(Prior code § 7-2-13) 
5.24.140 - Penalty for misrepresenting transactions. 
    Any person who fails to keep such records or fails to make the required entries therein, or shall intentionally or knowingly make any false or unintelligible entry, or any entry which he or she has reason to believe is untrue, or who shall fail to make the inquiries necessary to enable him or her to make such entries, or who shall fail to produce his or her records when requested by a city police officer during reasonable business hours, or who shall destroy or willfully permit such records to be destroyed or lost, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 1.16. 
(Prior code § 7-2-14) 
5.24.150 - Length of records to be kept. 
    The records required by this chapter shall be maintained for one year after the date of purchase or receipt and shall be made available for inspection to city police officers during reasonable business hours. 
(Prior code § 7-2-15) 
5.24.160 - Pawn tickets. 
    At the time of receiving a pledge and upon the subsequent renewal of a loan, the pawnbroker shall deliver to the pledgor or his or her agent a pawn ticket, which pawn tickets shall be correspondingly serially numbered, and shall contain the following information: the name and address of the pawnbroker; a generic description of the pledge with such particular details of description noted whenever possible in order to distinguish the article or articles; the date and time of the transaction, and the amount, duration, and terms of the loan. The pawnbroker may insert on the pawn ticket any other terms, conditions, and information that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7-2-16) 
5.24.170 - Holding period for pawnbroker purchases. 
    Any licensed pawnbroker who shall purchase any new or secondhand goods of any individual not engaged in trade, shall keep the same for inspection for ten (10) days from the time of the transfer, except on written release from the chief of police or his or her designee. The above-mentioned property shall be held during this period on the licensed premises or some other secure location within the city and shall not be disposed of or altered from the form in which it was received during this period. 
(Prior code § 7-2-17) 
5.24.180 - Holding period of secondhand goods-Exceptions. 
A.  Any person licensed as a secondhand goods dealer who shall purchase any new or secondhand goods as stated in Section 5.24.020 of any individual not engaged in trade shall either keep the same for inspection for ten (10) days from the time of transfer, except on written release from the chief of police or his or her designee, or, keep the same for three working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and calendar holidays, after delivering the required records to the Sisseton Police Department. The above mentioned property shall be held during this period in the licensed premises or some other secure location within the city and shall not be disposed of or altered from the form in which it was received, except on written release from the chief of police or his or her designee. 
B.  When articles are acquired by a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer in a group, they shall be kept together for identification purposes and not separated until the ten (10) day period has elapsed, unless released prior on written authorization by the chief of police or his or her designee. 
(Prior code § 7-2-18) 
5.24.190 - Pawned articles to be held forty (40) days. 
    Every article of any kind or description which is taken in pawn by a pawnbroker shall be held by the pawnbroker for a period of forty (40) days, during which time the same shall not be shown either for sale or for inspection, to any person, other than a city police officer, during reasonable business hours. 
(Prior code § 7-2-19) 
5.24.200 - Effect of hold order. 
    The chief of police or any authorized police officer may, by written order, order a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer to hold any specified article or articles, deposited with or in custody of such pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer, for purposes of further investigation by the police department, when the item or items are believed to be stolen. A hold order shall remain in effect for a period of thirty (30) days commencing the day on which the hold order was delivered to the pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer. A hold order shall supersede the provisions of Sections 5.24.170 and 5.24.180 of this chapter, and no sale or other disposition may be made of the article or articles while such hold order remains outstanding, unless released by officers issuing the hold order. 
(Prior code § 7-2-20) 
5.24.210 - Accepting articles from other than lawful owner. 
    A pawnbroker who accepts in pledge any article as security for a loan from a pledgor who is not the owner thereof, obtains no property in the article, either by reason of maturation of the loan or by transference of the pawn ticket to the pawnbroker by the pledgor or holder thereof. Ignorance of the fact that the pledged article was lost or stolen shall not be construed to affect the question of title, and if the pawnbroker shall sell such article to a third person, he or she shall remain liable to the original owner. 
(Prior code § 7-2-21) 
5.24.220 - Transactions with minors which are unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer to accept any articles in pawn or purchase any secondhand personal property by acquiring a pawn ticket by transference from any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Prior code § 7-2-22) 
5.24.230 - Concealing articles to prevent identification. 
    No pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer shall conceal, secrete, or destroy, for the purpose of concealing, any article purchased or received by him or her, for the purpose of preventing identification thereof by city police officers. 
(Prior code § 7-2-23) 
5.24.240 - Firearms. 
    No pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer shall purchase, accept as security, or retain in his or her possession, a firearm unless he or she shall obtain the name, age, and address from the person or persons from whom it was received and be able to give a physical description of the person or persons. The name, age and address shall be verified by the presentation of identification to the pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer. 
(Prior code § 7-2-24) 
5.24.250 - Examination of premises by city police officers. 
    No pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer or any other personnel shall refuse, resist, or attempt to prevent any city police officer without a warrant from examining the licensed premises occupied by the pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer, or other secured premises within the city limits where property is stored, during reasonable business hours for the purpose of discovering stolen property. 
(Prior code § 7-2-25) 
5.24.260 - Hours of operation. 
    No pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer covered under this chapter shall operate his or her business before 9:00 a.m. and shall cease operation of his or her business at or before the hour of 10:00 p.m. The pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer shall post a sign on his or her place of business which shall be of sufficient size to be readable from the street listing the hours of business. 
(Prior code § 7-2-26) 
5.24.270 - Exemption. 
    The chief of police is authorized to issue a certificate of exemption, exempting a secondhand goods dealer from the requirements of this chapter where it is determined that the dealer makes a majority of his or her purchases outside of the city and a majority of his or her sales outside the city. Such exemption shall state whether it is an exemption from all portions of this chapter or an exemption from certain sections of this chapter. If the exemption is partial, it shall specifically state which sections of the chapter are covered by the exemption. An exemption shall be valid for one year and requests for renewal shall be directed to the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 7-2-27) 
Chapter 5.28 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
Sections: 

5.28.010 - Public nuisance. 
    The practice of going in and upon private residences, and premises in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors and purchasers of merchandise, not having been expressly requested or invited to do so by the owners, occupant or occupants, of the private residences or premises, for the purpose of the sale or purchase of goods, wares, or merchandise, and for the soliciting of orders for the sale or purchase of the same, and for the purpose of disposing of, peddling or hawking the same, is declared to be a public nuisance, and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 143 § 1, 1937) 
5.28.020 - Abatement. 
    The chief of police and police department of the city are required and directed to suppress the same, and to abate any such nuisance as is described in the Section 5.28.010. 
(Ord. 143 § 2, 1937) 
5.28.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of perpetrating a nuisance as described and prohibited in the Section 5.28.010, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a sum not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), together with costs of proceedings, which the fine may be satisfied, if not paid in cash, by execution against the person of anyone convicted of committing the misdemeanor herein prohibited. 
(Ord. 143 § 3, 1937) 
Chapter 5.32 - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 
Sections: 

5.32.010 - Locally-raised produce. 
    Persons selling farm produce raised locally shall be granted a license without any fee. 
(Ord. 438 § 1, 1988) 
5.32.020 - Other produce. 
    Other than as described in Section 5.32.010, persons selling farm produce shall pay a license fee of five dollars per year. 
(Ord. 438 § 2, 1988) 
5.32.030 - Home businesses. 
    Persons selling merchandise, insurance, investments, goods or wares from their homes as their principal places of business shall, if their homes are located within thirty (30) miles of the city limits, be granted licenses without fee. 
(Ord. 438 § 3, 1988) 
5.32.040 - Other businesses. 
    Persons selling any and all merchandise, insurance, investments, goods or wares not covered by Sections 5.32.010-5.32.030 shall be subject to a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
(Ord. 438 § 4, 1988) 
5.32.050 - Duration of license. 
    Licenses shall run from January 1 to December 31 and the fee shall not be pro-rated for any part of a year, but shall be due and payable in full. 
(Ord. 438 § 5, 1988) 
5.32.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Operating without a license shall be a class 2 misdemeanor punishable by a maximum of a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine. 
B.  Each day that a person operates without a license as hereinbefore set forth constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. 438 §§ 6, 7, 1988) 
Chapter 5.36 - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

5.36.010 - Carnivals and circuses. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons owning, managing, or operating any circus, menageries, wild west shows, carnival, or other exhibition to exhibit in the city without first registering with the city finance office the nature and purpose of the activity, the hours of operation, the length of time appearing, and the particular place to be used. Such shows or exhibits must be approved by the city council which may require that a bond be filed to cover the cost of cleanup or repair. 
(Prior code § 7-4-1) 
5.36.020 - Video lottery machines. 
    Each video lottery machine in use in the city shall be subject to an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per machine to the city. This fee shall be payable on or before January 15th of each year by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license having the machine or machines on the premises. Any new machines installed after the due date shall pay a pro-rata fee based on the day they are placed in service. All annual video lottery machine fees shall be payable to the city finance officer. 
(Ord. 475, 1992) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMALS GENERALLY 

6.04.010 - Cruelty to animals. 
    Any person who in the city cruelly or immoderately beats any horse, mule, cow, or other animal, or neglects to properly take care of or feed any such animals, or leaves standing in the streets any horse, mule, team, or other animals, unprotected an unreasonable time, or who overworks, overloads, or overdrives any horse or other working animal, shall upon conviction be fined in any sum not less than five dollars nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); and the chief of police or any police officer shall take such action as may be necessary for the immediate protection of the animal or animals. 
(Prior code § 8-4-1) 
6.04.020 - Inciting animals to fight. 
    Any person who in the city by words, signs, or otherwise, sets any animal or animals to fighting, or to attack any other animal or animals, or who aids and abets or encourages any animal fight, or any owner, keeper or harborer of any animal, who knowingly permits such animal to fight without endeavoring to prevent the same, or to any person who by signs, words, or otherwise sets on or encourages any animal to attack or chase any human being not engaged in any malicious act, shall, upon conviction be fined in any sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Prior code § 8-4-2) 
6.04.030 - Animals running at large. 
    No hogs, cattle, horses, mules, sheep, geese, or poultry are permitted to run at large in the streets, alleys, or public places within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 8-4-3) 
6.04.040 - Pound master-Created. 
    The office of pound master is created and established. 
(Prior code § 8-4-4) 
6.04.050 - Pound master-Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police or the pound master, and they are hereby authorized and empowered to distrain all hogs, cattle, horses, mules, sheep, geese, or poultry running at large, or picketing or pasturing in the streets, alleys, or public places within the corporate limits of the city contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and to safely keep the same in the public pound until the same shall be claimed or disposed of as provided by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8-4-5) 
6.04.060 - Public notices posted. 
A.  The chief of police or pound master shall within twenty-four (24) hours (Sunday excluded) after distraining any such animals or fowls, give public notice of such distraint and of the time and place of sale thereof, by posting with written or printed notices of such distraint and sale, in three public places within the corporate limits of the city. 
B.  These notices shall describe such animals or fowls distrained with reasonable certainty and shall state the time and place of sale, which sale shall not take place within less than three days, or more than six days from the time of posting the notices. 
C.  If the animals or fowls distrained shall in the opinion of the chief of police or pound master be of the value of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more, then notice of such distraint and sale shall be published in the official newspaper of the city, or posted in five public places within the corporate limits of the city for the period of two weeks successively. 
D.  Unless the owner shall sooner claim the the property distrained, and pay the expenses of distraining and keeping the animal to the pound master, together with the expenses of advertising, if there be any, and in case the property so distrained shall be, in the opinion of the pound master, of the value of more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and the owner thereof shall be known, then such pound master or chief of police shall give notice in writing personally to the owner thereof, of such distraint and sale, together with the time and place thereof, and any and all property distrained under and by virtue of this chapter. 
E.  Unless redeemed by payment as aforesaid prior to such sale the animal or fowl shall be sold by the pound master or chief of police at public auction, to the highest bidder for cash and shall pay over the surplus, if any there shall be to the municipal finance officer of the city, and, in case of a sale being made, he or she shall make a report in writing to the city council, which report shall describe the property sold, the time when sold, and place where distrained, the amount for which it was sold, together with the name of the owner, if known, the amount retained by him or her for fees, costs, and expenses, specifying each item separately, and the name of the purchases, at the first meeting of the city council occurring after such sale. 
(Prior code § 8-4-6) 
6.04.070 - Owner seeking proceeds after property is sold. 
    If any person or persons after the making of sale as aforesaid, shall satisfactorily prove to the city council that he or she or they were the owner of the property so sold, the city council may cause an order to be drawn on the municipal finance officer, signed by the mayor and countersigned by the finance officer, enabling the finance officer to pay such person or persons the net proceeds of the property sold, after deducting his or her fees for receiving and paying out the same, as provided by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8-4-7) 
6.04.080 - Pound master penalized. 
    If the chief of police or pound master, shall willfully neglect or refuse to distrain and impound any of the animals or fowls described in this chapter running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall for each offense, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of five dollars, to be prosecuted for and enforced in the same manner that fines for the violation of the ordinances of the city are prosecuted for and enforced. 
(Prior code § 8-4-8) 
6.04.090 - Hindering or obstructing pound master. 
    The pound master or chief of police, in distraining the animals or fowl described in this ordinance, may when reasonably necessary, employ any assistance. Any person or persons who shall hinder or obstruct the pound master or anyone else so authorized from distraining any animal or fowl as provided in this chapter, shall for each such offense be punished by a fine of not more than ten dollars ($10.00) and costs of prosecution. 
(Prior code § 8-4-9) 
Chapter 6.08 - DOGS, CATS AND OTHER PET ANIMALS 

6.08.010 - License. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons within the city to keep, maintain, or have in his or her custody or control, any dog or cat without first having obtained a license to do so from the city finance officer as hereinafter provided and without having paid the license fee therefor. 
(Ord. 511 § 7-6-1, 1999) 
6.08.020 - Application. 
    Any person or persons desiring to keep, maintain, or have in his or her custody or control by him or herself or agent, within the city, any dog or cat shall, on or before the first day of May of each year make application to the city finance officer for a license to keep such animal. Such application shall be in writing, stating the name, species, sex, color and other distinguishing characteristics of the animal and the name of the owner, and that the animal has no vicious propensities so far as known to the applicant, which application shall be made on a printed blank furnished by the city finance officer and shall be filed with the city finance officer. In addition, the applicant shall exhibit to the finance officer, a certificate by a registered veterinarian showing that such animal has been inoculated against rabies and that the inoculation will be effective during the period for which the animal is licensed. 
(Ord. 511 § 7-6-2, 1999) 
6.08.030 - Fee-Tag. 
A.  The applicants shall at the time of making such application, pay to the city finance officer a license fee for each male dog or cat, spayed female dog or cat and a license fee for each unspayed female dog or cat, and the license fees shall be set by the city council and on file at the office of the city finance officer. 
B.  The fee for the first two dogs and the first two cats registered by each owner shall be substantially lower than the fee charged if a party has over two dogs or two cats. 
C.  It shall be the duty of the city finance officer at the time of the issuance of the license herein provided for, to furnish and deliver to the applicant, a metallic tag for each animal for which such license is issued. This metallic tag shall be stamped or engraved the registered number of the animal and the year when registered, and it shall then be the duty of the owner of the animal to place a collar around the neck of the animal owned or kept by him or her, on which collar shall be securely fastened a metallic tag furnished by the city finance officer. In case of the loss of any tag issued, the city finance officer is authorized to issue a duplicate upon proof that the tag has been lost. 
D.  Any owner who fails to purchase a license for the animal shall be subject to a fine as set in Chapter 1.16. 
(Ord. 511 § 7-6-3, 1999) 
6.08.040 - Restrictions on the keeping of dogs and cats. 
A.  No person shall keep or allow to be kept more than three adult dogs or cats per household in a house or yard of a house which the person owns or controls or occupies within the city. 
B.  The keeping or operation of a kennel or other structure or device for the commercial breeding of dogs, cats or other animal pets within the city is forbidden. 
C.  All female dogs, cats or other animal pets physically capable of producing litters shall be kept in a building or enclosure so as to deny access to the female animal by males. 
(Ord. 511 § 7-6-4) 
6.08.050 - Vicious animals. 
A.  A vicious animal is: 
1.  Any animal which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches in apparent attitude of attack, or bites, inflicts injury, assaults, or otherwise attacks a human on the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places; or 
2.  Any animal which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches in apparent attitude of attack, or bites, inflicts injury, assaults, or otherwise attacks a domestic animal while running at large, or while on the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places; or 
3.  Any animal which, on private property, when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrifying manner approaches in apparent attitude of attack, or bites, or inflicts injury, or otherwise attacks a child under the age of majority, mailman, meter reader, serviceman, journeyman, delivery man, any other employed person, or human who is on the property by reason of permission of the owner or occupant of such property or who is on private property by reason of a course of dealing with the owner of such private property. 
B.  In the event animal bites, or breaks skin of a human or a domestic animal, the owner must provide proof of up-to-date rabies vaccinations, or the animal must be quarantined in the city pound for a period of ten (10) days at the owner's expense. Despite those requirements, if a medical professional determines the animal must be euthanized and tested for rabies, the medical professional's determination shall prevail over the prior options and the animal must be euthanized at the owner's or keeper's expense and tested for rabies at the owner's or keeper's expense. All animals under this paragraph must be removed from the city limits upon leaving quarantine, or immediately upon proof of up-to-date rabies vaccination. 
C.  No person or persons shall permit any animal, which he or she may be the owner or keeper of to be kept in the city after the owner or keeper has been informed that the animal is vicious, as defined above. The police department shall provide the owners or keepers of the vicious animals notice of removal upon determining that said animal is vicious. Said notice may be verbal or in writing. 
D.  If the owner or keeper fails to comply with the notice of removal by removing of the animal from the city limits of the city, within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of such notice, the police are empowered and directed to take such animal into custody, whether found running at large or upon the premises of the owner or keeper, forthwith, without notice to the owner or keeper of the animal. The police shall have the full right to enter upon the premises of the owner or keeper, including all outbuildings, but not the owner's or keeper's home without consent or a search warrant, to make sure that any animal has been removed and by keeping any animal pet within the city limits of the city, the owner or person keeping or harboring the pet has agreed to this authority of the police department. Any animal taken into custody after the owner's failure or refusal to remove such animal shall first be attempted to rehome with the nearest animal shelter or the humane society. If the nearest animal shelter or the humane society refuses to accept the animal, the city shall have authority to have a licensed veterinary doctor euthanize the animal. The expense of the euthanization shall be borne by the owner of the animal. 
E.  Notwithstanding the above, no animal may be declared vicious if an injury or damage is sustained to any person who was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or who was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime unless the animal is rabid. 
(Ord. 511 § 7-6-5; Ord. No. 628, 8-11-2014) 
6.08.060 - Nuisance animals. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or persons to permit or suffer to run at large within the city limits of the city, any dog, cat, or other animal pet, whether licensed or unlicensed. The owner or keeper shall have the dog, cat, or other animal pet contained on its property on a leash, or enclosed by a fence at all times. Any animal control officer, police officer or person of proper authority is hereby authorized and empowered to impound any such animal found running at large. Any dog, cat, or other pet animal violating this provision shall be defined as a nuisance animal. 
B.  Any licensed animal found running loose shall be held at the city pound or some other proper and suitable place for a period of three days. If the owner or keeper does not call for the animal within the three-day period, the animal shall be rehomed with the nearest animal shelter or the humane society. If the nearest animal shelter or the humane society refuses to accept the animal, the city shall have authority to have a licensed veterinary doctor euthanize the animal. The expense of the euthanization shall be borne by the owner or keeper of the animal. Any dog, cat, or other pet animal violating this provision shall be defined as a nuisance animal. 
C.  Any unlicensed animal found running loose shall be held at the city pound for a period of twenty-four (24) hours. If unclaimed within the twenty-four-hour period, the animal shall be rehomed with the nearest animal shelter or the humane society. If the nearest animal shelter or the humane society refuses to accept the animal, the city shall have authority to have a licensed veterinary doctor euthanize the animal. The expense of the euthanization shall be borne by the owner or keeper of the animal, if said persons can be ascertained. Any dog, cat, or other pet animal violating this provision shall be defined as a nuisance animal. 
D.  If an animal is found running at large and in the opinion of the animal control officer or police officer involved the animal cannot be captured, the animal is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. If, in the opinion of the animal control officer or police officer involved, the animal constitutes a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city, or their property or animals, the animal control officer or police officer may destroy the animal immediately if such action can be safely done. Any dog, cat or other pet animal violating this provision shall be defined as a nuisance and/or vicious animal. 
E.  Any animal suspected of having rabies, which has bitten, or in any way injured a person, shall be addressed as set forth in Section 6.08.050. 
F.  No person owning, keeping harboring, or having on property occupied by him or her, any dog, cat, or other animal licensed or unlicensed, confined on the premises or otherwise, shall suffer or permit the animal to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by making loud and/or unusual noises, or shall suffer or permit the animal to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by persistent or constant barking, howling, whining, snarling, growling, or any other offensive noise. 
G.  Upon complaint being made to the police department that any person owns or is keeping or harboring any animals which disturbs the peace as herein set forth, or is keeping or harboring any animals that are a nuisance as defined herein, the police department shall be empowered to take immediate possession of the animal and to impound the animal. The police department shall have the full right and authority to go on the premises where the animal is located, including outbuildings, but not homes without consent or a search warrant, to take possession of the animal and to impound it for a period of three days. Any animal taken into custody which the owner's or keeper's fail to pick up after the third day of confinement shall be rehomed with the nearest animal shelter or the humane society. If the nearest animal shelter or the humane society refuses to accept the animal, the city shall have authority to have a licensed veterinary doctor euthanize the animal. The expense of the euthanization shall be borne by the owner of the animal. 
H.  By keeping any animal pet within the city limits of the city, the owner or person keeping or harboring the pet has agreed to the authority of the police department as set forth in this chapter. The police department shall contact the owner or person keeping or harboring the animal and advise them of the complaint and location where the animal is being held. In addition to the impounding of the animal or other penalties prescribed, the owner of the animal and the occupant of the property on which the animal is being kept or harbored during the times that the animal is disturbing the peace, or a nuisance, shall be subject to a penalty as prescribed in Chapter 1.16 for disturbing the peace, or keeping a nuisance animal. 
I.  No person or persons shall permit any animal, which he or she may be the owner or keeper of to be kept in the city after five violations of this ordinance. The police department shall inform the owners or keepers that the animal has violated this ordinance five times and provide notice of removal from the city. Said notice may be verbal or in writing. 
J.  If the owner or keeper fails to comply with the notice of removal by removing the animal from the city limits of the city, within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of such notice, the police are empowered and directed to take such animal into custody, whether found running at large or upon the premises of the owner or keeper, forthwith without notice to the owner or keeper of the animal. The police shall have the full right to enter upon the premises of the owner or keeper, including all outbuildings, but not the owner's or keeper's home without consent or a search warrant, to make sure that the subject animal has been removed. Any animal taken into custody after the owner's or keeper's failure or refusal to remove such animal shall first be attempted to rehome with the nearest animal shelter or the humane society. If the nearest animal shelter or humane society refuses to accept the animal, the city shall have authority to have a licensed veterinary doctor euthanize the animal. The expense of the euthanization shall be borne by the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. 511 § 7-6-6; Ord. No. 628, 8-11-2014) 
6.08.070 - Unlicensed dog or cat. 
    An animal control officer may enter upon the premises of the owner or person keeping or harboring any unlicensed dog or cat for the purpose of seizing the animal. In addition to the impounding of the unlicensed dog, or cat or other penalties prescribed, the owner and the occupant of the property on which the dog or cat is being kept or harbored during the time the animal is not licensed shall be subject to a penalty as prescribed in Chapter 1.16. 
(Ord. 511 § 7-6-7) 
6.08.080 - Treatment of impounded animal. 
    All animals captured and conveyed to the pound, as established by the city, shall be kept with humane treatment and supplied with sufficient food and water for a period of at least twenty-four (24) hours unless sooner reclaimed by the owner or keeper thereof as herein provided. When the owner or claimant of any animal so impounded shall desire to redeem the animal from the pound, the animal may be released upon payment to the person in charge of the pound of an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the city finance officer and costs of keeping, and shall exhibit a license for such animal, issued in the manner herein provided, and the person in charge of the pound shall thereupon release the animal to the owner or claimant. 
(Ord. 511 § 7-6-8) 
6.08.090 - Penalty. 
    A court of competent jurisdiction shall have the authority to order the destruction or removal of an animal from the city limits of the city, where the animal has violated the terms of this chapter. In addition, the owner thereof shall be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1.16. 
(Ord. 511 § 7-6-9) 
6.08.100 - Ignorance does not excuse the offense. 
    Ignorance of the law is not a defense in any proceeding for violation of the provisions of this chapter, and the knowledge or lack of knowledge of this chapter shall be considered immaterial. 
(Ord. 511 § 7-6-11; Ord. No. 628, 8-11-2014) 
Chapter 6.12 - DOMESTIC PETS 

6.12.010 - Domestic pets-Restrictions. 
    It is unlawful for a person to: 
A.  Allow the accumulation of animal feces in any open area, run, cage, structure or yard wherein animals are kept or allowed, and to fail to remove or dispose of the feces at least once every seven-day period. 
B.  Fail to clean up and remove fecal matter deposited by his or her animal on public property of another before the owner leaves the immediate area where the fecal matter was deposited. 
C.  Fail to have in his or her possession the equipment necessary to remove his or her animal's fecal matter when accompanied by said animal on public streets, public property, or private property of others. 
D.  Have possession or control of any animal sick or afflicted with any infectious or contagious disease and fail to provide treatment for such infection or disease, or to permit such diseased or infected animal to run at large or to come in contact with persons or other animals, or to drink at any public watering trough or stream accessible to other animals. 
E.  An owner or keeper shall provide their animal with sufficient food and water, proper shelter, humane care and treatment, and veterinary care when needed. No person shall mistreat any animal or shall abandon any animal. 
F.  An owner or keeper shall keep their animal on a leash while on public streets, public property or private property of others. 
G.  An owner or keeper shall keep their animal confined on their property with either a fenced in yard, a run, cage, or on a leash at all times. 
H.  This chapter shall apply to any owner or keeper of an animal in the city limits. 
I.  The penalty for a violation of this ordinance shall be the general penalty set forth in Chapter 1.16. 
(Ord. 582, 2006; Ord. No. 628, 8-11-2014) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapter 8.04 - BOARD OF HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Sections: 

8.04.010 - Establishment and appointment. 
    A board of health and safety is hereby established in and for the city. The board shall consist of five persons: the health and safety officer, who shall be appointed for three years, two members to be appointed for two year terms, and two members to be appointed for a one year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be made at the first city council meeting in May of each year. Board members shall receive no compensation for their services, except as any actual and necessary expenses incurred by them in the fulfillment of their duties. 
(Ord. 456 (part), 1990: prior code § 6-1-1) 
8.04.020 - Duties of the board. 
    The board of health and safety shall make such recommendations, investigations and reports and shall carry out such directions concerning public health and safety matters as the state department of health or the city council may require or give, and shall enforce all statutes, ordinances and all lawful rules and regulations concerning public health and safety. All matters of public health and safety and sanitation, disease prevention, abatement or control shall be under the management, direction and control of the board. The board shall meet during January and July of each year and shall thereupon furnish the city council with a written report of its activities during the preceding six months. 
(Ord. 456 (part), 1990: prior code § 6-1-2) 
8.04.030 - Removal of offensive matter. 
    The board of health shall have power and authority to require any person or persons owning property within the city to remove all offensive, dangerous, or deleterious matter from the premises, and to that end shall have power and authority to enter upon any premises or into any building in the city to examine the same and in case there is found to be any offensive, dangerous, or deleterious matter or conditions in or on the premises, or in any building, may direct in writing the removal or correction thereof. If the owner shall neglect or refuse to abate the problem, and shall fail to do so for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after such notice, he or she, upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) and costs and up to thirty (30) days in jail and the cost to the city of removing, correcting, or having the condition removed or corrected. It shall be the duty of the chief of police, under the direction of the board of health, to remove, correct or otherwise abate such nuisance as soon as possible after the appeal period hereunder has elapsed or as soon as the order to abate has been upheld on appeal by the city council. 
(Ord. 533, 2002: Ord. 456 (part), 1990: prior code § 6-1-3) 
8.04.040 - Notices, citations and orders. 
    In order to carry out the intent of this chapter whenever a section provides that notices, citations and orders are to be made or served by the board of health and safety, such notices, citations and orders may be made and served in a like manner and with a like effect by the city council. 
(Ord. 456 (part), 1990: prior code § 6-1-4) 
8.04.050 - Right of noninterference. 
    It is unlawful to obstruct, interfere with or impede the health and safety officer or any member of the board of health and safety in the performance of their respective duties or to remove, mutilate or destroy any sign posted by order of the health and safety office of the board of health and safety relating to any area or building within the city without prior approval of the health officer or the city council. 
(Ord. 456 (part), 1990: prior code § 6-1-5) 
8.04.060 - Interpretation. 
    It is the intent of the city, by its city council, to delegate to the health and safety officer, and the board of health and safety, full and complete authority commensurate with their responsibilities under this chapter, the laws, charters and regulations of the city, and the state of South Dakota relating to the corporate limits of the city of Sisseton, South Dakota. 
(Ord. 456 (part), 1990: prior code § 6-1-6) 
8.04.070 - Right to appeal to the council. 
    In the event the owner, proprietor, occupant or agent of any premise feels that the order to abate issued by the health and safety officer or board of health and safety is unjust, untrue or unwarranted, he or she shall have ten (10) days from the order to request a hearing before the city council to determine the necessity for the order. If requested, the city council shall hold such hearing to determine the validity of the order to abate. 
(Ord. 456 (part), 1990: prior code § 6-1-7) 
Chapter 8.08 - CONTAGIOUS DISEASES 
Sections: 

8.08.010 - Isolations of persons. 
    The board of health shall have power within the limits of the city to isolate all persons suffering with contagious diseases, and to make, demand, and require of the county board of health to immediately remove and care for all the cases as are not proper charges on the city; and the board of health shall have power to make rules and regulations covering the subject of all contagious diseases and other matters concerning the public health. 
(Prior code § 6-2-1) 
8.08.020 - Powers of board and health officer. 
    The board of health shall have power and authority to enter any premises in the city in search of contagious diseases or of nuisances, and shall have power and authority to quarantine any premises within the city, wherein is located any person suffering with an infectious or contagious disease, and may remove any person therefrom who is found to be suffering from, suspected to be suffering from, or has been exposed to any infectious or contagious disease, and the board may placard the premises, as aforesaid with the placard of such design and color as shall be determined by the board of health and which shall warn all persons within the premises not to leave the same, and all other persons whomever not to enter the premises without the written consent of a member of the board of health; and every physician practicing in the corporate limits of the city shall immediately report by telephone, or otherwise, to the health officer every case of contagious or infectious disease arising in his or her practice, and shall also report every case he or she suspects to be contagious, and the physician shall within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter make a written report of the case, and the name of the disease, and source of contagion, if known, and the physician shall also make a written report to the board of health upon the termination of the disease, and any person violating this chapter, or violating the order of the board of health, shall upon conviction thereof be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1.16. 
(Prior code § 6-2-2) 
Chapter 8.12 - DUTCH ELM DISEASE 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - Possession of dead elm trees. 
    It is unlawful to keep or have in possession any dead elm trees or dead elm wood of any species. Bark shall be removed from any elm wood to be used as fireplace wood so as to prevent the European bark beetle from mating and using it as a place of habitation. 
(Prior code § 6-5-1) 
8.12.020 - Removal of dead elm trees. 
    It is unlawful to permit any diseased elm tree to be left on property. Any person having a diseased elm of any species shall cause the same to be removed through the procedures outlined herein. 
(Prior code § 6-5-2) 
8.12.030 - City forester. 
    There is hereby created the position of city forester whose duty is to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-5-3) 
8.12.040 - Abatement of nuisances created by dead trees. 
    The following procedures shall be followed in abating the nuisances created by dead elm wood or diseased elm trees: 
A.  Once a year in June, the city forester shall take a physical survey of all trees within the city limits of the city and report his or her findings to the city council. If a tree appears to be diseased, the forester shall take a sample of the tree and have the sample analyzed by the state for dutch elm disease. Should the sample be positive, the forester will notify the property owner of the tree's disease by certified letter and inform the owner that if the tree is not removed within ten (10) days after receipt of the letter, that the city will have the tree removed and bill the property owner. If the bill is not paid within six months, the unpaid balance will be assessed against the property owner's taxes. 
B.  Any person allowing dead elm wood to be on their property shall be warned by the forester and thereafter be held in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties thereof. 
C.  No person shall interfere nor attempt to interfere with the city forester in the conduct of his or her duty. 
D.  No person shall be permitted to plant, transplant, or otherwise cause to be planted any type of elm tree within the city. 
(Prior code § 6-5-4) 
8.12.050 - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision established herein for the abatement of dutch elm disease shall be subject to the penalties established in Chapter 1.16. 
(Prior code § 6-5-5) 
Chapter 8.16 - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 

8.16.010 - Definitions. 
    "Garbage" means kitchen and table refuse and every accumulation of waste, animal, and vegetable matter that attends the preparation, cooking, and eating of food or the storage, handling, sale, or decay of food, or any other substance that is in the process of decay, which gives off an odor offensive to the senses. 
    "Garbage container" means a water tight metallic or plastic can, of not less than ten (10) or more than thirty (30) gallon capacity, having a handle on each side, covered with a tight fitting metal or plastic lid, which must be kept in a sanitary condition at all times, with the outside thereof free and clean of grease or decomposed matter, secured in such manner that it cannot be tipped over or spilled by dogs or marauders. 
    "Rubbish" means broken crockery, destroyed bottles, tin cans, pasteboard boxes, wooden boxes, paper, straw, leaves, and ashes. 
    "Rubbish container" means a box, crate, or can of such character that it can be readily handled and emptied by the city rubbish collectors and sufficiently tight so as to prevent the rubbish therein contained from being blown or strewn about, not to exceed thirty (30) gallon capacity. 
(Prior code §§ 6-3-1-6-3-4) 
8.16.020 - Garbage and rubbish must be deposited in containers. 
    The occupant of every private home or dwelling place, and the operator of every place of business in the city, is required to deposit and keep the garbage that accumulates each day upon his or her premises in a garbage container above defined, and to each day deposit and keep the rubbish that accumulates upon his or her premises in a rubbish container herein defined, provided that grass, leaves, or other material to be used as compost for fertilizer may be kept in a pit or closed container, until such time as it may be used, and barnyard manure must be kept in a tightly closed box or container not exceeding a period of one week. 
(Prior code § 6-3-5) 
18.16.025 - Littering or dumping garbage within city-Illegal use of garbage facilities-Penalty. 
    It shall be illegal for any person to throw or dump garbage, litter or refuse of any sort on any street, boulevard, sidewalk, alley, or any private or public land within the city. 
    It shall be illegal for any person to place garbage or refuse of any kind in any dumpster within the city if that person does not subscribe to garbage service from the city, unless that person is acting as the agent or employee of a person who does subscribe to city garbage service. 
    It shall be illegal for any person subscribing to garbage service from the city to haul garbage or refuse produced outside the city into the city to dispose of it in the city or to have an agent or employee do so. 
    It shall be illegal for anyone to place items other than garbage in any dumpster in the city. Tires, auto parts, machinery parts, dead animals or dead animal parts, trees, branches, waste oil, grass, leaves, furniture, appliances, lumber, shingles and concrete shall not be placed in any dumpster belonging to the city within the city. Business waste shall be disposed of only in the dumpster assigned to that business. 
    The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) and a jail sentence not to exceed thirty (30) days or both. 
(Ord. 558, 2003) 
8.16.030 - Garbage must be wrapped. 
    All garbage shall be wrapped in paper, plastic, or other material so as to prevent as nearly as possible moisture from the garbage from coming in contact with the sides and bottom of the garbage container. 
(Prior code § 6-3-6) 
8.16.040 - Garbage and rubbish containers for multiple-family dwellings. 
    The proprietor or operator of each duplex, apartment house, or similar multiple-family dwelling shall furnish and maintain for the use of the tenants therein a sufficient number of garbage containers and rubbish containers to hold all garbage and rubbish that accumulates upon such premises in the course of a week, or he or she shall require the tenants upon the premises to furnish such containers. The place where the garbage and rubbish containers are located shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Prior code § 6-3-7) 
8.16.050 - Collection. 
    The city council of the city shall cause to be collected and dispose of all garbage within the city, where found. Rules and regulations for the collection and disposal of the garbage from the lots, premises, and private or public places within the city are as provided by this chapter. The city council shall make suitable arrangements for the collection of garbage with city equipment operated by city employees. Each residence and business within the city shall be required to subscribe to and pay for city garbage service. If for any reason the owner of any such residence or business is dissatisfied with the municipal garbage service, or has needs in excess of the services, the city is able to provide, he or she is free to hire and pay for additional service from any authorized garbage hauler. Subscribing to such additional service shall not relieve any patron from responsibility to pay the city for garbage service. 
(Ord. 579, 2005: prior code § 6-3-8) 
8.16.060 - Duty of garbage collector. 
    It shall be the duty of the garbage collector to collect and dispose of all garbage within the city at such times and places as the city council shall direct. He or she shall thoroughly clean up all garbage in the immediate vicinity of the place from which the garbage is removed, and see that none of the garbage is dropped or liquid matter permitted to escape from the receptacles in which it is being hauled on the streets or alleys of the city, and shall keep all garbage receptacles emptied at whatever regular intervals may be deemed necessary. 
(Prior code § 6-3-9) 
8.16.070 - City customers. 
    Responsibilities of the city and the customer with regard to application and billings for garbage collection services are fully set forth in Chapter 13.04, Utility Services Generally. 
(Prior code § 6-3-10) 
8.16.080 - Hauling through streets. 
    No garbage shall be hauled through the streets or alleys of the city unless contained in a water-tight steel tank or other water-tight tank or receptacle. 
(Prior code § 6-3-11) 
8.16.090 - Unlawful to haul garbage without permit-Penalty. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in the business of collecting or hauling garbage from any place in the city without first having been authorized to do so by the city council of the city. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties described in Chapter 1.16. 
(Prior code § 6-3-12) 
8.16.100 - Burning garbage and rubbish. 
    No person shall burn any garbage outside of a residence building or business building at any place in the city. 
(Prior code § 6-3-13) 
8.16.110 - Nuisance-Penalty. 
    Every accumulation of garbage or rubbish which is deposited, kept, burned, or transported any place in the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and any person who maintains or permits the maintenance of the nuisance shall upon conviction be subject to the penalties established in Chapter 1.16. 
(Prior code § 6-3-14) 
Chapter 8.20 - NUISANCES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

8.20.010 - Public nuisance defined-Remedy. 
    A public nuisance consists in unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty within the corporate limits of the city or in any public grounds or parks belonging to the city or within one mile of the corporate limits of the city, which act or omission either: 
A.  Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, or safety of others; 
B.  Offends decency; 
C.  In any way renders other persons insecure in life, or in the use of private property. 
    A public nuisance is defined as a nuisance which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal. 
    The remedies against a public nuisance shall be those prescribed by Section 21-10-5 of the South Dakota Codified Laws, this title, or by other statute. 
(Prior code § 8-7-1) 
8.20.020 - Nuisances-Defined and prohibited. 
    No person shall create, commit, maintain, or permit to be created, committed, or maintained any nuisance as defined herein. 
    Whatever is dangerous to human health, whatever renders the ground, the water, the air, or food a hazard or an injury to human health, and the following specific acts, conditions, and things are, each and all of them, hereby declared to constitute nuisances. 
A.  Imperfect Plumbing. Any imperfect, leaking, unclean, or filthy sink, water closet, urinal, or other plumbing fixture in any building, used or occupied by human beings. 
B.  Garbage and Refuse. Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be maintained or to accumulate upon any public or private property, any household wastewater, sewage, garbage, tin cans, offal, or excrement, any decaying fruit, vegetables, fish, meat, or bones or any foul, putrid, or obnoxious liquid substance. 
C.  Impure Water. Any well or other supply of water used for drinking or household purposes which is polluted or which is so constructed or situated that it may become polluted. 
D.  Undressed Hides. Undressed hides kept longer than twenty-four (24) hours, except at the place where they are to be manufactured, or in a storeroom, or basement whose construction is approved by the health department. 
E.  Manure. The accumulation of manure. 
F.  Breeding Place for Flies. The accumulation of manure, garbage, or anything whatever in which flies breed. 
G.  Stagnant Water. Any excavation in which stagnant water is permitted to collect. 
H.  Poison Ivy. Permitting poison ivy to be or to grow upon any private property nearer than fifteen (15) feet from the sidewalk or any public street. 
I.  Dead Animals. For the owner of a dead animal or fowl to permit it to remain undisposed of longer than twenty-four (24) hours after its death. 
J.  Farm and Other Live Animals. The keeping of live farm animals which are deemed to include horses, cattle, swine, sheep, fowl, and other animals that are normally raised or kept on farms, the keeping of live wild animals, and the keeping of any live animal in a manner so as to cause a public nuisance within the city limits. This shall not apply to "rural property" as defined in SDCL 9-2lA which is within the municipal boundaries of the city unless such keeping of animals within rural property is deemed to constitute a public nuisance. 
K.  Polluting Bodies of Water. Throwing or leaving any dead animal or decayed animal or vegetable matter or any slops or filth whatever, either solid, or fluid into any pool of water. 
L.  Privies and Cesspools. Erecting or maintaining any privy or cesspool except such sanitary privies and cesspools, the plans of which are approved by the state health department. 
M.  Garbage Handling Improperly. Throwing or letting fall or permitting to remain on any street, alley, public ground, or highway, any manure, garbage, rubbish, filth, fuel, or wood while engaged in handling or removing any such substances. 
N.  Rodents. Accumulation of junk, old iron, automobiles, cement slabs, or parts thereof, or anything whatever in which rodents may live or breed or accumulate. 
O.  Bonfires in Public Places. Burning, causing, or permitting to be burned in any street, alley, or public ground any dirt, filth, manure, garbage, swept leaves, ashes, paper, rubbish, or material of any kind. 
P.  Rubbish on Street. The piling or depositing of any dirt, shavings, sawdust, leaves, ashes, manure, straw, or waste material of any kind upon any street, alley, or public ground. 
Q.  Offensive Premises. Permitting any grocery store, shop, factory, warehouse, stable, barn, or other places to become nauseous or offensive. 
R.  Dangerous Agencies. Anything that is dangerous to human health or which renders the ground, the water, the air, or food a hazard or injury, to the public health. 
S.  Ice Boxes, Refrigerators, or Airtight Container. The keeping, leaving, or permitting to remain outside of any dwelling, building, or other structures or premises, in a place accessible to children, of any discarded ice boxes, refrigerators, or other container which has an air-tight door or lid, snap lock, or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing the door or lid, snap lock, or other locking device from the ice box, refrigerator, or container, is declared to be a nuisance and the person responsible for the violation shall be subject to a fine in an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer, and the person shall also abate the nuisance according to Section 8.20.030 of this chapter. 
T.  Smokestacks and Smoke Nuisance. The construction, use, or maintenance of any smokestack or chimney which emits sparks, cinders, or dense smoke which is dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of persons, or the value of property. 
U.  Use of Sanitary Sewer. Permitting drainage water, blood, buttermilk, whey, by-products of milk, sewer pipe consuming acids, or any substance or material which interferes with the normal flow of sewage or prevents, blocks, or stops the flow of sewage. 
V.  Unconfined Refuse. The depositing, unloading, placing, storing, or otherwise piling of any dirt, straw, shavings, seeds, grain screenings, chaff, leaves, ashes, paper, or material of any kind upon property without covering the same in order to prevent it from being moved and blown about by wind upon property of another or upon any street, alley, or public property. 
W.  Dilapidated Buildings. A building or structure within the limits of the city which is so dilapidated, decayed, out of repair, unsafe, unsanitary, or utterly fails to provide the amenities essential to decent living such that it is unfit for human habitation and is likely to cause or is causing or aggravating sickness or disease so as to work an injury to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the community. 
(Prior code § 6-6-1) 
8.20.030 - Nuisances-Abatement. 
    The board of health shall give written notice to any person creating, permitting, or maintaining any nuisance to abate such nuisance forthwith, and if such person shall neglect or refuse to do so within a reasonable time after such notice, he or she shall be deemed guilty of violation of this chapter. The board of health shall cause to be removed or abated any such nuisance upon the expiration of a reasonable time after the serving of such notice, and the city may recover the expenses so incurred from the person maintaining such nuisance in a civil suit instituted for such purpose. 
(Prior code § 6-6-2) 
Chapter 8.24 - RAT ERADICATION 
Sections: 

8.24.010 - Definitions. 
    Terms used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise plainly requires, shall have the following meanings. 
    "Business building" means any structure, either public or private, that is adapted for occupancy for transaction of business, play, sale, or storage of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including but not being limited in this application, hotels, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, and all buildings, sheds, barns, and other structures on premises used for business purposes. 
    "Occupant" means the individual or partnership who or the corporation that, has the use of or occupies any business building, or a part of or portion thereof, whether the actual owner, tenant, or subtenant. In the case of vacant buildings, or any vacant portion of a business building, the owner, agent, or other person having custody of the building, shall have the responsibilities of an "occupant" of the building. 
    "Owner" means the actual owner of the business building, either individual, partnership, or corporation, the person having custody of the building, and the person to whom any rental upon the building is to be paid. In the case of business buildings leased under agreement that the lessee is responsible for maintenance and repairs, the lessee will in such cases also be considered as the "owner" for the purpose of this chapter. 
    "Rat harborage" means any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continuous existence in, under, or outside of a structure of any kind. 
    "Rat proofing" means a form of rat proofing to prevent the ingress into business buildings, from the exterior or from one business building to another. It consists essentially of the closing, with material impervious to rat gnawing, of all openings in the exterior wall, ground or first floors, basements and foundations, that may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing or by burrowing. 
(Prior code § 6-7-1) 
8.24.020 - Rat proofing buildings. 
    It is hereby provided and required that all business buildings in the city shall be rat proofed, freed of rats, and maintained in a rat proof and rat free condition, under the direction and supervision of the health officer. 
(Prior code § 6-7-2) 
8.24.030 - Notice to owner. 
    Upon receipt of written notice and/or order from the health officer, the owner of any building specified in the notice or order shall take immediate steps for rat proofing the buildings, and unless the work and improvements required for such rat proofing have been completed by the owner of the building in the time specified in the written notice or order, or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the health officer, then the owner shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-7-3) 
8.24.040 - Notice-Charge against owner. 
    Whenever the health officer notifies the occupant of a business that there is evidence of rat infestation of the building, the occupant shall immediately institute appropriate steps for freeing the building of rats within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice. If within ten (10) days the building is not free of rats, the city shall institute such action as is necessary and shall charge occupant for labor, material, and equipment necessary for the eradication measures carried out. 
(Prior code § 6-7-4) 
8.24.050 - Maintaining rat proofing condition. 
    The occupants of all rat proofed business buildings are required to maintain the premises in a rat proof condition and to repair all breaks and leaks that may occur in the rat proofing. 
(Prior code § 6-7-5) 
8.24.060 - Inspections. 
    The health officer is empowered to make unannounced inspections of both the interior and exterior of business buildings within the city as in their opinion may be necessary to determine whether there has been a full compliance with this chapter, and to require a full compliance with this chapter. If at any time of any inspection, the health officer finds evidence of rat infestation, and/or the existence of breaks or leaks in the rat proofing, or new openings through which rats may again enter the buildings, the city council shall serve upon the owner or occupant of the building a notice to abate the conditions so found. 
(Prior code § 6-7-6) 
8.24.070 - Installation of floors. 
    Whenever conditions inside or under business buildings provide such extensive harborage for rats that the health officer deems it necessary to eliminate such harborage, he or she may require the owner to install cement floors or basement or to replace wooden first floors or ground floors or require the owner to correct such other interior rat harborage as may be necessary in order to facilitate the eradication of rats in a reasonable length of time. 
(Prior code § 6-7-7) 
8.24.080 - Removal of rat proofing. 
    It is unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber, or any other person to remove the rat proofing from the same in a satisfactory condition; and, in like manner, it is unlawful for any such person to make any new openings that are not sealed or closed against the entrance of rats. 
(Prior code § 6-7-8) 
8.24.090 - Metal or plastic containers. 
    Everywhere within the city, all garbage or other refuse shall be placed and stored in covered metal or plastic containers, compartments, or rooms, unless kept in a rat proof building. 
(Prior code § 6-7-9) 
8.24.100 - Dumping of garbage and rubbish unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to place, leave, dump, or permit the accumulation of any garbage, rubbish, or trash in any building or upon any premises in the city so that the same shall or may provide food or harborage for rats. 
(Prior code § 6-7-10) 
8.24.110 - Storage of lumber and other material. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit to accumulate upon any premises whether improved or vacant, or upon any open lot or alley in the city, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones, or any other materials that may be permitted to remain thereupon for any longer time than a temporary period reasonably required for the use of such materials in building or repairing of property, unless same shall be placed on open racks that are elevated not less than eighteen (18) inches above the ground, and evenly piled or stacked so that such material will not afford harborage for rats. 
(Prior code § 6-7-11) 
Chapter 8.28 - WEEDS 
Sections: 

8.28.010 - Duty of owner. 
    No owner, occupant, or other person in the charge of any lot, lots, tract, parcel, or any grounds in the city shall permit any grass or weeds to grow upon the property, or any grounds along any sidewalk adjoining the same, to a height exceeding three inches above such sidewalk or in any such manner as to impede, obstruct, or render inconvenient to travel upon the sidewalk; nor shall any owner, occupant, or person in charge of any lot or grounds in the city allow any weeds, grass, or other vegetation to grow thereon to a height exceeding ten (10) inches. 
(Prior code § 6-4-1) 
8.28.020 - Duty of chief of police. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see that all lots and grounds along the sidewalks are kept free from grass and weeds as hereinbefore provided and to notify all owners and occupants or persons responsible for such property of their duty to cut or remove the same. In case of default thereof by any such person within five days after being given written notice to cut or remove such weeds or grass, the chief of police of the city shall cause to be cut, mown, or removed such grass or weeds and shall cause the cost for removing and cutting same to be taxed and assessed against the lot, lots, tract, parcel, or grounds, and shall file with the county auditor of the county of Roberts and state of South Dakota, a statement of the costs incurred in cutting and removing such grass or weeds to be taxed against such property, and that the same shall become a lien upon such property immediately after the filing of such statement with the county auditor as herein provided. 
(Prior code § 6-4-2) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY 
Sections: 

9.04.010 - Crowds obstructing streets. 
    It is unlawful for persons to gather in crowds or groups, or for any person to stand on any public street or sidewalk in such manner as to obstruct free passage thereon, or to annoy other persons passing along the same, and any police officer is authorized to disperse any crowd or group or to cause the removal of any person violating the provisions of this section, and to summarily arrest any person in case of refusal to obey any reasonable direction given by such officer for the purpose of clearing the way or preventing annoyance to any passerby on any public street or sidewalk. 
(Prior code § 8-2-1) 
9.04.020 - False emergency alarms prohibited. 
    No person shall knowingly make or give any false alarm of fire or other emergency, by calling or causing to be called the fire department, the police officers, or any authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Prior code § 8-1-3) 
9.04.030 - Open alcoholic beverages-Prohibitions. 
    No person shall take, carry, or have in his or her possession upon a street, alley, sidewalk, or public grounds of the city, or in any vehicle, any opened can, bottle, or other container in which there shall be any quantity of beer or other alcoholic beverage. 
(Prior code § 8-1-4) 
9.04.040 - Intentional use of aerosol propelled liquids, glue and gasoline as intoxicants. 
    It is illegal to intentionally use, sniff, or consume aerosol propelled liquids, glue, gasoline, or other substances as intoxicants by allowing those items to diminish the supply of oxygen going to the person's brain. 
(Prior code § 8-1-5) 
9.04.050 - Disorderly conduct. 
    Any person who intentionally causes serious public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to any other person, or creates a risk thereof by: 
A.  Engaging in fighting or in violent or threatening behavior; 
B.  Making unreasonable noise; 
C.  Disturbing any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful authority; or 
D.  Obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic; is guilty of disorderly conduct. Disorderly conduct is punishable by a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or jail sentence of up to thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. 546, 2002) 
9.04.060 - Fireworks and explosives. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell, keep for sale or offer for sale any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, or other fireworks of any description, or other such explosives or to discharge the same within one mile of the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. 534, 2002: prior code § 8-5-2) 
9.04.070 - Loitering. 
A.  It shall be illegal for any person to, with a purpose to or in a manner so as to cause public danger, alarm, disorder, inconvenience or nuisance, wilfully loiter, sit or stand on a public sidewalk or around the entrance of any place of business, church, theater, public building or on a street or other public place in a manner so as to unreasonably obstruct traffic, pedestrian or vehicular, on such street, sidewalk, entrance, or public place. 
B.  Whenever a police officer observes a person or persons engaging in conduct in violation of the foregoing in a public place, the police officer shall: 
1.  Inform the persons that they are engaging in loitering in violation of city ordinance; 
2.  Order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from within sight and hearing of the place at which the order was issued; 
3.  Inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest for a violation of this section if they fail to obey the order promptly or engage in further loitering at or within the sight or hearing of the place the order was issued. 
C.  As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
1.  "Loiter" means to remain in any one place with no apparent purpose. 
2.  "Public place" means any location open to the public, whether publicly of privately owned. 
D.  The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) and a jail sentence not to exceed thirty (30) days or both. 
(Ord. 572, 2005) 
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY 
Sections: 

9.08.010 - Injuring signs. 
    No person shall deface, remove, change, mar or in any way interfere with or obliterate either wholly or in part any sign, signboard, or card placed, posted, extended, or erected by the city. 
(Prior code § 8-3-1) 
9.08.020 - Traffic signs-Injuring or placing unauthorized-Prohibited. 
A.  No person shall deface, injure, move, obstruct, or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal, street sign, or parking meter. 
B.  No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic. Every such prohibited sign, signal, or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause the same to be removed without notice. 
(Prior code § 8-3-2) 
9.08.030 - Destroying trees and plants. 
A.  No person shall willfully injure, destroy, or deface any tree, shrub, plant, or grass in any parking lot or park. 
B.  No person shall willfully injure or destroy any cultivated fruits or vegetables, ornamental trees, shrubs, hedges, vines, or flowers, nor injure or carry off any of the products thereof which are the property of the city. 
(Prior code § 8-3-3) 
9.08.040 - Interference with electric light posts and apparatus. 
    No person shall interfere with, injure, break, or jar any electric light, telephone, telegraph, or fire alarm system, post, or pole or apparatus in any manner, or climb any telegraph, telephone, electric light, or fire alarm pole without being properly authorized to do so. 
(Prior code § 8-3-4) 
9.08.050 - Unauthorized connection with gas, water or electrical pipe or wire. 
    No person shall without lawful authority, connect or cause to be connected with any main service pipe, wire, or other conductor of any gas, water, or electrical energy, any pipe, wire, or other device for the purpose of obtaining gas, water, or electrical current therefrom; nor shall with intent to defraud, connect, or cause to be connected with any meter installed for the purpose of registering the amount of gas, water, or electricity supplied to any customer, any pipe, wire, or other device or disconnect, change, or in any manner so interfere with any such meter or any pipe, wire, or appliance connected therewith, that such meter will not measure or register the full amount of gas, water, or electricity supplied to any customer. 
(Prior code § 8-3-5) 
9.08.060 - Interference with city engineer, instruments, stakes. 
    No person shall interfere with the city engineer while engaged in his or her official duties in any manner or by driving any vehicle of any kind against the person, surveying instruments, or apparatus of the city engineer or any of his or her assistants, or by moving or displacing any stake, monument, or bench mark fixed or located by him or her or any assistants. 
(Prior code § 8-3-6) 
9.08.070 - Interference with city property. 
    No person shall climb or in any manner interfere with any building, water tower, or structure belonging to the city, without being authorized to do so by the city; and no person shall in any manner injure or deface any such structure. 
(Prior code § 8-3-7) 
9.08.080 - Destroying property. 
    No person shall willfully damage, deface, break, destroy, or interfere with the property of the city. 
(Prior code § 8-3-8) 
Chapter 9.12 - HOUSING DISCRIMINATION 
Sections: 

9.12.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the fair housing ordinance of the city of Sisseton and is adopted pursuant to SDCL 20-12. 
(Ord. 390 § 1, 1982) 
9.12.020 - Purpose and declaration of policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city and the purpose of this chapter, in the exercise of the police and regulatory powers of the city for the protection of the public safety, for the health, morals, safety and welfare of the persons in and residing in the city, and for the maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry, and good government in Sisseton City to secure all persons living and/or working or desiring to live and/or work in the city, fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy real estate without discrimination based on sex, race, color, creed, religion, ancestry or national origin. 
(Ord. 390 § 2, 1982) 
9.12.030 - Construction. 
    This chapter shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms and shall be liberally construed to further the purpose and policy states in Section 9.12.020 and the special purposes of the particular provision involved. 
(Ord. 390 § 3, 1982) 
9.12.040 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter: 
    "Commission" means the housing and redevelopment commission of the city. 
    "Lease" includes sublease, assignment and rental, and includes any contract to do any of the foregoing. 
    "Owner" means any person who holds legal or equitable title to, owns any beneficial interest in any real property, or who holds legal or equitable title to shares of, or who holds any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative which owns any real property. 
    "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnership, associations, corporations, unincorporated organizations, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, agents, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, labor organizations, public bodies, public corporations and agencies thereof. 
    "Purchase" includes any contract to purchase. 
    "Real property" means any right, title, interest in or to the possession, ownership, enjoyment, or occupancy of any parcel of land, any building situated thereon, or any portion of such building. 
    "Sale" includes any contract to sell, exchange or to convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to or a beneficial interest in real property. 
(Ord. 390 § 4, 1982) 
9.12.050 - Discriminatory terms. 
    It is an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or rent, or offer to sell or rent real property on terms, conditions or privileges that discriminate between persons on the basis of sex, race, color, creed, religion, ancestry or national origin. 
    It is an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any person to refuse to sell or rent, or offer to sell or rent real property on terms, conditions or privileges that discriminate between persons on the basis of sex, race, color, creed, religion, ancestry or national origin. 
(Ord. 390 §§ 5, 6, 1982) 
9.12.060 - Powers and duties of the housing and redevelopment commission. 
    The commission shall have and exercise the following duties and powers pursuant to this chapter: 
A.  Disseminate information, engage in and cooperate with programs of research and education, to cooperate with persons or groups interested in similar objective, and to conduct public meetings; 
B.  To conduct public hearings, to mediate and conciliate in instances of alleged discrimination with such investigation and inquiry as may reasonably appear necessary. 
(Ord. 390 § 7, 1982) 
9.12.070 - Complaints-Conciliation. 
A.  Any person aggrieved in any manner of any violation of any provision of this chapter may file with the commission a written verified complaint setting for his or her grievance. 
B.  The complaint shall state: 
1.  The name and address of the complaint, 
2.  The name and address of the person against whom the complaint is brought, if known to the complainant, and 
3.  The alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this chapter. 
C.  After the filing of any complaint, the commission shall serve a copy of the complaint on the party or parties charged. 
D.  If the chairperson of the commission or his or her designee determines that probable cause exists for the allegations of the complaint, he or she shall investigate the same. 
E.  If he or she shall determine after such investigation that probable cause exists for the allegations of the complaint: 
1.  He or she shall set a time and date for a conference with the commission, 
2.  At such conference, the commission shall interview the complainant and the person or persons against whom the complaint has been directed and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by all proper methods of conciliation and persuasion, 
3.  If, at any time after the date of filing of the complaint the commission shall determine that such attempt at conciliation and persuasion would not be in the furtherance of the objectives of this chapter, the commission shall thereupon proceed promptly to a full hearing on the complaint in accordance with Section 9.12.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 390 § 8, 1982) 
9.12.080 - Hearings of the commission. 
    Such hearings shall be conducted by the entire commission or a quorum hereof upon ten (10) days notice to all parties. The commission shall have the power to administer oaths and to take sworn testimony. The commission shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents, which power may be enforced by the commission by proper petition to the circuit court of Roberts County. The complainant and any party alleged to have violated this chapter shall be entitled to be represented by counsel and shall have the right to call witnesses on his or her own behalf and to cross-examine witnesses. The hearing shall be tape-recorded. 
(Ord. 390 § 9, 1982) 
9.12.090 - Adjudication. 
A.  If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, the commission finds that a person complained of has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the commission shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served upon such person the findings of fact. The findings of fact shall also be served upon the South Dakota Human Relations Commission and any documents or records concerning the hearing or investigations of the complaint shall be made available to the South Dakota Human Relations Commission upon request. 
B.  If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, the commission finds that the person complained of has not violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the commission shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served upon the complainant an order dismissing the complaint. 
(Ord. 390 § 10, 1982) 
9.12.100 - Appeals. 
    All decisions of the commission shall be subject to an appeal under the same conditions and in the same manner provided under SDCL 1-26-30 though 1-26-37. 
(Ord. 390 § 11, 1982) 
Chapter 9.16 - CURFEW 
Sections: 

9.16.010 - Persons under seventeen (17) years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for persons under the age of seventeen (17) to be upon the public streets or in any public place, whether or not in a vehicle, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the next morning on Friday and Saturday nights and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the next morning on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday nights. 
(Ord. 535 § 1, 2002) 
(Ord. No. 592, 7-14-2008) 
9.16.020 - Persons over seventeen (17) years of age but under eighteen (18) years of age. 
    It is unlawful for any person over the age of seventeen (17) years but under eighteen (18) years of age to be upon the public streets or in any public place, whether or not in a vehicle, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the next morning on Friday and Saturday nights and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the next morning on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday nights. 
(Ord. 535 § 2, 2002) 
(Ord. No. 592, 7-14-2008) 
9.16.030 - Enforcement-Penalties. 
    It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) and imprisonment for up to thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. 535 § 3, 2002) 
9.16.040 - Exceptions. 
    No person shall be in violation of the foregoing chapter by the reason of being: 
A.  In a public place for purposes of employment; 
B.  In a public place for purposes of going to or coming home from any church, school or work activity by the most direct route. 
(Ord. 535 § 4, 2002) 
Chapter 9.20 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 

9.20.010 - Discharge of firearms or air rifles. 
    It is unlawful for any person except a police officer in the performance of his or her duties or a person exercising his or her right to lawful self defense, to discharge or fire any gun, air rifle, sling shot, or other dangerous weapon within the city limits of the city. 
(Ord. 536, 2002: prior code § 8-5-1) 
9.20.020 - Throwing stars. 
A.  Definition of Terms. 
    "Throwing star" means any object having points or sharp surface or blades around its circumference which is manufactured for the purpose of throwing to stick in a surface struck, manufactured from metal or any other material of suitable strength and weight to allow such use which is calculated or designed to inflict death or bodily harm if thrown at a human being. 
B.  It is prohibited for any person to possess, sell transfer, purchase, receive, or hold for sale any throwing star within the corporate limits of the city. 
C.  Violation as Misdemeanor-Confiscation and Destruction. Any person or corporation violating the terms of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and/or a jail sentence of not more than thirty (30) days in jail. All throwing stars shall be confiscated, held for evidence and destroyed upon disposition of the charge or charges in which they are evidence and then destroyed. 
D.  Separate Offense for Each Day-Each Item. A violation of the terms of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation for each illegal item involved and for each day the violation or violations continue. 
(Ord. 431 §§ 1-4, 1987) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapter 10.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - Definitions. 
    Terms used in this title, unless the content otherwise plainly requires, shall have the following meanings: 
    "Authorized emergency vehicle" means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of police. 
    "Crosswalk" means that portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections, whether marked or not, or any other portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface of the street. 
    "Curb" means the extreme edge or lateral boundary of a roadway, whether marked by curbing or not. 
    "Department" means the police department of the city. 
    "Double parking" means the standing of a vehicle upon a street at the rear of another vehicle which is parked diagonally at the curb, or the standing of a vehicle upon the street alongside and parallel to another vehicle which is parked parallel at the curb. 
    "Driver" or "operator" means any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    "Left hand side of a street" means the side to the left of the vehicle as it moves forward. 
    "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    "Parking" means the standing of a vehicle, whether attended or unattended upon a roadway, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
    "Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
    "Private road" or "driveway" means every road or driveway not open to the use of the public for vehicular travel. 
    "Right hand side of a street" means the side to the right of the vehicle as it moves forward. 
    "Right-of-way" means the privilege of the immediate use of the street. 
    "Roadway" means that portion of a street devoted to vehicular traffic. 
    "Semitrailer" means every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    "Sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines. 
    "Street" means any street, avenue, boulevard, alley, highway, or public place set apart for the public vehicular traffic. 
    "Street intersection" means that portion of a street where it joins another at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other street, and shall include the full width of the street between the curb lines, extended, of the intersection streets. 
    "Through streets" means streets, or parts thereof, that have been so designated and marked, by order of the city council. 
    "Trailer" means every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    "Vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, provided that for the purpose of this title a bicycle or an animal that is being ridden, driven, or led shall be deemed a vehicle. 
(Prior code § 12-1-1) 
10.04.020 - Enforcement-Duty of police department. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the chief of the police department office to enforce all the regulations and requirements of this title. 
B.  Whenever any police officer shall find a vehicle standing or parked upon any street, as defined in this chapter, in the city, in violation of any of the provisions of this title, he or she is hereby authorized to move such vehicle to a position and location permitted under the sections of this title relating to parked vehicles. 
C.  The chief of police shall make a report to the city council once a month for all notices issued, arrests made, and fines collected for violations of this title. 
(Prior code § 12-1-2) 
10.04.030 - Police to direct traffic. 
    Police officers shall direct all traffic in conformance with traffic laws and ordinances, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, members of the police or fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require. 
(Prior code § 12-1-3) 
10.04.040 - Obedience to police. 
    It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction of the police department. 
(Prior code § 12-1-4) 
10.04.050 - Authority of police department to adopt regulations. 
    The chief of police with the approval of the council is hereby empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this title and to make temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, provided any such regulations are not inconsistent with the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 12-1-5) 
10.04.060 - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
A.  The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the U.S. Government, this state, county, or city; and it is unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title. 
B.  The provisions of this title regulating the movement, parking, and standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles as defined in this title while the operator of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties. This exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(Prior code § 12-1-6) 
10.04.070 - Manner of arrest. 
    Except in cases of driving while intoxicated or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any stupefying or exhilarating drug, and except in the more serious and aggravated cases of speeding or careless and reckless driving, and except when reasonably necessary to secure appearance, a person charged with violation of a traffic ordinance of the city by a police officer need not be arrested in the regular manner but may first be given an opportunity, after notice, to appear voluntarily to answer for such traffic violation. 
(Prior code § 12-7-20) 
10.04.080 - Notice to appear. 
    A person charged with violation of a traffic ordinance shall be given a notice to appear before the circuit court magistrate or the county clerk of courts at the time stated in such notice, which shall be written within seven days from the time of the offense; and that in event of failure to do so, a warrant will be issued for his or her arrest. The notice shall state the name and address of the offender, if known; the license number and make of the vehicle involved in the violation; the nature, date, and location of the offense; and the time and place where the offender is to appear to answer to the charges. The notice shall be made in duplicate and the portion of the original stating the offense and the place and time to appear shall be given to the owner or driver charged with the offense or left in or upon the vehicle involved in the violation. 
(Prior code § 12-7-21) 
10.04.090 - Appearance and deposit for fine. 
    A person who has received a notice of traffic violation as provided in the preceding section shall appear at the time and place specified in such notice. In cases of parking violations and other minor traffic violations for which the person charged has been ordered to appear before the circuit court magistrate or county clerk of courts, he or she may make a deposit for the fine as authorized by the court and sign a statement authorizing a circuit court magistrate or county clerk of courts to enter his or her plea of guilty to the offense, then he or she shall not be required to appear in court. Any person who has been guilty of three or more violations of the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city shall not be permitted to deposit the fine as hereinabove authorized, but must post a bond for his or her appearance in court at the time specified by the department, the bond to be in an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 12-7-22) 
10.04.100 - Failure to appear. 
    Upon failure of a person to appear in response to a notice of traffic violation as herein provided, he or she shall be subject to arrest in the manner otherwise provided by law. 
(Prior code § 12-7-23) 
10.04.110 - Evidence of traffic violations. 
    In any proceeding for violations of the provisions of this title relating to the operation or parking of motor vehicles, the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of the vehicle was the person who was operating or parking the motor vehicle at the time when the violation occurred or who parked the motor vehicle at the point where the violation occurred. 
(Prior code § 12-7-24) 
Chapter 10.08 - TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS 
Sections: 

10.08.010 - Traffic signs and signals. 
A.  The city council shall by resolution determine and designate the character or type of all official traffic signs and signals, provided that all traffic signs and signals erected and in operation are hereby designated official traffic signs and signals. 
1.  Subject to this selection, the chief of police is hereby authorized, and as to those signs and signals required hereunder, it shall be his or her duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official traffic signs and signals. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall be approved by the city council, and as far as practicable, standard throughout the city. 
B.  No provisions in this title for which signs are required shall be enforceable against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation, the sign herein required is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(Prior code § 12-6-1) 
10.08.020 - Obedience to traffic signs and signals. 
    It is unlawful for any operator to disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign or signal upon the street placed in accordance with the provisions of this title, unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer. 
(Prior code § 12-6-2) 
10.08.030 - Interference with signs or signals prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person willfully to deface, injure, move, obstruct, or interfere with an official traffic sign or signal. 
(Prior code § 12-6-3) 
10.08.040 - Display of unauthorized signs and signals prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic. Every such prohibited sign, signal, or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Prior code § 12-6-4) 
10.08.050 - Council authorized to designate crosswalk. 
    The city council may by resolution establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as they may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians and may mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as they may deem advisable consistent with the provisions of this title; and that space being so designated, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to mark such zones and lanes in accordance with such resolution. 
(Prior code § 12-6-5) 
Chapter 10.12 - TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS 
Sections: 

10.12.010 - Accident-Duty to stop. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injury or death to any person or damage to property shall immediately stop and give his or her name and address, and the name and address of the owner and the license number of the vehicle he or she is driving to the person struck or the driver or occupants of any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of such person to a physician or surgeon for medical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person. 
(Prior code § 12-7-1) 
10.12.020 - Immediate notice of accident. 
    The driver of any motor vehicle involved in an accident resulting in bodily injuries or death to any person or property damage to an apparent extent of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more to any one person's property or two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per accident shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of the accident to the nearest available law enforcement officer who has jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 532, 2002) 
10.12.030 - Duty upon striking animal. 
    The driver of any vehicle which collides with any dog or domestic animal causing injury thereto shall stop and attempt to notify the owner; if the owner cannot be notified at once, the driver shall report the accident to the police department in order that the injured animal may be properly cared for. 
(Prior code § 12-7-3) 
10.12.040 - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in an accident with any vehicle or other property which is unattended resulting in any damage to such other vehicle or property shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle or other property of his or her name, address and the name and address of the owner and the license number of the vehicle he or she is driving or shall attach securely in a conspicuous place in or on such vehicle or other property a written notice giving his or her name, address and the name and address of the owner and the license number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall without unnecessary delay notify the police department. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(Prior code § 12-7-4) 
10.12.050 - Repair of vehicle with reportable damage-Prohibited-Violation. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop shall not commence repair on any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a reportable accident or struck by any bullet unless the vehicle bears the notice provided by the state public safety department. 
(Prior code § 12-7-5) 
Chapter 10.16 - RULES OF THE ROAD 
Sections: 

10.16.010 - Rules of the road. 
    SDCL Title 32, Chapter 26, 32-26-1 through 32-26-45 both inclusive, are hereby adopted and enacted as the rules of the road within the city. 
(Ord. 537, 2002) 
Chapter 10.20 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 

10.20.010 - Restrictions. 
    Any person driving a vehicle on a street or highway shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface, and width of the street or highway and to any other conditions existing, and no person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway or street at such a speed as to endanger the life, limb, or property of any person. 
(Prior code § 12-5-1) 
10.20.020 - Limitations. 
    It is unlawful for any driver to drive any vehicle upon a highway or streets of the city or in any municipal park at a greater rate of speed than the following: 
A.  Fifteen (15) miles an hour when approaching within fifty (50) feet of a railroad grade crossing when the driver's view is obstructed. A driver's view shall be deemed to be obstructed when at any time during the last two hundred (200) feet of his or her approach to such crossing he or she does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such crossing and of any traffic on such railway for a distance of four hundred (400) feet in such direction from such crossing. 
B.  Fifteen (15) miles an hour when passing a school during a school recess or while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing hours. 
C.  Fifteen (15) miles an hour when approaching within fifty (50) feet and in traversing an intersection of streets when the driver's view is obstructed. A driver's view shall be deemed to be obstructed when at any time during the last fifty (50) feet of his or her approach to such intersection he or she does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such intersection for a distance of two hundred (200) feet from such intersection. 
D.  Twenty (20) miles per hour on "thru streets." 
E.  Fifteen (15) miles per hour in the city parks, and in the city cemetery. 
F.  All other roads and highways as posted. 
(Prior code § 12-5-2) 
Chapter 10.24 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 

10.24.010 - Right-of-way. 
A.  The operator of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers or traffic control signals. 
B.  Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, it is unlawful for the operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
C.  It is unlawful for a pedestrian to cross a roadway at any point other than within a marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(Prior code § 12-4-1) 
10.24.020 - Rights and duties at controlled intersections. 
    At intersections where traffic is controlled by a police officer, a pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully proceeding directly ahead on a "go" signal, and the driver of a vehicle while making a right or left turn shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians proceeding across the street on the "go" signal. It is unlawful for a pedestrian to cross or attempt to cross a street when the traffic is stopped. 
(Prior code § 12-4-2) 
10.24.030 - Jaywalking. 
    It is unlawful for any pedestrian or person to jaywalk or cross that portion of First Avenue between Ash Street and Cherry Street, other than at intersections and then only when the traffic signals are on green. 
(Prior code § 12-4-3) 
10.24.040 - Right half of crosswalk. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Prior code § 12-4-4) 
10.24.050 - Soliciting rides. 
    It is unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the operator of any private vehicle. 
(Prior code § 12-4-5) 
Chapter 10.28 - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT 
Sections: 

10.28.010 - Brakes and signaling devices. 
A.  Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer, and any combination of such vehicles shall be equipped with brakes in compliance with the requirement of Chapter 32-18 of the South Dakota Codified Laws or revision thereof; 
B.  Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn in good working order capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet. 
(Prior code § 12-7-10) 
10.28.020 - Lights. 
    A motor vehicle upon a highway within the state during the period from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any person on the highway at a distance of two hundred (200) feet shall be equipped with at least two lighted lamps on the front and two on the rear of such motor vehicle, such lamps to conform to state law, Chapter 32-17, South Dakota Codified Laws, provided that a motorcycle or motor bicycle shall be required to display but one lighted lamp in front and one in the rear. 
(Prior code § 12-7-11) 
10.28.030 - Head lights dimmed. 
    No person shall use head lights or side lights upon any vehicle on any street unless the same are dimmed in such a way as to prevent the light being dazzling or blinding to persons using the street. 
(Prior code § 12-7-12) 
10.28.040 - Muffler, excessive smoke and noise. 
    No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle unless such motor vehicle is provided with an adequate muffler, which shall at all times be kept closed so that the exhaust is effectively muffled. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such manner as to emit unnecessary or excessive smoke or noise from the motor of such vehicle or to needlessly sound the horn or other noisemaking device. 
(Prior code § 12-7-15) 
10.28.050 - Prohibiting the use of "Smitty" or "Hollywood" mufflers. 
A.  The use of "Smitty" or "Hollywood" mufflers or other devices of a like character which make loud noises or explosions are hereby declared unlawful. 
B.  It is unlawful to use a "muffler cutout" on any motor vehicle on any street or roadway in the city. 
(Prior code § 12-7-16) 
10.28.060 - Vehicles with lugs prohibited. 
    No person shall operate or move any tractor or vehicle equipped with mud lugs, ice spurs, or spikes upon or across any street that is surfaced with portland cement concrete or surfaced with bituminous material or any other hard surfacing material without first laying planks at least two inches in thickness over the surface of such street in a manner so as to protect such street surface from any damage. 
(Prior code § 12-7-17) 
10.28.070 - Pneumatic tires with metal studs. 
    No person may operate during the time period of May 1 to September 30 of each year, upon the highways of this city, a motor vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires in which there are embedded metal studs or wires of tungsten steel or other similar metal. However, any motor vehicle may be operated during the time period extending from October 1 to April 30, and a school bus or a fire-fighting vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of over five thousand (5,000) pounds owned or operated by any unit of local government may be operated anytime with such metal studs. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 538, 2002) 
10.28.080 - Dynamic braking or air-braking devises prohibited. 
A.  Defined. Dynamic braking device (commonly referred to as Jacobs Brakes) means a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
B.  Prohibited. Operating any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged except for the aversion of imminent danger shall be prohibited within the territorial jurisdiction of the City. 
C.  Public emergency response vehicles exception. Any public emergency response vehicle equipped with a dynamic braking device will be allowed to use such device during a response to an emergency situation. 
D.  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty provision as set forth in section 1.16.010 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 651, 4-9-2018) 
Chapter 10.32 - PARKING 
Sections: 

10.32.010 - Parking zones. 
A.  The city council may designate by resolution any street, avenue, or alley in the city, as necessity requires, as parking zones for the parking of motor vehicle or vehicles of any nature and description or the storage of any material of any kind, nature or description; provide the length of time for day and night parking; the hours that constitute day and night; and when such street, avenue, or alley is so designated by resolution, provide for marking with proper signs setting forth the manner, form, and hours of parking. Such parking zones shall be delineated on a map filed in the office of the finance officer. 
B.  The driver or person in charge of any vehicle parked in such a limited time zone shall comply with such time limit for parking as shown on the signs, or marked on the curb, in the immediate vicinity which such vehicle is parked. 
(Prior code § 12-3-1) 
10.32.020 - Twenty-four (24) hour parking. 
    The entire city is hereby declared to be a twenty-four (24) hour parking zone, unless otherwise stated. No vehicle shall therefore be parked on a city street, alley, or avenue for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than five dollars and the vehicles shall be subject to tow-away. 
(Prior code § 12-3-3) 
10.32.030 - Non-parking areas. 
    The city council may from time to time, by resolution, establish and cause to be designated and marked non-parking areas, along street curbs. No vehicle shall be parked at any time or for any period except to load or unload passengers or merchandise in such places so designated and marked. 
(Prior code § 12-3-5) 
10.32.040 - Parking large or obstructive item prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to park during the day or night, any truck, truck tractor, trailer, semi trailer, farm tractor or farm implement, or any other large or obstructive item of any form or description on or upon any street, avenue, or alley in the city. Except that such person, firm, or corporation may temporarily park, for the purpose of demonstration of such items from sunrise to sunset one day and that immediately following such demonstration the item be immediately removed from the street, avenue, or alley. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to park any commercial vehicle or trailer or both of a large size in a residential area of the city. A commercial vehicle will be as defined in SDCL Chapter 32-9, South Dakota Codified Laws. 
(Ord. 483, 1994: Prior code § 12-3-8) 
10.32.050 - Spaces reserved for police cars, handicapped parking, etc. 
    The city council may from time to time, by resolution, establish and cause to be designated and marked, by suitable signs or otherwise, space for the exclusive use, day and night, of police cars, busses and such other vehicles as they may deem entitled to such privilege. After a space has been so designated and marked it is unlawful for any other vehicle to park within such space day or night except momentarily to take on or let off passengers. 
(Prior code § 12-3-6) 
10.32.060 - Parking near fire hydrant or fire station. 
    No person shall stop or park any vehicle within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant or within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station. 
(Prior code § 12-3-17) 
10.32.070 - Parallel and diagonal parking. 
A.  Parallel parking shall be done so that the vehicle is parallel to the curb, headed in the direction of traffic for that side of the street and not closer than four feet to any other vehicle, front or rear. The front and rear wheels on the right side of such vehicle shall not be more than twelve (12) inches from the curb. 
B.  Diagonal parking shall be done so that the vehicle shall be parked at an angle with the curb of approximately forty-five (45) degrees with the right front tire touching or within twelve (12) inches of the curb. 
(Ord. 539, 2002) 
10.32.080 - Prohibited vehicles. 
    No vehicles of more than twenty (20) feet in length or seven feet in width, or with a load exceeding such length or width shall be parked upon any street which has been designated for diagonal parking. 
(Ord. 494, 1996: prior code § 12-3-11) 
10.32.090 - Interfering with traffic. 
    No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street so as to interfere with or interrupt the traffic on the street. Disabled vehicles are excepted from this but only for such reasonable period of time as may be required to remove the disabled vehicle from its position of interference. 
(Prior code § 12-7-7) 
10.32.100 - Flow parking. 
    All vehicles on a city street shall be parked with the direction of traffic. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than five dollars. 
(Prior code § 12-3-9) 
10.32.110 - Parking in traffic to converse. 
    No person or persons shall park or stop any vehicle in any lane of traffic for the purpose of talking with any pedestrians or with a person or persons of another vehicle. 
(Prior code § 12-3-19) 
10.32.120 - Double parking. 
    No vehicle shall be double parked on any street unless the vehicle is in charge of some person able to drive same, and it shall be the duty of such person to at once move the same upon the request of any law enforcement officer or driver of any vehicle which is blocked by such double parked vehicle. 
(Prior code § 12-3-13) 
10.32.130 - Parking in alleys. 
    No vehicle shall be parked in any alley except for the purpose of loading, unloading, and delivery of merchandise; and in such cases, the vehicle shall be parked so as not to block the alley for traffic and shall not be so parked for a longer time than thirty (30) minutes at one location. 
(Prior code § 12-3-14) 
10.32.140 - Parking on crosswalks. 
    No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any crosswalk, except momentarily for the purpose of taking on or letting off passengers. 
(Prior code § 12-3-15) 
10.32.150 - Stopping near curb. 
    No vehicle shall stop or be allowed to stand anywhere in the streets except as near as possible to the right hand curb. 
(Prior code § 12-3-16) 
10.32.160 - Backing to curb. 
    No vehicle shall be backed to the curb or be left standing backed to the curb except where it is necessary in order to load and unload goods or merchandise and then only for such length of time as may be necessary to load or unload. 
(Prior code § 12-3-12) 
10.32.170 - Blocking private driveway. 
    No persons shall stop or park a vehicle so as to block any private driveway. 
(Prior code § 12-3-18) 
10.32.180 - Parking without permission. 
A.  No person shall park any motor vehicle in any private parking lot, residential lot, business lot, parking lot for hire, city lot or park, or other vacant lot without the permission of the owner, lessee or person in charge thereof. Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a penalty of a fine of twenty dollars ($20.00), notwithstanding the terms of Section 10.32.210. 
B.  Any motor vehicle or other vehicle which is improperly parked in violation of subsection (A) of this section may be removed by the owner or lessee, or person in charge of the lot. The owner, lessee or person in charge of any such lot shall be entitled to recover the cost of removal of the vehicle, to be taxed by the court as a cost. No one effecting such a removal shall have any liability for damage to any vehicle so removed as long as reasonable care is used in removal such vehicle. 
(Ord. 554, 2002) 
10.32.190 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings herein ascribed: 
A.  Abandoned motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle which is left unattended on any public street or alley, in any public parking lot, or in any other public place for more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours. 
B.  Junk motor vehicles. Any motor vehicle which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable or discarded. 
C.  Inoperable vehicle. Any vehicle which is not in operating condition due to damage, removal or inoperability of one or more tires and wheels, the engine or other essential parts required for the operation of the vehicle, or which constitutes an immediate health, safety, fire or traffic hazard. 
D.  Motor vehicle. Any self-propelled vehicle including, but not limited to automobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts and campers. 
E.  Removal agency. Any business in the operation of towing and transporting motor vehicles. 
(Prior code § 12-3-7) 
(Ord. No. 614, 7-9-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 614, adopted July 9, 2012, amended § 10.32.190 title to read as herein set out. Former § 10.32.190 pertained to vehicles left in disrepair. 
10.32.191 - Nuisance declared. 
    The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junk or partially dismantled motor vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property, is declared a public nuisance pursuant to SDCL § 9-29-13. This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any motor vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, properly operated in the appropriate zoning district, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways which vehicle remains on private property. 
(Ord. No. 614, 7-9-2012) 
10.32.192 - Storing, parking or leaving on public property. 
A.  Prohibited. No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any abandoned, junk, or inoperable motor vehicle of any kind, whether attended or not, upon any public property in the city. 
B.  Removal. Whenever any police officer finds an abandoned motor vehicle, junk, or inoperable motor vehicle on public property, he or she shall place written notice on the vehicle that it will be removed to a garage or place of safety unless the owner removes the vehicle from public property within twenty-four (24) hours of the giving of the notice. After the expiration of the 24-hour period, the vehicle may be removed by the removal agency to a garage or place of safety. The vehicle can be recovered by payment of costs incident to its removal and storage. Nothing in this section precludes the Police Department from immediately removing a motor vehicle which causes an obstruction or hazard to traffic. 
(Ord. No. 614, 7-9-2012) 
10.32.193 - Presence on private property. 
A.  Prohibited. No person owning, in charge of, or in control of any real property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any abandoned, junk, or inoperable motor vehicle of any kind to remain on the property longer than fifteen (15) days. 
B.  Notice to Remove. Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department or ordinance enforcement that any person has an abandoned, junk, or inoperable motor vehicle on private property for a period longer than fifteen (15) days, a notice shall be given to the real property owner that said motor vehicle is in violation of this section of the municipal code. The notice shall be in writing to the record owner of the property and such other of the persons referenced in subsection 10.32.193 A. as can be ascertained. The notice shall be personally served or shall be mailed by first class mail to the record owner of the property and such other of the persons referenced in subsection 10.32.193 A. as can be ascertained, ordering the removal of such motor vehicle in the time specified in this chapter. The notice shall be deemed complete upon personal delivery or mailing to the last known address to the record owner of the real property and such other of the persons referenced in subsection 10.32.193 A. as can be ascertained. The notice shall contain the request for removal within fifteen (15) days after the mailing of such notice, and the notice shall state that failure to comply with the notice to remove shall be a violation of this chapter. The notice shall also state that the failure to comply with the notice to remove shall subject the motor vehicle at issue to subsections 10.32.194 A-C. 
(Ord. No. 614, 7-9-2012) 
10.32.194 - Removal by the city-Notice to owner. 
A.  Towing by Removal Agency. The Police Department may abate the nuisance by causing the motor vehicle to be towed from the property by a removal agency. The Police Department shall then notify, by first class mail, the registered owner, and if encumbered, the lienholder, of the removal, storage and present location of any motor vehicle removed under the provisions of this chapter and that the vehicle can be recovered by payment of costs incident to its removal and storage. 
B.  Disposal. Additionally, the Police Department or duly authorized ordinance enforcement personnel may abate the nuisance by removing the junk motor vehicle, inoperable vehicle or vehicle parts thereof and disposing of them. 
C.  Cost. The city may defray the cost of abating the public nuisance by taxing the cost thereof by special assessment against the real property on which the nuisance occurred. 
(Ord. No. 614, 7-9-2012) 
10.32.195 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In addition to the abatement remedies provided in this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty provision as set forth in section 1.16.010 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 614, 7-9-2012) 
10.32.200 - Parking in snow emergency. 
A.  From the first snow fall of the year through the snow season, any vehicle not being used daily must be removed from the city streets for the remainder of the snow season. 
B.  Any time there is two inches or more of new snow, there will be no overnight parking allowed on Veterans Avenue from Ash Street to Cherry Street; on Oak Street from Main Avenue to Second Avenue East; and on Maple Street from Main Avenue to Second Avenue East. 
C.  Any time there is two inches or more of new snow, all vehicles must be removed from all east and west streets immediately following the snow fall. Following completion of plowing east and west streets, all vehicles must be removed from all north and south streets to allow snow removal to continue. 
D.  Violation of subsections (A) through (C) shall result in ticketing of the offending vehicle and towing of the vehicle to impound. Violators or owners of offending vehicles shall be liable for a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per violation. The city shall not be liable for any damage to any vehicle illegally parked under the terms of this section resulting from towing, impound or snow removal activities. 
(Ord. 551 § 1, 2002: Ord. 492 § 2, 1995) 
10.32.210 - Penalties-Violations. 
A.  The amount of fines for parking violations will be kept on file in the office of the finance officer. The offending automobile or other vehicle will be tagged with a tag in the form of an envelope, listing the date of the offense, license number of the vehicle, make, violation number, meter number, and location of offense with reference to street or avenue. Whenever a notice is left by any member of the police department in or on any vehicle which has exceeded the parking time limit requesting the person in charge of such vehicle to report to the police station or municipal court, the person shall appear at the hour and place designated, and default in so doing shall in itself, be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
B.  The fines for parking violations within the city are as follows: 
Section Violation Fine 10.32.010 Parking in a No Parking Zone $20.00 10.32.040 Parking Large or Obstructive Item Prohibited $20.00 10.32.050 Parking in Handicapped Parking $50.00 10.32.060 Parking Near Fire Hydrant $40.00 10.32.070 Parallel and Diagonal Parking $20.00 10.32.080 Prohibited Vehicle Parking Over 20 Feet Long or 7 Feet Wide $5.00 10.32.110 Parking in Traffic to Converse $$5.00 10.32.120 Double Parking $10.00 10.32.130 Parking in Alley $20.00 10.32.140 Parking on Crosswalk $20.00 10.32.160 Backing to Curb-Other than Unloading $5.00 10.32.170 Parking Blocking Private Driveway $20.00 10.32.190 Vehicle Left in Disrepair Over 30 Days $20.00 10.32.200 Emergency Limited Parking (Street Cleaning etc.) Pay Penalty and Cost of Removal $10.00  
(Ord. 480, 1993; prior code § 12-3-2) 
Chapter 10.36 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES 
Sections: 

10.36.010 - Parades and processions. 
    No parade or procession other than a funeral procession shall be held or participated in upon the streets except with the prior consent of the city council. The consent of the city council to the holding of such parade or procession shall be given unless it reasonably appears that the holding of the same would unreasonably obstruct and impede traffic or would be likely to disturb the peace and quietness of the city. 
(Prior code § 12-7-6) 
10.36.020 - Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices restricted. 
    It is unlawful for any person on roller skates or riding in or by means of any coasters, toy vehicle, or similar device to go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. 
(Prior code § 12-7-8) 
10.36.030 - Weight and size of vehicle and loads. 
    No person shall drive or operate any vehicle upon any street the gross weight of which, including the load, or the size of which does not comply with the requirements of the state law governing such vehicle. 
(Prior code § 12-7-9) 
10.36.040 - Spot lights. 
    No person shall use a spot light in the streets unless in an emergency, and then so as not to blind or inconvenience persons using the street. 
(Prior code § 12-7-13) 
10.36.050 - Play streets. 
    The council may declare any street or part thereof as "play street," and place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating such use. 
(Prior code § 12-7-14) 
10.36.060 - Vehicles prohibited on closed streets. 
    No vehicle shall be driven upon any street which has been closed to traffic by the proper authority. 
(Prior code § 12-7-19) 
10.36.070 - Alcoholic beverages-Prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to have a package or any receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage in his or her possession in a motor vehicle unless the seal of the original package remains unbroken or the alcoholic beverage is so removed that no occupant of the motor vehicle shall have access to it while the motor vehicle is in motion. 
B.  "Alcoholic beverage" means any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverage including low-point beer. 
C.  Violation of any provision of this section shall result in a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), a jail sentence of not more than thirty (30) days or both. 
(Ord. 547, 2002: Ord. 396, 1982) 
Chapter 10.40 - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 
Sections: 

10.40.010 - Definitions. 
    "Off road vehicles" means any mechanical vehicle which runs by its own power and which by its nature cannot be registered and licensed under the terms of SDCL Chapter 32-5 and any two, three, four or six wheeled all terrain vehicle, golf cart, go cart, except moped, electric wheel chair and street legal licensed motorcycle. 
    "Operate" means to control the motion of or run the power plant on a vehicle or be in a position to do so while the vehicle is in motion or the power plant is running. 
    "Operator" means any person who operates or is in physical control of a vehicle. 
    "Streets" means any street, avenue or alley within the corporate limits of the city, including ditches and boulevards within the right-of-way or a street or alley. 
(Ord. 548 § 1, 2002: Ord. 432 § 1, 1987) 
10.40.020 - Restrictions-Corporate limits. 
    No off road vehicle shall be operated within the corporate limits of the city except upon the property of the operator thereof or with the permission of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. 548 § 2, 2002: Ord. 432 § 2, 1987) 
10.40.030 - Restrictions-Streets. 
    No off road vehicle shall be operated upon any street in the city, at any time unless the vehicle is licensed to do so by state law. 
(Ord. 548 § 3, 2002: Ord. 432 § 3, 1987) 
10.40.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or a jail sentence of not more than thirty (30) days in jail or both. 
(Ord. 548 § 4, 2002: Ord. 432 § 4, 1987) 
Chapter 10.44 - SNOWMOBILES 
Sections: 

10.44.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the listed words shall have the following meanings: 
    "Operator" means any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile. 
    "Owner" means a person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile and entitled to the use or possession thereof. 
    "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its agencies and subdivisions, and any body of persons whether incorporated or not. 
    "Roadway" means that portion of any highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    "Snowmobile" means a self propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow, ice, or natural terrain, steered by means of wheels, skis or runners. 
(Ord. 540 (part), 2002) 
10.44.020 - Limitations on operation of snowmobiles. 
A.  Travel and operation of snowmobiles shall be limited to a route of travel from the owners residence or place of storage of the snowmobile to the city limits by the most direct route. 
B.  Snowmobiles shall be operated only in the lane furthest to the right and in the same direction as is used for vehicle traffic. 
C.  Two or more snowmobiles traveling in the same direction shall be operated one behind the other with and interval of at least fifteen (15) feet between each snowmobile. Snowmobiles shall not be operated side by side. 
D.  Snowmobiles may be operated on the public streets in emergencies during the period of time and at locations where snow upon the roadways has rendered travel by automobile impractical as declared by the Sisseton City Police Department. 
E.  Snowmobiles shall be subject to the same speed limits and rules of the road as other motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 540 (part), 2002) 
10.44.030 - Prohibited operation. 
A.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel, except crossing such sidewalks at driveways. 
B.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on the private property of another person without the specific written permission of the owner of the property, which shall be in the possession of the operator. 
C.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any city park except in areas specially designated for operation of snowmobiles. 
D.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on any public or private school property, cemetery, golf course or park, including athletic fields and tracks. 
E.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated within one hundred (100) feet of any pedestrian skating rink or sliding hill or area or anywhere operation would endanger other persons or property. 
F.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated so as to chase, drive, run over, kill or injure any animal. 
G.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated in a manner so as to endanger any person or property. 
(Ord. 540 (part), 2002) 
10.44.040 - Required equipment. 
    It is unlawful to operate any snowmobile within the city unless it is equipped with the following: 
A.  Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No snowmobile shall be operated within the city with an open exhaust, straight pipe or tuned exhaust which results in louder exhaust than the standard mufflers. 
B.  Brakes adequate to stop and hold the snowmobile under any condition of operation and sufficient to control the machine. 
C.  A safety or "deadman" throttle in operating condition, which, when pressure is released from the throttle causes it to close completely. 
D.  Every rider and passenger of a snowmobile within the city shall at all times wear an approved helmet when the snowmobile is in motion. 
(Ord. 540 (part), 2002) 
10.44.050 - Penalty. 
    Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) and up to thirty (30) days in jail. 
(Ord. 540 (part), 2002) 
Chapter 10.48 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 

10.48.010 - Registering and licensing. 
    All bicycles within the city shall be registered and licensed by the stamping of a number somewhere upon the frame and licensed by a corresponding number to be displayed upon the bicycle in a place to be designated by the licensing agency. 
(Prior code § 7-5-1) 
10.48.020 - License fees. 
    The registration and licensing shall be done by the police department of the city, for which a charge of not less than fifty cents ($0.50) shall be made, such sum to be set by the city council and on file in the office of the finance officer to be paid to the finance officer for the expense of the equipment and licenses. 
(Prior code § 7-5-2) 
10.48.030 - Requirements concern all bicycle owners. 
    The requirements of this chapter shall be complied with by all bicycle owners within the city, but shall not exclude anyone from registering and licensing a bicycle. 
(Prior code § 7-5-3) 
10.48.040 - Traffic laws shall be obeyed. 
    A bicycle is considered a vehicle and every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other public highway in the city shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto. Persons riding bicycles within the city shall observe all traffic signs and stop at all stop signs; and shall turn only at intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the right-hand side of the street or highway, pass to the left when overtaking vehicles and individuals that are slower moving, and shall pass vehicles to the right when meeting. 
(Prior code § 7-5-4) 
10.48.050 - Restrictions. 
A.  No bicycle shall be operated within the city between thirty (30) minutes after sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise, without a white headlight visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof for not less than three hundred (300) feet indicating the approach or presence of the bicycle, firmly attached to such bicycle and properly lighted, or without a yellow or red light or reflector attached to and visible from two hundred (200) feet from the rear thereof. 
B.  No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street or other public highway of the city with another person on the handle bars or in front of the operator. 
C.  No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public sidewalk within the city except within a residential area in the city. 
D.  No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper, but every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the operator and other persons upon the sidewalks, streets, and other public highways. 
E.  No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or other public highway in the city abreast of or to the left of more than one other person riding or propelling a bicycle. 
F.  No person shall ride or operate a bicycle by holding on, clinging to, or attaching such bicycle in any manner to any other vehicle on any public highway or street. 
(Prior code § 7-5-5) 
10.48.060 - Penalty. 
A.  If in the opinion of a law enforcement officer, this chapter has been violated, the bicycle may be impounded at the police station for a period not to exceed five days. A fee for storage shall be paid to the city before the bicycle is released. Should the owner of the bicycle feel that such an impoundment is not justified, he or she may request that the chief of police or the mayor order it released. 
B.  In addition, violators shall be subject to the penalties described in Chapter 1.16. 
(Prior code § 7-5-6) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapter 12.04 - STREET NAMES 

12.04.010 - Plats part of chapter. 
    Those plats indicating the names of streets and avenues of the city now on file in the office of the register of deeds of Roberts County, South Dakota are hereby incorporated as a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 11-1-1) 
12.04.020 - Official map. 
    The official map of the city shall be those maintained in the office of the register of deeds of Roberts County, South Dakota. 
(Prior code § 11-1-2) 
12.04.030 - Names of the streets and avenues. 
    The official names of the streets and avenues in the city shall be those as shown on the official map or maps maintained in the office of the register of deeds of Roberts County, South Dakota. 
(Prior code § 11-1-3) 
Chapter 12.08 - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 
Sections: 

12.08.010 - Supervision of sidewalk and curbing construction. 
    The building and construction of all sidewalks and curbing within the limits of the streets and alleys of the city shall be done under direct supervision of agents and all such sidewalks shall be constructed on the grades as determined by the city. 
(Prior code § 11-2-1) 
12.08.020 - Specifications. 
    The construction of all sidewalks and curbing whether to be done by direct contract with the city or by contract with the abutting property owners, shall be done strictly in accordance with the specifications for sidewalks and curbing adopted by the council and on file in the office of the finance officer. The council shall have full power to condemn work and material not in accordance with the requirements of the specifications. 
(Prior code § 11-2-2) 
12.08.030 - Permit required. 
    Before any sidewalk or curbing is constructed within the limits of the streets and alleys in the city by any contractor or person for the owner or owners of abutting property, the contractor or person must first secure a permit therefore from the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 11-2-3) 
12.08.040 - Bond. 
    Before any such contractor or person shall receive a permit for the construction of any sidewalk or curbing within the limits of the streets or alleys of the city, such contractor or person must first execute a guaranty bond in an amount equal to the total amount of the work to be performed by him or her under the contract therefor, with good and sufficient surety approved by the city council; or may give a bond of an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer to cover all work to be done by such contractor during the year in which the bond is given. All such bonds shall require that the contractor or person receiving such permit shall replace all sidewalks and curbing constructed by him or her at any time within the period of three years, from the time of completion of the sidewalks or curbing which, in the opinion of the city engineer, were not laid in accordance with the required specifications, provided however that no bond shall be required where the owner of the abutting property does his or her own work. 
(Prior code § 11-2-4) 
12.08.050 - Width of sidewalks. 
    The width of the sidewalks in the residential districts shall be four feet and the width of sidewalks in the business district shall be eight feet. 
(Prior code § 11-2-5) 
Chapter 12.12 - STREET AND SIDEWALK USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Obstruction on streets. 
    No person shall place, leave, or keep on any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public ground in the city any wagon, automobile, cart, truck, sleigh, or other vehicle, except when the same shall be in actual use; nor shall any person place, leave, or keep on any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public ground in this city, any other article, substance, or material which may obstruct the free use of the street, road, alley, sidewalk, or public ground, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 11-5-1) 
12.12.020 - Materials in streets-Permits. 
    The council is authorized to grant permission in writing to any person to deposit and keep lumber, stone, brick, or other materials for building in any public sidewalk, street, road, or alley adjacent to the building to be erected or repaired, but such permission shall not excuse the obstruction or occupancy with such materials of more than one-third in width of any carriage way of any street or road. 
(Prior code § 11-5-2) 
12.12.030 - Cleaning streets or the sidewalk of rubbish. 
    Every person to whom permission may be granted, as in Section 12.12.020, to place and keep building material in the street, road, or alley, shall cause all such material and the rubbish resulting therefrom, to be removed from such sidewalk, street, road, or alley at the expiration of the time limited in the permit, unless the time shall for good cause be extended by the council; and any person depositing and keeping any building material on such sidewalk or in such street, road, or alley shall there remain, keep one or more lighted lanterns or flares so placed that such material may be easily seen by persons passing along such sidewalk, street, road, or alley. 
(Prior code § 11-5-3) 
12.12.040 - Excavation near street. 
    It is unlawful for any person, owner, or occupant of any lot or parcel of land within the city to make or cause to be made any excavation on the lot or parcel of land, except the same be securely guarded so as to prevent the injury of any person or persons or animals passing upon or along the sidewalks, streets, alleys, or public grounds or traveled path or roadway. 
(Prior code § 11-5-4) 
12.12.050 - Building in street. 
    No person shall erect or maintain any building in such a position that the same shall stand in whole or in part upon any public street, road, alley, or sidewalk in the city, or so constructed that any part of the building proper shall project into or over such street, road, alley, or sidewalk; provided that jutting windows, cornices, and other projections from the buildings above the first story may extend over an adjoining street, road, alley, or sidewalk, not exceeding eighteen (18) inches; and no person shall construct any step, area, or other appurtenance to any building extending over or upon the sidewalk nor shall any person erect in any public street or road any flight of stairs or step leading to any floor of any building. 
(Prior code § 11-5-5) 
12.12.060 - Eave pipes. 
    No person shall place or maintain any pipe leading from the eaves of any building or any part of any building in the city in such a position that the water discharged from the roof of the building will flow upon or over any public sidewalk in the city. 
(Prior code § 11-5-6) 
12.12.070 - Garbage in streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to throw or deposit any ashes, offals, dirt, garbage, decaying vegetables, fish, meat, manure, filthy water, slops, or any other offensive or putrid material or thing into or upon any street, avenue, land, alley, or public ground within the corporate limits of the city or into any stream of water within the limits of the city or forming the boundaries thereof. 
(Prior code § 11-5-7) 
12.12.080 - Animals and vehicles on sidewalks. 
    No person shall ride, drive, or lead any horse or mule or drive or lead any cow or any other animal upon any public sidewalk in the city, or draw or propel or cause to be drawn or propelled thereon any vehicle ordinarily drawn by horses; or drive or operate, cause to be driven or operated, any motor vehicle upon any sidewalk in the city, except that the same may be driven across any sidewalk in entering or leaving the premises. 
(Prior code § 11-5-8) 
12.12.090 - Use of streets for sale of vehicles, etc. 
    No person shall display for sale any vehicle or other personal property upon any of the streets or avenues in the city. 
(Prior code § 11-5-9) 
Chapter 12.16 - SNOW REMOVAL 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Duty of owner or occupant. 
    It is the duty of the owner or occupant or person in possession or in charge of any lot, parcel, or plot of ground fronting or abutting upon any sidewalk, to keep such sidewalk free and clear from snow and shall within twelve (12) hours after any fall of snow and before 9:00 a.m. of the next day if such fall of snow should occur after 12:00 a.m., remove the snow from so much of the walk as adjoins those premises. 
(Prior code § 11-3-1) 
12.16.020 - Duty of street commissioner. 
    It is the duty of the street commissioner to notify all owners or persons in possession of property abutting on sidewalks in the city to keep such sidewalk free from snow, and remove the same within twelve (12) hours after every fall of snow, or prior to 9:00 a.m. of succeeding day. Such notice need not be given personally, but may be given generally by one publication in the official newspaper of the city; which notice shall state that each owner or person in possession is required to keep the sidewalks on which their property or premises abut free and clear from snow between November 15 and the following April 1. 
(Prior code § 11-3-2) 
12.16.030 - Cleaning parking lots, driveways and sidewalks. 
A.  Snow and ice must be removed from public sidewalks and crosswalks adjoining a property owner's property within twelve (12) hours of any snowfall. 
B.  Snow removal from sidewalks, crosswalks and driveways must not be placed on streets after the snowplow has gone by. If a city crew has to return to remove snow placed in the street, the property owner from whose property the snow came will be billed at posted rates for workers and machines used to remove the snow. 
C.  Snow removed from parking lots, driveways and sidewalks shall not be placed in streets, creeks, drainage ditches or near culverts or drainage pipes. 
D.  Snow shall not be piled anywhere or in any manner so it blocks vision of traffic at any intersection or impedes vehicles or pedestrian traffic, blocks view of traffic signs or covers a fire hydrant. 
E.  Violations of this section will result in being mailed to the offender by first class mail. The city will remedy the problem resulting from the offender's act(s) or omissions and the offender will be charged at posted rates for the workers, materials and/or machines required to remedy the condition. 
F.  Any charges from workers, materials or machines under this chapter shall be charged against the real estate involved as a special assessment unless being paid in full within thirty (30) days of billing by the city. 
(Ord. 552 § 2, 2002) 
12.16.040 - Refusal to remove snow. 
    If the owner or person in possession of the premises fails or refuses to remove the snow after every fall of snow from such sidewalks within the time above specified, it shall be the duty of the street commissioner to have the snow removed and charge the costs thereof against the abutting property each time the snow is so removed. 
(Prior code § 11-3-3) 
12.16.050 - Account to be kept for the removal of snow. 
A.  The street commissioner shall cause an account to be kept against each lot or parcel of land, for the removal of snow from the sidewalk, from November 15 to the following April 1 and the same shall be certified to the finance officer on or before April 15 of each year. 
B.  The finance officer shall prepare an estimate of the assessment against each lot or parcel of land for removal of snow for the preceding winter and fall, and submit the same to the city council for its approval at or before its first meeting in June, and shall publish in the official newspaper of the city a notice to property owners of the time and place when the city council will meet for the purpose of approving such estimate. 
C.  Upon the day so named, the city council shall meet, and if they find the estimate correct shall approve the same, or if not correct, they shall correct or modify the same and approve the same as corrected and modified, and file such assessment with the city finance officer, and from the date of such approval and filing the same shall be and become a special lien against the various pieces of property described in the assessment, and shall be collected in like manner as special assessments are now collected for public improvements. 
(Prior code § 11-3-4) 
12.16.060 - Penalty. 
    Any person who fails to remove such snow shall be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1.16; and in addition thereto, shall be liable to the municipality for any damage caused by the neglect to keep such sidewalk clear and free of snow and ice as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 11-3-5) 
Chapter 12.20 - EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 

12.20.010 - Permit required. 
    No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation in or under any street, parking area, sidewalk, alley, or public ground, or remove any earth, soil, paving, gravel, or material therefrom without having first obtained a permit therefore as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 11-6-1) 
12.20.020 - Application. 
    Application for such permit shall be made to the finance officer. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee of an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer, which amount shall be considered compensation to the city for the granting of such permit and the necessary investigation prior thereto. Before any such permit is issued, the person requiring the same shall state in this application therefor where such excavation is to be made, the extent thereof, in front of what lot or lots, and for what purpose the excavation is to be made. 
(Prior code § 11-6-2) 
12.20.030 - Supervision of excavations. 
    The chief of police shall supervise all excavations made for any purpose in the streets, alleys, or public ground and he or she shall require that all excavations be backfilled in the manner specified. 
(Prior code § 11-6-3) 
12.20.040 - Guarding excavations. 
    Any person receiving a permit to make excavations in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or public ground shall during the progress and continuance of the work, erect and maintain around the same both by day and night suitable guards, fences, flares, and signals so as to prevent injury to persons, animals, or vehicles on account of such excavations. Such flares shall be kept lighted from sundown until sunrise. 
(Prior code § 11-6-4) 
12.20.050 - Refilling excavations. 
A.  Any person making such excavation shall when the excavation is completed, promptly and without delay, refill the same as herein provided. 
B.  In refilling any excavation the earth shall be thoroughly settled as the refilling progresses by using water to compact the earth; the earth shall be thoroughly tamped in successive layers of approximately six inches, in such a manner that all the earth shall be replaced in the excavation leaving the surface in its original condition. 
C.  In making connection to fire hydrants for flushing excavations, all rules and regulations relating thereto shall be observed. 
D.  In all cases where excavations are made in the paved district the earth shall be replaced in the manner above specified, and the pavement shall be replaced by the city. 
(Prior code § 11-6-5) 
12.20.060 - Cutting pavements. 
    Where it is necessary to cut the street pavement in making any street excavation, there shall be deposited with the finance officer before permit is issued, an amount determined by multiplying the number of square yards of pavement to be removed by the per square yard charge of an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer. The deposit shall be credited to the permanent street fund and be used in replacing the pavements. 
(Prior code § 11-6-6) 
12.20.070 - Excavations near streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person, owner, or occupant of any lot to make or cause to be made any excavation on the lot adjacent to any street, alley, public ground, or traveled road, or roadway, except the same be securely guarded so as to prevent the injury of any person or animal passing upon or along the same. 
(Prior code § 11-6-7) 
12.20.080 - Operating in sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful to make, cause to be made, or maintain any opening in any sidewalk for the purpose of providing light for a basement or cellar or for ventilating the same, unless such opening shall be guarded with a substantial railing of iron not less than three feet high, or with a substantial iron grating or other strong substantial cover, the grates of which shall be not more than one inch apart. No railing or grate shall occupy more than two feet of the sidewalk, measuring from the inner side thereof. 
(Prior code § 11-6-8) 
12.20.090 - Excavations under sidewalks. 
    Any person having or erecting any building abutting upon any street, avenue, or alley in the city, may excavate under the sidewalk to the curb for the purpose of constructing a cellar or basement under the sidewalk in front of or adjoining the building; provided, that the excavation shall be surrounded upon the outer side and ends thereof with a substantial wall, to be approved by the building committee, sufficient to maintain the sidewalk. The plan of the sidewalk shall be approved by the building committee; and provided further, that permission to make such excavations and to construct such sidewalk, shall be first obtained from the finance officer. The excavation shall be securely guarded by barricades at all times, and one or more lighted lanterns in the night time, so long as the same shall remain open. 
(Prior code § 11-6-9) 
Chapter 12.24 - TREES 
Sections: 

12.24.010 - Definitions. 
    "Boulevard" means the area along the public streets between the curb or curbline and the sidewalk or sidewalk line. 
(Ord. 545 (part), 2002) 
12.24.020 - Planting regulations. 
A.  No trees shall be planted in the boulevard unless they are in compliance with the following regulations: 
1.  At least forty (40) feet between each tree. 
2.  At least two feet from the curb line and/or sidewalk. 
3.  At least twenty-five (25) feet from any street corner where the curb line intersects. 
4.  At least ten (10) feet from any fire hydrant. 
5.  At least five lateral feet from any underground water line, sewer line, gas line, transmission line, or other utility. 
B.  No hedge, shrub, bush or fence more than three feet in height shall be planted or allowed within fifty (50) feet of any street corner measured from the point of intersecting curbs or curb lines. No female cottonwood trees. 
(Ord. 545 (part), 2002) 
12.24.030 - Duty of private owners. 
    It is the duty of the owner of the land where a tree is planted to: 
A.  Trim any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city that obstructs the light from any street lamp or obstructs the view of any street intersection. All trees shall be trimmed to sufficient height so as to allow ten (10) feet clearance over sidewalks and seventeen (17) feet clearance over all streets. 
B.  Treat and remove any tree or plant that is diseased or insect ridden which constitutes a hazard to other trees or plants, or any dead tree. 
C.  Remove any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which may come into contact with utility wires, water lines, sewer lines, gas lines, curb and gutter, sidewalks or other public improvements. 
D.  Remove any tree, which was planted in violation of the planting regulations. 
(Ord. 545 (part), 2002) 
12.24.040 - Order to preserve or remove. 
    When the city council finds it necessary to order the trimming, preservation, or removal of trees or plants upon private property or in the boulevard or other public areas, they shall serve a written order to correct the condition upon the owner, or occupant where the tree is located. The order shall give the owner or occupant thirty (30) days to remove or trim the tree. In cases of extreme danger to persons or other public property, the city council shall have the authority to require compliance immediately upon service of the order. 
(Ord. 545 (part), 2002) 
12.24.050 - Failure to comply. 
    When a person who has received notice to trim, preserve or remove trees or plants, fails to comply within the specified time, the city shall remedy the condition or contract with others for such purpose and charge the cost thereof to the person to whom the order was directed by sending him or her a statement of costs. The person remedying the condition shall be authorized to enter the premises for that purpose. If the owner of the property does not pay the cost of the work within thirty (30) days after receipt of the statement thereof such costs may be levied against the property benefited or upon which the condition existed as a special assessment or lien. 
(Ord. 545 (part), 2002) 
Chapter 12.28 - CITY PARKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 600, adopted June 8, 2009, did not specifically amend the code; therefore, said provisions have been included as Ch. 12.28, §§ 12.28.010-12.28.060, at the editor's discretion. 

12.28.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(a)  "Recreation center" means those buildings and surrounding areas owned by the the City of Sisseton (the city) where recreation activities, day care, health services and other beneficial services and activities are provided by the city, that are designated by the city council as recreation centers or senior citizen centers. 
(b)  "Park" means a specific piece of ground, either within the city or that is under the control of the city, that is operated and maintained by the city and set apart for the use of the general public, whether developed or undeveloped, including natural parks and that is usually, or may be, planted with trees, lawns and other shrubbery. A park may include within its boundary facilities for sport, entertainment, dancing, recreation, swimming, or a park may be planning for any beneficial use by the citizenry. A park may have numerous facilities or consist of only a single facility. 
(c)  "Recreation" means leisure activity or diversion which restores one strength, spirit or vitality and which refreshes the mind and/or body. 
(d)  "Recreation facilities" (facilities) means parks, recreation areas and recreations centers which are owned or operated by the city, or for which the city has enforcement and/or maintenance responsibilities. 
(e)  "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or form. 
(Ord. No. 600, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 632, 11-10-2014) 
12.28.020 - Authority to make rules. 
    The city council may adopt or recommend the adopting rules for the use and care of city recreational facilities consistent with this chapter and other city ordinances, as provided by the city's ordinances on rulemaking. The council may coordinate rulemaking and enforcement with the Sisseton Police Department which has enforcement authority in all city recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 600, 6-8-2009) 
12.28.030 - Prohibited activities. 
    The following activities are prohibited in or on city recreational facilities: 
(1)  Entering into a flood detention pond where there is water present in it; 
(2)  Expectorating, urinating or littering, or defecating except into a toilet for that purpose; 
(3)  Allowing any dog or cat to be off a leash, or allowing such animal not to be secured by a person; 
(4)  Allowing an animal, under one's ownership, care, custody or control to defecate in a recreational facility without removing the defecation to a proper trash receptacle; 
(5)  Possessing or drinking any alcoholic beverage; 
(6)  Shooting any projectile, paint ball or golfing; 
(7)  Adjusting or tampering with sprinklers, sprinkling valves, or sprinkling or irrigation systems; 
(8)  Making excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises; 
(9)  Making or continuing to burn an open fire except in a barbecue or grill areas provided by the city; 
(10)  Putting any object which is not normally used in those receptacles in sinks, toilets or drinking fountains which is reasonably likely to clog or plug the plumbing; 
(11)  Operating any dispensary or concession stand without the express written consent of the city council or without first obtaining permission from the city; 
(12)  Engaging in any activity in an area which is not specifically designated for that activity; 
(13)  Camping, lodging or remaining overnight; 
(14)  Throwing or depositing any bottle, metal objects, glass, paper, wood, clippings, rubbish or garbage except in receptacles set out for that purpose; 
(15)  Carrying or discharging any firearm or explosive of any kind, including fireworks, excepting law enforcement officers and those who have received written consent to do so from the city council; 
(16)  Violating any provision or instruction on any sign, or violating any rule of the facility; 
(17)  Removing any plant, shrub, natural plant, rock, etc., from the recreational facility, excepting city personnel or parks and recreation personnel in furtherance of their duties; and 
(18)  Smoking and/or ingestion of tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 600, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 632, 11-10-2014) 
12.28.040 - Opening and closing times for city recreational facilities. 
(a)  Except for unusual or unforeseen events, city recreational facilities shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. Unless otherwise noticed by sign or other communication, facilities shall open each day at sunrise and shall close each day at sunset. With the exception of police, fire, and parks and recreation personnel, no one may enter a recreational facility during the hours that the facility is closed. 
(b)  Individuals or groups may receive express written permission from the city council to be in a facility during the hours it is closed and to be exempted from prohibited activities. The written permission shall designate specific hours within which the exemption is granted. The exemption from closing hours and prohibited acts shall be in effect only for those hours exempted. Any person wishing to remain in the park after closing hour may apply to the city finance officer for a special permit specifying the person's name, the proposed activity's nature, the hours during which it is to be conducted, and any other information that the city finance officer may reasonably request. A bond, or other undertaking, in form or substance satisfactory to the city finance officer and city attorney, may be required holding the city harmless from any liability arising from the permitted activity. The city finance officer will provide the city council with the request and the city council will determine whether the applicant's request will be granted or denied. 
(c)  Issuance of a permit does not exempt the holder or permitted from all other rules, regulations, ordinances or statutes, whether state, county or city that are not exempted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 600, 6-8-2009) 
12.28.050 - Noise restrictions. 
    No person may play or cause to be played amplified music or sound in a facility without the express written approval of the city council. Any person wishing to play or cause to be played amplified music or sound may apply to the city finance officer for a special permit specifying the person's name, the proposed activity's nature, the hours during which it is to be conducted, and any other information that the city finance officer may reasonably request. A bond, or other undertaking, may be required in form or substance satisfactory to the city finance officer and city attorney, holding the city harmless from any liability arising from the permitted activity. The city finance officer will provide the city council with the request and the city council will determine whether the applicant's request will be granted or denied. Such permission or license may be denied by the city council where it is reasonably believed that such noise would disturb other patrons of the facility, annoy residents neighboring the facility or disturb wildlife. The written approval to play amplified sound must be provided to any city employee or official upon demand during the time for which it is granted. Issuance of permission and does not exempt the holder or permitted from all other rules, regulations, ordinances or statutes, whether state, county or city. 
(Ord. No. 600, 6-8-2009) 
12.28.060 - Violation of ordinance or rule. 
(a)  Eviction. Any person violating any of the ordinances, rules, or instructions established by the city council may be evicted immediately from the facility by any city employee who has been granted that authority by city council. Any person who, having been given direction to leave by such an employee and who does not leave, is guilty of violating this chapter. 
(b)  Penalty. The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) and a jail sentence not to exceed thirty (30) days or both unless the violation is a greater offense under state, county or city criminal codes, in which case the violation shall be punished by the greater offense. 
(Ord. No. 600, 6-8-2009) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapter 13.04 - UTILITY SERVICES GENERALLY 

13.04.010 - Utility services-Generally. 
A.  Each structure within the city occupied as a residence shall be required to have running water and be connected to the city sewer system. Each residence and each business located within the city shall be required to subscribe to municipal garbage service. Each residence and each business using the city sewer system must purchase its water from the city. Any person, corporation or business desiring any utility service furnished by the city, including water, sewer or garbage collection, shall make application for the same to the city council. Such application shall contain the applicant's name, address and the uses for which such service is desired. A separate application shall be made for each premises to be served. The applicant shall abide by the rules and regulations established by the city council, relative to utility service in effect at the time of such application and as they may be revised from time to time in addition to conditions and agreements as the council shall deem advisable. Obtaining any of the services above set forth without paying for such services shall be a class 2 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or up to thirty (30) days in jail, or both. 
B.  Each day that a person receives water, sewer or garbage services from the city without paying for such services shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. 549, 2002) 
13.04.020 - User responsible for operation and maintenance of water and sewer lines. 
    The city shall be responsible for the maintenance and proper operation of the water and sewer mains only. Any other water or sewer line including the corporation valves attached to the mains shall be the exclusive responsibility of the property owner. In the event that a property owner must excavate to repair a line, it shall be his or her responsibility to fill in such excavation to the satisfaction of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the city to replace the pavement displaced by such excavation. 
(Prior code § 10-1-10) 
13.04.030 - City not liable for damage. 
    No claim shall be made against the city by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or apparatus, or for any other damage that may result from shutting off water for repairing or any other purpose, or for any variation in pressure, or ram of water from mains, and no reduction will be made from regular rates because of leaking pipes or fixtures. 
(Prior code § 10-1-11) 
13.04.040 - Subject to state and federal law. 
    Should the city be unable to collect money due on water, garbage collection or sewer bills due to bankruptcy proceedings, or other statutes or regulations of federal or state government, if allowable, the city shall require a reasonable deposit set by the city council to be paid by the person discharged from the debt to assure payment of money due to the city in the future. All provisions of this title shall be subject to applicable state and federal law. 
(Prior code § 10-1-12) 
13.04.050 - Rates. 
    Utility rates shall be set by the city council and placed on file at the office of the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 10-1-2) 
13.04.060 - Monthly billings. 
    Bills for water, garbage collection and sewer services shall be sent monthly, the amounts to be paid to the finance officer; who shall keep a true and accurate account of all receipts and collections. 
(Prior code § 10-1-3; Ord. No. 630, 11-10-2014) 
13.04.070 - Customers of the city. 
    In buildings that contain more than one housing unit, such as apartments or duplexes, each unit shall be considered as one billable customer of city services and shall be charged the same rates for municipal water, sewer and garbage collection services as any other billable customer. Each mobile home, whether in a trailer court or not, shall be considered as one billable customer of city services and shall be charged the same rates. In every instance, billings shall be sent to and shall be the legal responsibility of the record owner of the real property thereof. 
(Prior code § 10-1-4) 
13.04.080 - Delinquent bills-Notice to customer. 
A.  After fifteen (15) days from postmark of the bill, if the bill remains unpaid, a ten (10) percent penalty shall be added to the bill. 
B.  If the bill remains unpaid for twenty (20) days or longer, the customer shall be sent a shut-off notice stating: 
1.  That the bill remains unpaid; 
2.  That the bill must be paid by specified date and time or water service will be disconnected and an additional fifty dollar ($50.00) fee will be added as an off/on fee to be paid before reconnection. 
C.  As an alternative, the customer may reach an agreement with the city finance office as to a payment plan or request a hearing with the city council. 
D.  Service will be discontinued after the hearing, should the city council find no grounds for not doing so. 
E.  Refusal of the customer to accept any notice, or the post office's statement that delivery cannot be made because customer cannot be found, or that any notice was unclaimed, shall constitute service upon the customer. 
(Prior code § 10-1-5; Ord. No. 603, 12-28-2009; Ord. No. 630, 11-10-2014) 
13.04.090 - Payment plans. 
    The mayor and the city finance officer are hereby authorized to enter into agreements with customers as to a mutually satisfactory payment plan for delinquent bills. Failure by a customer to comply with the terms of an agreement entered into with the city shall cancel the agreement and the city may proceed with the procedures under this chapter for termination of service. 
(Prior code § 10-1-6) 
13.04.100 - Termination of service. 
    Should no payment plan be reached or the delinquent customer fails to show cause why service should not be terminated, the city council after the time set for the hearing shall order that the service be terminated without further notice to the customer. Termination of service shall be accomplished at any time, day, or month of the year for cause as determined by the city council. 
(Prior code § 10-1-7) 
13.04.110 - Penalty. 
    Should termination of service be necessary, before service is resumed, the city shall be paid in full for delinquent bills and the customer shall be charged a fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty, fine. 
(Prior code § 10-1-8) 
13.04.120 - Tampering with city equipment. 
A.  Should the city discover damage to its equipment or an attempt to tamper with such equipment or an attempt to falsify the amount of water used, or the amount due the city for water, garbage collection or sewer services, the city may serve notice upon the customer as to a hearing that is to be held where the customer may show cause why service should not be discontinued. This notice shall state the reason for the hearing and the time and place it is to be held. 
B.  Should the city council find a violation of this section and that there is no justification for the violation, the city council may order immediate termination of service and service shall be reinstated only upon conditions established by the city council. 
(Prior code § 10-1-9) 
Chapter 13.08 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 

13.08.010 - City council-Duties. 
    The city council shall have the immediate control, protection and management of everything appertaining to the water works of the city and have all the powers and duties hereinafter enumerated. 
(Prior code § 10-3-1) 
13.08.020 - Employees-Appointment-Compensation. 
    The city council shall appoint all other regular employees of the water works, and fix the salaries or compensation of every person connected therewith. 
(Prior code § 10-3-2) 
13.08.030 - Water mains-Map. 
    The city council may provide and maintain a comprehensive map of all water mains, branches, extensions, hydrants, and gates, showing their location and size. Any changes of or additions to the water system require that the maps and records thereof be corrected and enlarged as the occasion may require. The map will be on file with the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 10-3-3) 
13.08.040 - Inventory and record. 
    The finance officer shall, at the end of each year, make and file with the city council, a complete inventory in detail, of all tools, implements, furniture, and other articles of personal property belonging to the water department. He or she shall also keep in a book provided therefor, records, with a suitable diagram showing the location, number and size of all taps in the main and service pipes connecting therewith, and such other records as he or she may be directed. 
(Prior code § 10-3-4) 
13.08.050 - Permit. 
    Any person desiring to make service connection with the water system shall make application in writing to the finance officer in such form as the city council may prescribe, and pay to the finance officer the fee for tapping the main as is hereinafter provided for. The application shall be filed in the office of the finance officer. Upon the filing of the application and the payment of the fee, a permit shall be issued authorizing the connection to be made at the place provided for therein. No tap shall be made until a permit is issued there for. 
(Prior code § 10-3-5) 
13.08.060 - Fees for connection. 
    The city council is hereby authorized by resolution to prescribe a schedule of fees for making a tap upon the city water mains and the connections to the curb stop. 
(Prior code § 10-3-6) 
13.08.070 - Repair of service. 
    When any iron service pipe breaks or leaks between the corporation cock and meter, such iron service pipe must be replaced with copper or one hundred sixty (160) pounds per square inch pipe, and all service pipes between the corporation cock and the meter hereafter installed, or changed shall be copper or one hundred sixty (160) pounds per square inch pipe; and if copper pipe is used, the same shall be extra heavy, soft copper pipe known as "Type K" stamped thereon. 
(Prior code § 10-3-7) 
13.08.080 - Cut offs. 
    All stop boxes and cut offs for controlling the supply of water to consumers shall be placed approximately six feet from the property line nearest to the main, where the tap is to be made with the top of the stop box even with the grade of sidewalk or parking. However, this rule shall not apply where the water supply is controlled by a valve in the street which must be manholed. All such cut offs are under the control of the city. The user or owner of the premises supplied with water shall be responsible for any damage to the curb box. 
(Prior code § 10-3-8) 
13.08.090 - Meter required-Fees. 
    All places supplied with water shall be metered by a meter furnished by the city and of a type approved by the city council. All meters shall be tested before installation. The owner of the premises where the meter is to be installed shall pay the finance officer a sum in an amount equal to the cost of such meter. Payments shall be made in advance of installation to the city to insure the payment of all water rent and other charges occasioned by such water service. 
(Prior code § 10-3-9) 
13.08.100 - Repair and return of meters. 
A.  The city will make all necessary repairs to meters, and all repairs to the meters shall be made at the expense of the owner of the premises or user, and may be charged against the rental account of such owner or user and become payable as water rent. 
B.  When any meter is returned it shall be determined the amount of damage, if any, to the same and the cost of repairing such meter The finance officer shall subtract from the deposit the amount of such damages or repairing as determined, any amount due the city for water rent, any amount due the city for any cause arising out of such water service, and return the balance. 
(Prior code § 10-3-10) 
13.08.110 - Placing of meters and cut off valves. 
    All meters shall be suitably placed on service pipe, with a compression stop and waste on the inlet side and next to the meter, so as to be easy to access and whenever possible not to exceed two feet from the wall or place where the service pipe enters the building or structure. The meter shall be kept free from all obstructions so that the same may be easily read and inspected, and shall be protected from freezing or other damage. The cut off valve shall have a handle or wrench attaching thereto for the purpose of turning same, and must be kept accessible at all times. One inch and larger meters shall have cut off valves on both inlet and outlet side. Meters of two-inch size or larger shall have a tee with a one-inch opening inserted between meter and stop valve on outlet side of meter. 
(Prior code § 10-3-11) 
13.08.120 - Owner responsible for pipes and fixtures. 
    All owners must at their own expense, keep their service pipe from the point of connection with the corporation cock and all other apparatus in good working order, and properly protected from frost and other damage. No claim shall be made against the city by reason of the breaking of any of the service pipes or apparatus, or for any other damage that may result from any shutting off or turning on of water, or for any variation in pressure. Water shall not be wasted or improperly used and no reduction will be made from rates because of leaking pipes or fixtures or for any other cause. 
(Prior code § 10-3-12) 
13.08.130 - Notice to discontinue required. 
    Owners or consumers desiring to discontinue the use of water shall give notice thereof to the finance officer, and the minimum charge for water rent as provided by the city council shall in all cases apply until such notice is given and the water service discontinued, regardless of whether the premises are occupied and used or not. Upon the receipt of such notice, it shall be the duty of the police chief to at once shut off the water at the curb cock, and the water shall not be turned on again unless a fee is paid to cover the expense of shutting off and turning on. The fee shall be in an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 10-3-13) 
13.08.140 - More than one consumer from one service. 
    Two or more premises cannot be supplied from the same service pipe unless each premises has its own curb cock. Owners of buildings who lease or subdivide, are responsible for all water used in the premises. If more than one meter is placed upon one service pipe, the piping must be arranged such that each meter can be set on separate pipe lines, and shall be so placed that no one of them shall measure water which has passed through another meter. 
(Prior code § 10-3-14) 
13.08.150 - Must not permit others to use water. 
    No consumer shall permit the owner or occupant of any other premises to use water from his or her service, except by special permission from the city council. 
(Prior code § 10-3-15) 
13.08.160 - Valve between water and boiler. 
    When a meter is placed on pipe connected to a boiler or other hot water apparatus, an approved check and relief valve must be placed between such meter and the boiler or other hot water apparatus. 
(Prior code § 10-3-16) 
13.08.170 - Building purpose. 
    Contractors, builders, or others desiring water for building purposes, must make application to the finance officer therefor. 
(Prior code § 10-3-17) 
13.08.180 - Testing meters. 
    In case there is any doubt of the accuracy of any meter on the part of the consumer, he or she may have the meter tested by the city. If the meter should prove to be more than five percent fast, proper deductions will be made from the bill for the preceding period. In case the meter is more than five percent slow, the proper amount will be added to the bill. 
(Prior code § 10-3-18) 
13.08.190 - Meter reading. 
    The water commissioner or designated person shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to enter the premises or buildings of the consumer for the purpose of reading meters and to examine water pipes and fixtures, and the manner in which water is used, and the city reserves the right to require the owner or user to set or remove a meter or change its location whenever it is deemed advisable to do so. And the owner or occupant of such premises must at all times, frankly and without concealment, answer all questions put to them by such representative of the city pertaining to use of the water and its consumption. If it is the opinion of the city staff that the water is wasted on account of negligence, want of repairs, or for any other reason he or she shall give verbal or written notice thereof to the consumer or owner to make the necessary repairs or changes and if such waste is not repaired within twenty-four (24) hours after the notice is given, the water will be shut off and shall not be turned on again until so ordered. If the waste of the water is great or when damage is likely to result from leakage, the water will be turned off immediately. The water will be turned off for any willful or persistent violation of the rules in force in relation to the use thereof. In either case, when the water is cut off, the water shall not be turned on again until a penalty in an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer has been paid. Such amount shall go to the credit of the water fund. 
(Prior code § 10-3-19) 
13.08.200 - Meters failing to register. 
    In cases where water meters fail to register the amount of water passing through them by being stopped up or from any cause whatever, the quantity used shall be determined and the charge made based upon the average amount used during two or more preceding periods of similar length. 
(Prior code § 10-3-20) 
13.08.210 - Boxes for meters. 
    All meters located outside of cellars must be placed in boxes. All such outside meter boxes must be constructed of brick, stone, cement, or other material other than wood, and be not less than three feet long and two and one-half feet wide, inside measurement, and must be provided with two close fitting covers so arranged as to provide a dead air space between each cover, and with the steps to enable one to descend into the box. The top of the meter box shall be at grade. 
(Prior code § 10-3-21) 
13.08.220 - Interfering with fire hydrants. 
    No person except the chief of the fire department shall open, take water from, or in any way interfere with, injure, break, or deface any fire hydrant belonging to the water plant of the city. 
(Prior code § 10-3-22) 
13.08.230 - Only licensed plumbers allowed. 
    No person except the water commissioner, a regularly licensed plumber, or his or her employee shall be permitted to do any work on any pipes or connections made with the mains of or in any way connected with the water supply of the city, and no plumber shall directly or indirectly allow any other person to do any work on the appliances under his or her license. All such plumbers shall be governed by all the rules and regulations of this chapter, the National Plumbing Code, and South Dakota statutes. 
(Prior code § 10-3-23) 
13.08.240 - Breaking seals. 
    No person shall break any seal upon any meter, valve, private fire hydrant, or other fixtures that may be sealed. Provided that the seals on private fire hydrants and private fire protection valves may be broken in case of fire, and when so broken shall be reported to the chief of police within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Prior code § 10-3-24) 
13.08.250 - Pipes inspected before covered. 
    No water pipes laid underground shall be covered and the trenches filled until after the water has been turned into such pipes and the pipes shall have been tested and found to be water tight and below frost line, except when otherwise specially permitted. 
(Prior code § 10-3-25) 
13.08.260 - May shut off water to make repairs. 
    In case of leaks or other accidents to pipes, or other apparatus connected with the city water works, plumbers may shut off the water to make necessary repairs, but in all cases where it is necessary to repair or remove a water meter, notice must be given to the chief of police and no plumber or other person shall remove any meter from any premises or change the location of any meter in any premises without first receiving a permit therefore from the finance officer. In all cases, when plumbers make repairs to pipes or fixtures on any premises, they shall leave the water turned on or turned off as they found it to be when they entered upon the premises to make such repairs. 
(Prior code § 10-3-26) 
13.08.270 - Leave water turned off. 
    In no case shall any plumber after the completion and test of any plumbing job, if it be the first installation of service pipe, leave the water turned on but in all cases the stop cock at the curb shall be shut off. 
(Prior code § 10-3-27) 
13.08.280 - Fires. 
    In case of fire, the chief of the fire department shall have the full management and control for the time being of all mains, gates, and fire hydrants, and it shall be the duty of the chief of police to carry out any lawful order of the fire department in relation to the waterworks. 
(Prior code § 10-3-31) 
13.08.290 - Hydrants. 
    Any person desiring to lay large pipes for hydrant or hose couplings to be used only in case of fire, will be permitted to connect with the street main at their own expense upon application to the finance officer, and under his or her direction, and will be allowed to use the water for fire purposes only, free of charge; but all such pipes must be provided with a suitable valve, which must be sealed, and a stop and waste cock attached at the bottom on the inside of the building. In case the seal is broken for the extinguishment of fire, the party must immediately give notice to the chief of police, and in case the seal shall have been broken for any other use, the party offending shall be subject to a fine in an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 10-3-32) 
13.08.300 - Drinking fountains. 
    Service pipes to all outdoor drinking fountains are to be provided with a stop cock or street valve which shall be under the exclusive control of the city. 
(Prior code § 10-3-33) 
13.08.310 - Use without meter unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use any water from the city waterworks except through a mater regularly installed under the provisions of this chapter or turn the water on or off at any curb cock or street valve without the permission of the city council. 
(Prior code § 10-3-34) 
13.08.320 - Water-Restrictions. 
    The city council shall have the right to limit or prohibit temporarily the use of water from the city distribution system for any purpose excepting domestic purposes within the dwellings of consumer or in business establishments during emergencies in the event of plant breakdown, prolonged drought, or shortage of water supply for any reason to the end that fire protection efficiency may be maintained at its maximum. The city will attempt to notify affected utility customers if time permits of any such limitation. Any person violating the terms of such prohibition or restriction after such notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalties in Chapter 1.16. Water service to the premises involved may be discontinued entirely during such emergency. 
(Prior code § 10-3-35) 
13.08.330 - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall in addition to the ordinary penalties prescribed for violation of this codebook, be subject to having water service turned off from the premises of such person, and service shall not be restored until there has been full compliance of this chapter and the payment of such fees for restoring service as may be provided by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-3-36) 
Chapter 13.12 - SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 

13.12.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    "Approving authority" means the city council or its duly authorized board, agent or representative. 
    "Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation or organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which received the discharge of soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, the building sewer also being called house connection. 
    "Combined sewer" means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
    "Easement" means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    "Floatable oil" means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    "Garbage" means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving foods. 
    "Hearing board" means the board appointed according to provisions of Section 13.12.080. 
    "Industrial user" means: 
A.  Any non-governmental user of publicly owned treatment works which discharges more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of sanitary wastes or a volume of processed waste or combined processed and sanitary wastes equivalent to twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of sanitary wastes. Sanitary wastes shall be defined as the wastes discharged from the average residential user in the city. The strength of the average residential waste discharged in the city is as defined in "normal strength domestic wastewater." These concentrations shall be applied in determining equivalent volume or processed waste or combined discharges of sanitary and processed waste or combined discharges of sanitary and processed wastes, or 
B.  Any non-governmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases of sufficient quantities either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works. 
    "Industrial wastes" means the wastewater from industrial processes, or trade, or business as distinguished from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
    "May" is permissive. 
    "Municipality" means the city or any authorized person or board acting in its behalf. 
    "Natural outlet" means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    "Normal strength domestic wastewater" means normal strength waste water for the city in which the average concentration of suspended materials and five-day BOD is established at not greater than two hundred fifty (250) and two hundred (200) parts per million respectively, by weight. Such wastewater does not include infiltration and/or inflow, and it is composed of domestic wastewater. 
    "NPDES permit" means the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit held by the city. This permit, which establishes limits on quality and quantity of discharges from the city treatment works, was issued by the state and federal governments in accordance with the provisions of the federal water pollution control act (the act), as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq). 
    "Parts per million" means a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallous of water. Parts per million and milligrams per liter (mg/L) shall be synonymous terms. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
    "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ion, in grams, per-liter of solution. 
    "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than half an inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    "Public sewer" means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
    "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
    "Shall" is mandatory. 
    "Slug" means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
    "Storm drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
    "Stormwater runoff" means that portion of rainfall or snowmelt that is drained to the storm drains or otherwise does not evaporate or enter the groundwater. 
    "Sump pump" means a pump for disposing of storm drainage or ground water collected by foundation drains or seepage to a common point. 
    "Superintendent" means the superintendent of wastewater facilities, and/or of wastewater treatment works, and/or of water pollution control of the city, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    "Suspended solids" means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and that is removeable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater". 
    "Unpolluted water" means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    "Wastewater" means the spent water of the community. "Sewage" is synonymous with wastewater. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present in the city's sanitary sewers. 
    "Wastewater facilities" means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
    "Wastewater treatment works" means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. "Waste treatment plant," "wastewater treatment plant" and "water pollution control plant" are synonymous with "wastewater treatment works." 
    "Watercourse" means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
    Other terms and abbreviations used herein which are not specifically defined by law shall be construed in conformance with the context and commonly accepted professional engineering usage thereof. 
(Ord. 443 Art. I, 1988) 
13.12.020 - Use of public sewers-Required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
B.  It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. Cesspools are defined as those facilities prohibited by ARSD 34:04:01:12. 
D.  The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the municipality is hereby required at the owners expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within two hundred (200) feet of the building, as provided by ARSD 34:04:01:03, which requires hook-up when the public sewer is within two hundred (200) feet of the building. 
(Ord. 443 Art. II, 1988) 
13.12.030 - Private wastewater disposal. 
A.  Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 13.12.020(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the approving authority. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications approved by the South Dakota Department of Water and Natural Resources, and other information as are deemed necessary by the approving authority. A permit and inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
C.  A permit for a private wastewater disposal system is not effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the approving authority. The approving authority shall be allowed to inspect the work at any state of construction and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the approving authority when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the approving authority. 
D.  The type, capacities, locations and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the South Dakota Department of Water and Natural Resources. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than forty-three thousand, five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet, when potable water is supplied by a private water supply system, or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet when the potable water is supplied by a public water supply. No septic tank or other private disposal system shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
E.  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in subsection (D) of this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within ninety (90) days in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
F.  The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the municipality. 
G.  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. 443 Art. III, 1988) 
13.12.040 - Sanitary sewers, building sewers and connections. 
A.  No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer, whether the same shall be a sanitary sewer or a storm sewer, appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the approving authority. 
B.  There shall be two classes of building permits: 
1.  For service to residential and commercial; 
2.  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes; 
    In either case, the owner(s) or his or her agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the approving authority. A permit and inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time of the application is filed. 
C.  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the municipality from any loss or damage that may directly of indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer system. 
D.  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except that where on building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building, and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the municipality does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection. 
E.  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the approving authority, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
F.  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary sewers including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pie, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable regulations of the city. In the absence of suitable code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the South Dakota Plumbing Code and the Design Criteria for Sanitary Sewers as published by the South Dakota Department of Water and Natural Resources, shall govern such matters. 
G.  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
H.  No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, sump pumps or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to public sanitary sewer, unless such connection is approved by the approving authority for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
I.  The connection of the building sewer in the public shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or in the absence thereof the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the South Dakota Plumbing Code and the Design Criteria for Sanitary Sewers as published by the South Dakota Department of Water and Natural Resources. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and must be verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the approving authority before installation. 
J.  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the approving authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the approving authority or its representative. 
K.  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the approving authority. 
(Ord. 443 Art. IV, 1988) 
13.12.050 - Use of public sewers. 
A.  No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sanitary sewer, except polluted stormwater runoff from limited areas may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the approving authority. 
B.  Stormwater other than that exempted under subsection (A) of this section and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the approving authority and in accordance with provisions of the current state and federal regulations, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
C.  No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public sewers: 
1.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
2.  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids , liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal system, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard in or have an adverse effect on the holding cells receiving discharge from the sewer system; 
3.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of wastewater works; 
4.  Solid or vicious substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstructions to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, woods, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
5.  Any wastewaters that would directly or indirectly result in a violation of the national pollution discharge elimination system permit as issued to the city. 
D.  The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal sewer systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process equipment, or holding cells, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The approving authority may set limitations lower than the limitations established below if, in its opinion, such more stringent limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming this opinion as to acceptability, the approving authority will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers. The wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the approving authority are as follows: 
1.  Wastewater having a temperature of higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius); 
2.  Wastewater containing more than twenty-five (25) milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or product or mineral oil origin; 
3.  Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or grease; 
4.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded in accordance with the definition of "properly shredded garbage" in Section 13.12.010. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers; 
5.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; 
6.  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the approving authority; 
7.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established by the approving authority in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
8.  Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a "slug" as defined in Section 13.12.010; 
9.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; 
10.  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
E.  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (D) of this section, and which in the judgment of the approving authority may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, holding cells or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the approving authority may: 
1.  Reject the wastes; 
2.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
3.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
4.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of subsection (J) of this section. 
    When considering the above alternative, the approving authority may give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If the approving authority permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the approving authority. 
G.  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified in subsection (D)(3) of this section or any flammable wastes, sand or any other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority and shall be located so as readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captivated material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the approving authority. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner(s) personnel must be performed by currently licensed water disposal firms. 
H.  Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at his or her expense. 
I.  When required by the approving authority, the owner(s) of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structures, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the approving authority. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
J.  The approving authority may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These requirements may include: 
1.  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
2.  Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
3.  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
4.  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control; 
5.  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
6.  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; 
7.  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer. 
K.  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the approving authority. 
L.  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the approving authority and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. 443 Art. V, 1988) 
13.12.060 - Tampering with equipment. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned in the Roberts County Jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days or shall be subject to both of such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 443 Art. VI, 1988) 
13.12.070 - Powers and authority of inspections. 
A.  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the municipality bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the city wastewater collection system. If the industry claims that such information is privileged or constitutes a trade secret or patentable process, the industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
C.  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (A) of this section, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the municipality shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the municipal employees, and the municipality shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by municipal employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury and property damage asserted against the company growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligent, willful, wanton or other failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in Section 13.12.050 (I). 
D.  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the municipality bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the municipality holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. 443 Art. VII, 1988) 
13.12.080 - Hearing board. 
A.  A hearing board shall be appointed if requested and agreed to by the parties to any dispute hereunder for arbitration of differences between the approving authority and sewer users on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this chapter by the approving authority. The cost of the arbitration will be divided equally between the municipality and the sewer user. 
B.  One member of the board shall be a registered professional engineer, with experience in design or in operation of wastewater treatment facilities, one member shall be representative of industry or manufacturing enterprise; one member shall be an attorney admitted to practice law within the state of South Dakota; and one member shall be selected at large for his or her interest in accomplishing the objectives of this chapter. 
(Ord. 443 Art. VIII, 1988) 
13.12.090 - Sump pumps and drain tile-Prohibited. 
A.  Sump Pumps. No person shall connect any pipe, hose, or sump pump to any part of the sewer system of the city so that water is pumped directly or indirectly into the sewer system. It is allowable to pump water onto the ground, streets or alleys where such pumping does not harm any other person, street of alley or cause a nuisance. 
B.  Drain Tile. It is unlawful for any person to in any way connect any drain tile to the sewer system of the city either directly or indirectly. 
C.  Winter Exemption. Sump pumps may be connected to the sewer system during the months of October through April of each year. 
D.  Contractors. No contractor shall commit any act made unlawful by subsections (A) or (B) of this section on their own behalf or as the agent or employee of any person. 
E.  Landowners-Tenants. Any landowner or tenant of another who violates the terms of subsections (A) or (B) of this section personally or hires or induces another to do so shall be in violation of this chapter. 
F.  Violation-Separate Counts. Each day that a sump pump remains connected to a sewer of the city or each day that a drain tile remains connected to a sewer of the city shall constitute a separate violation of this section. Each day a sump pump or a drain tile remains connected to the sewer system of the city shall constitute a separate violation for the contractor who so installed the system. 
G.  Inspection. Each and every person and/or business connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city agrees to allow a voluntary inspection of the premises so connected at any reasonable time from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday by agents of the city to determine if there is any violation of this section on the premises. Consent to such inspection is granted by each person subscribing to sewer service from the city. 
H.  Penalty. Each and every violation of this section shall be punishable by a maximum penalty of thirty (30) days in jail and a two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine. 
(Ord. 478, 1993) 
13.12.100 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except Sections 13.12.060 and 13.12.090 shall be served by the municipality with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof, not to exceed sixty (60) days. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
B.  Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (A) of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
C.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the municipality for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the municipality by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. 443 Art. IX, 1988) 
Chapter 13.16 - SEWER USE CHARGES 

13.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to generate sufficient revenue to pay all costs of the operation and maintenance of the complete wastewater system. The costs shall be distributed to all users of the wastewater system in proportion to each user's contribution to the total loading of the treatment works. Factors such as strength (BOD and SS), volume and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included as the basis for the user's contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs to each user (or user class). 
(Ord. 453 § 1, 1990) 
13.16.020 - Determining the total annual cost of operation and maintenance. 
    The city, or its engineers, shall determine the total annual cost of operation and maintenance of the wastewater system which is necessary to maintain the capacity and performance, during the service life of the treatment works, for which such works were designed and constructed. The total annual cost of operation and maintenance shall include but need not be limited to, labor, repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power sampling, laboratory tests and a reasonable contingency fund. 
(Ord. 453 § 2, 1990) 
13.16.030 - Determining the user's wastewater contribution percentage. 
A.  The city, or its engineer, shall determine each user's average daily volume of wastewater, which has been discharged to the wastewater system, which shall then be divided by the average daily volume of all wastewater discharged to the wastewater system, to determine each user's volume contribution percentage. The amount used as the total average daily volume of wastewater shall exclude infiltration and inflow. The city or its engineers shall determine each user's average daily poundage of five-day, twenty (20) degree Centigrade biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) which has been discharged to the wastewater system which shall be divided by the average daily poundage of all five-day BOD discharged to the wastewater system to determine each user's BOD contribution percentage. 
B.  The city, or its engineers, shall determine each user's average suspended solids (SS) poundage which has been discharged to the wastewater system which then shall be divided by the average daily poundage of all suspended solids discharged to the wastewater system, to determine the user's volume contribution percentage, BOD contribution percentage and suspended solids contribution percentage shall be multiplied by the annual operation and maintenance costs for wastewater treatment of the total volume flow, of the total five-day twenty (20) Centigrade BOD and of the suspended solids, respectively. 
(Ord. 453 § 3, 1990) 
13.16.040 - Determining a surcharge system for users with excess BOD and SS. 
    The city, or its engineers, will determine the average suspended solids (SS) and biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) daily loadings for the average residential user. The city or its engineers will assess a surcharge rate for all non-residential users discharging wastes with BOD and SS strengths greater than the average residential user. Such users will be assessed a surcharge sufficient to cover the costs of treating such user's above normal strength wastes. Normal strength wastes are considered to two hundred (200) P.P.M. BOD and two hundred fifty (250) P.P.M. SS. The surcharge rate structure for such above normal strength waste dischargers is attached (see Appendix A). 
(Ord. 453 § 4, 1990) 
13.16.050 - Determining each user's wastewater service charge. 
    Each non-residential user's wastewater treatment cost contribution as determined in Sections 13.16.030 and 13.16.040 shall be added together to determine such user's annual wastewater service charge. Residential users may be considered to be one class of user and an equitable service charge may be determined for each user based upon an estimate of the total wastewater contribution of this class of user. The governing body may classify industrial, commercial and other non-residential establishments as a residential user, provided that the wastes from these establishments are equivalent to the wastes from the average residential user with respect to volume, suspended solids and BOD. Each user's wastewater treatment cost contribution will be assessed in accordance with the attached rate schedule (see Appendix B). 
(Ord. 453 § 5, 1990) 
16.16.060 - Wastewater facilities replacement fund. 
    A reserve fund called the wastewater facilities replacement fund is established within the wastewater utility fund for the purpose of providing sufficient funds to be expended for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories and appurtenances during the useful life (twenty (20) years) of the wastewater treatment facilities necessary to maintain the capacity and performance for which such facilities are designed and constructed (see Appendix C). 
(Ord. 453 § 6, 1990) 
16.16.070 - Payment of the user's wastewater service charge and penalties. 
A.  The city shall submit an annual statement to the user for the user's annual wastewater charge or one-fourth of the user's annual wastewater charge may be included with the quarterly water and/or wastewater utility billing. The city shall add a penalty of ten (10) percent if the bill remains unpaid after ten (10) days of postmark of the bill. The city may send an informal notice, notifying the customer that the bill remains unpaid. If the bill remains unpaid for thirty (30) days or longer, the customer shall be sent a notice by certified mail or registered mail stating: 
1.  That the bill remains unpaid; 
2.  That the customer may appear before the city council at a designated time and place to show cause why the bill has not been paid; 
3.  That as an alternative, the customer may reach an agreement with either the mayor or the municipal finance officer as to a payment plan before the hearing date; 
4.  That service will be discontinued after the hearing, should the city council find no grounds for not doing so. 
B.  Notices shall be sent at least five days prior to the hearing. In the event that the building or part thereof receiving service, is occupied by a renter, the notice shall be sent both to the owner and the renter if the city is aware that a landlord/tenant relationship exists. 
C.  Refusal of the customer to accept notice, or the post office's statement that delivery cannot be made because the customer cannot be found, or that the notice was unclaimed, shall constitute service upon the customer. 
(Ord. 453 § 7, 1990) 
13.16.080 - Review of each user's wastewater service charge. 
    The city shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance as well as each user's wastewater contribution percentage not less often than every two years and will revise the system as necessary to assure equity of the service charge system established herein and to assure that sufficient funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater treatment works. If a significant user, such as an industry, has completed in plant modifications which would change that user's wastewater contribution percentage, the user shall present at a regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body, such factual information and the city shall then determine if the user's wastewater contribution percentage is to be changed. The city shall notify the user of its findings as soon as possible. 
(Ord. 453 § 8, 1990) 
13.16.090 - Notification. 
    Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to services of the wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. 453 § 9, 1990) 
13.16.100 - Change of rates. 
    After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city council of the city may from time to time by resolution change the rates set forth in "Appendix A," "Appendix B" and "Appendix C" which are by reference made a part of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 453 § 10, 1990) 
"APPENDIX A" 
SURCHARGE RATE STRUCTURE FOR ABOVE NORMAL STRENGTH WASTES 
    The City of Sisseton or its Engineers, will determine the average total suspended solids (SS) and five-day biochemical demand (BOD) daily loadings for the average residential user or in lieu of such a determination will consider the average residential strength wastes to be 200 mg/L BOD and 250 mg/L SS. The City of Sisseton, or its engineers, will assess a surcharge rate for all non-residential users discharging wastes with BOD and SS strengths greater than the average residential user. The surcharge will be sufficient to cover the costs of treating such users above normal strength wastes. Such users will pay an additional service charge of 9.60 cents per 1000 gallons for each 25mg/L over 200 mg/L of BOD and 7.70 cents per 1000 gallons for each 25mg/L over 250 mg/L SS. 
mg/L = milligrams per liter - parts per million (ppm) 
"APPENDIX B" 
RATE SCHEDULE 
Rates for residential users and nonresidential users located within the legal limits of the City of Sisseton: 
    Residential users are considered to be one class of user and are assessed a charge of $2.84 per 1,000 gallons per month. Nonresidential users with flows no greater than the average residential user's flows of 6,000 gallons per month and with 200 mg/L BOD and 250 mg/L SS will pay the same charge of $2.84 per 1,000 gallons per month as the average residential user. The minimum sewer bill for any class user will be $17.04 per month, or $2.84 per 1,000 gallons, whichever is greater. 
    Nonresidential users with volumes greater than the average residential user will pay an additional charge of $2.84 per 1,000 gallons per month for all flows greater than the average residential user's flow of 6,000 gallons per month. 
    Any nonresidential user with BOD and SS greater than the average residential user's strength of 200 mg/L BOD and 250 mg/L SS will pay a surcharge in accordance with the rates shown in the surcharge rate structure. 
Rates for residential users and nonresidential users located outside of the legal limits of the City of Sisseton: 
    Residential users are considered to be one class of user and are assessed a charge of $5.68 per 1,000 gallons per month. Nonresidential users with flows no greater than the average residential user's flow of 6,000 gallons per month and with 200 mg/L BOD and 250 mg/L SS will pay the same charge of $5.68 per 1,000 gallons per month as the average residential user. The minimum sewer bill for any class user will be $34.08 per month or $5.68 per 1,000 gallons, whichever is greater. 
    Nonresidential users with volumes greater than the average residential user will pay an additional charge of $5.68 per 1,000 gallons per month for all flows greater than the average residential user's flow of 6,000 gallons per month. 
    Any nonresidential user with BOD and SS greater than the average residential user's strength of 200 mg/L BOD and 250 mg/L SS will pay a surcharge in accordance with the rates shown in the surcharge rate structure. 
These rates will become effective January 1, 2015. The residential monthly sewer bill will be based on the water usage of January, February and March of each year. Nonresidential sewer bill will be based on actual water usage year-round. 
(Ord. No. 631, 11-10-2014) 
"APPENDIX C" 
WASTEWATER FACILITIES
REPLACEMENT FUND SCHEDULE 
    The reserve fund called the wastewater Facilities Replacement Fund established within the wastewater utility fund as an interest-bearing account shall be funded by a deposit of $2,600.00 per year obtained from the wastewater utility fund at the end of each fiscal year. 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING CODE 
Sections: 

15.04.010 - Repealed. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 634, adopted Sept. 14, 2015, repealed § 15.04.010, which pertained to adoption of the Uniform Building Code and derived from Ord. 541, 2002: prior code § 3-1-1. 
15.04.020 - Office of building official-Established. 
    The office of building official is hereby created and the executive official in charge shall be the public works director or, in his or her absence, the chief of the fire department. 
(Prior code § 3-1-2) 
15.04.030 - Right of entry for inspection. 
A.  Whenever any officer or employee of the city is authorized to enter any building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce any ordinance, the officer or employee may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same; provided, that the officer or employee shall effect entry in the manner provided in subsection (B) of this section, except in emergency situations, or when consent of the person having charge or control of such building or premises has been otherwise obtained. 
B.  If the building or premises to be inspected is occupied, the authorized officer or employee shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, the officer or employee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If consent to such entry is not given, the authorized officer or employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
C.  This section shall be controlling over any other ordinance or part of an ordinance on the same subject, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, unless such ordinance or part of an ordinance provides differently by an express reference to this section. 
(Ord. 524 §§ 1-3, 2002: prior code § 3-1-3) 
15.04.040 - Definitions. 
A.  Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the building code, it means the City of Sisseton. 
B.  Whenever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the building code, it means the city attorney for the city. 
(Prior code § 3-1-4) 
15.04.050 - Building committee-Appointment. 
    The mayor shall appoint a building committee which shall consist of two members of the city council of the city. 
(Prior code § 3-1-5) 
15.04.060 - Authority of committee. 
    All buildings and/or mobile homes constructed, repaired, or moved within the limits of the city or any buildings or mobile homes moved into or removed from the city limits or any other applicable contingencies covered in this chapter, shall be under the supervision and control of the building committee of the city and shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-1-6) 
15.04.070 - Fire district-Established-Zones. 
    The entire incorporated area of the city is hereby declared to be and is hereby established as a fire district and the fire district shall be known and designated as fire zones 1 and 2. 
A.  Fire Zone 1. The following are declared to be the fire limits in the city: All of Blocks Twenty-four (24), Twenty-five (25), Twenty-six (26), Forty (40), Forty-one (41), Forty-two (42), Fifty-seven (57), Fifty-eight (58), that part of Block Fifty-six (56) lying east of the railway right-of-way, Seventy-three (73), Seventy-four (74), Eighty-nine (89), One Hundred Five (105), and One Hundred Six (106). 
B.  Fire Zone 2. Fire zone 2 shall consist of all portions of the city not included in fire zone 1. 
(Prior code § 3-1-7) 
15.04.080 - Building permits required. 
A.  The mayor or the council together with the finance officer shall issue and sign permits according to the fee schedule set by the city council and on file at the finance officer's office. The chapter and sections of the code referring to permits are amended to read as follows: 
B.  No wall, structure, building, or part of building shall be constructed or added to, or any permanent fixture, including heat producing appliances, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, blower, exhaust systems, or conversion, and no building shall hereafter be enlarged or any permanent fixture, including heat producing appliances, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, blower, exhaust systems, or conversion units thereof, attached to such building, until a plan or proposed work statement of the material to be used, the proposed site of such structure, and the name of the owner of the property to be improved shall be submitted in duplicate to the city council by the contractor, builder, or owner; which shall also state the value or cost of such improvement. If the building committee is satisfied that the proposed improvement complies with the law and city ordinances, it may authorize issuing of a permit for such work, construction, or improvement. 
C.  The building official shall endorse his or her approval or disapproval on the application for building permit. If he or she recommends disapproval on the application for permit, he or she shall state the reasons therefore in writing, and file the same with the city finance officer. The city finance officer shall present the application to the city council at the next council meeting, and if the city council is satisfied that the proposed improvement complies with the law and city ordinances, it shall authorize the city finance officer to issue a permit for such work, construction, or improvement. 
D.  All permits shall recite therein the conditions and requirements under which the same are issued, one of which shall be that sidewalks, streets, alleys, and highways shall not be blocked, or partially blocked, unless permission is granted in the permit, and also that all debris shall be removed and not permitted to accumulate on the sidewalks, streets, alleys, or highways, and shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant not to engage in any construction except in accordance with the permit and the provisions of this chapter. If the value or cost of the improvement for which a permit has been issued shall exceed the cost or value of the amount stated in the application for permit and the permit granted, the contractor, or builder, shall furnish to the city finance officer an additional statement of the cost or value of such improvement. 
E.  It shall be the duty of the city finance officer to keep a file of all plans, specifications, and work statements upon which building permits are granted, with an appropriate index for the same. 
F.  No owner or contractor or builder shall attempt to proceed with any work or improvement of any kind for which a permit is herein required without first having obtained a permit therefore. 
G.  In addition to any other legal remedies open to the city, any person, owner, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof be subject to the penalties as set in Chapter 1.16. 
(Prior code § 3-1-8) 
15.04.090 - Permissible wooden structures in fire limits. 
    No frame or wooden structure shall hereinafter be built within the fire limits as defined herein, or as they may be hereafter established, except the following: 
A.  Temporary one-story frame buildings for use of builders; 
B.  Built by a retail lumberman upon his or her premises and which building must be removed from the premises within three days after completion. 
(Prior code § 3-1-9) 
Chapter 15.08 - PLUMBING CODE 
Sections: 

15.08.010 - Adoption. 
    In order to provide rules and regulations to assure safety in building projects within the city, pursuant to SDCL 9-33-4.1 the city adopts the Uniform Plumbing Code, 1997 edition. At least one copy of these regulations shall be kept on file with the city finance officer. 
(Ord. 542, 2002) 
Chapter 15.12 - ELECTRICAL CODE 
Sections: 

15.12.010 - Adoption. 
    In order to provide rules and regulations to assure safety in building projects within the city, pursuant to SDCL 9-33-4.1 the city adopts the 1996 National Electrical Code. At least one copy of these regulations shall be kept on file with the city finance officer. 
(Ord. 543, 2002) 
Chapter 15.16 - FIRE CODE 
Sections: 

15.16.010 - Adoption. 
    There is adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code, Abbreviated Edition, recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, being particularly the most current edition thereof and the whole thereof save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of which a copy of the code is on file in the office of the finance officer of the city, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 5-1-1) 
15.16.020 - Enforcement. 
    The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. 
(Prior code § 5-1-2) 
15.16.030 - Definition. 
    Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the code hereby adopted, it means the city of Sisseton. 
(Prior code § 5-1-3) 
15.16.040 - Storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks and bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases-Restricted. 
    The limits referred to in the code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, and the limits referred to in the code in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum is restricted, are hereby established as the limits set forth in Section 15.04.070. Liquid petroleum gases within the jurisdiction of the city shall be handled, transported, and stored in a safe manner. 
(Prior code § 5-1-4) 
15.16.050 - Modifications. 
    The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Prior code § 5-1-5) 
15.16.060 - Appeals. 
    Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the appeal. 
(Prior code § 5-1-6) 
15.16.070 - Rules and regulations for open burning, recreational fires and firewood. 
    This is a section regarding open burning, recreational fires and firewood, the rules and regulations for such open burning, recreational fires and firewood upon the lots, premises, and private or public places within the city are as provided by this section. 
    Open burning: It shall be unlawful to burn in any open or exterior space any garbage, refuse, leaves, wood or other matter within the city, except as hereinafter set forth. 
    Recreational fires: The burning of a recreational fire within city limits is a privilege granted by the city to citizens of the city and visitors to the city. This privilege may be revoked upon violation of one or more requirements as set forth in the provisions of this section, as follows: 
1.  A recreational fire is the burning of clean wood or charcoal, for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking or similar purposes. Unless meeting the specific requirements of this provision, bonfires shall not be deemed recreational fires and are expressly prohibited. Gas and charcoal grills are not deemed to be open fires or recreational fires and are not subject to this provision. 
2.  All recreational fires must be conducted on private property and shall not be conducted in or on alleys, streets or boulevards. 
3.  Recreational fires may be conducted on public property if a permit is granted by the fire department. 
4.  Recreational fires shall be conducted and contained in an earthen pit with sidewalls, a fireplace, a commercial grill or fire-walled device which, because of its structure will contain the fire. All recreational fires shall have fire screen which encloses the open fire designed to control the sparks from leaving the immediate fire area. 
5.  Recreational fires in commercial fire kettles or similar commercial devices shall not be conducted within ten (10) feet of any structure or combustible material. Recreational fires in commercial, open fire rings or constructed fire pits shall not be conducted within twenty (20) feet of any structure or combustible material. 
6.  Water buckets, shovels, garden hoses or a fire extinguisher (with a minimum 4-A rating) shall be readily available for use at a recreational fire. 
7.  Recreational fires shall be constantly attended by an adult person knowledgeable in the use of the fire extinguishing equipment and there shall be an adult person responsible for attending the fire until such fire has been completely extinguished. 
8.  Ashes shall not be placed in city garbage containers and must be taken to the solid waste facility by the person responsible for the recreational fire. 
9.  The fire department and the police department are authorized to require that a fire be immediately discontinued if such fire is determined by an officer of such department to constitute a hazardous condition. Should the fire department or the police department discontinue a fire, the fire department and/or police department may prohibit the occupant or property owner from having any future recreational fires within the city limits unless a permit is obtained from the fire department. 
10.  Excessive noise around a recreational fire or excessive smoke, either of which results in a complaint by one or more of the neighbors and is filed with the city may result in recreational fire privileges on the property being discontinued upon an order from the fire department or police department and/or a nuisance or disorderly conduct complaint being filed. 
11.  Violation of this provision shall subject the violator [to] Section 1.16.010 of the Municipal Code which provides for a maximum penalty of a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), thirty (30) days in jail, or both. 
    Firewood: For the purposes of this section, unless apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this section shall be defined as follows: 
    Cord of wood: A unit of quantity for cut fuel wood, equal to one hundred twenty-eight (128) cubic feet in a stack by measuring four feet by four feet by eight feet. 
    Firewood: Neatly stacked, burnable wood, cut into lengths of approximately one or two feet that require no further cutting of the wood prior to placing it in a wood burner or fireplace. 
    No person shall store firewood on residentially zoned property, except for use on the premises and in conformance with the following: 
1.  No more than three cords of firewood shall be stored at any time, without the written approval of the fire department. 
2.  The firewood must be cut and neatly stacked and may not be stacked closer than five feet to any property line and not higher than six feet from grade. 
a.  Exception: Firewood may be cut and neatly stacked on or near the lot line or against a fence, provided that it is no higher than the fence and that it is located a minimum of six feet from any structure on adjacent property. 
3.  All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly removed from the premises. 
4.  No person shall store firewood in such a manner or for such a long period of time that it becomes a nesting place for vermin or an eyesore or a danger to the property or to a neighbor's property. 
(Ord. No. 593, 8-18-2008) 
Chapter 15.18 - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 
Sections: 

15.18.010 - Designation of addresses. 
A.  Addresses for dwelling units and places of business on all public and private streets shall be assigned by the finance officer in accordance with the procedures adopted by the city. 
B.  The finance officer shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this chapter. 
(Ord. 564 § 1, 2003) 
15.18.020 - Posting of designated addresses. 
A.  The owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building to which an address has been assigned will be notified by the finance officer of the address assigned to the same at any time after the adoption of this chapter. 
B.  Within sixty (60) days after the receipt of such notification from the finance officer, the owner or occupant or person in charge of the structure to which an address has been assigned shall affix the address to the structure, or to a sign or number post, in such a way that the address can be clearly seen from the roadway. 
C.  It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge thereof upon affixing the new number to remove any different number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned to the structure by the finance officer. 
D.  Each principal building shall display the address assigned to the property on which the street is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate dwelling or unit must display a separate address. 
E.  Numbers and/or letters indicating the official address for each principal building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner as to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located, with letters painted or applied, of a contrasting color to the background, of not less than three inches (3?) in height. If a building or dwelling is situated in such a way that the address cannot be easily seen from the roadway in front of the structure or if the owner prefers, then a sign or address post may be used in front of the structure or at the entrance of the primary driveway and placed in such a way that it can easily be seen from the roadway. 
(Ord. 564 § 2, 2003) 
15.18.030 - New structures. 
A.  Addresses will be assigned to each proposed lot or tract on the surveyor's copies of final subdivision plats by the finance officer. 
B.  No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner or developer has procured from the finance officer of the city the official address of the premises. 
(Ord. 564 § 3, 2003) 
15.18.040 - Penalties. 
    In the event that the owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building refuses to comply with the terms of this chapter by failing to affix the address assigned within sixty (60) days after notification, or by failing to remove any old addresses affixed to such structure or primary driveway or elsewhere which may be confused with the address assigned thereto within said sixty (60) day period, he or she shall be punished by paying a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or thirty (30) days in jail. 
(Ord. 564 § 4, 2003) 
Chapter 15.20 - MOVING BUILDINGS 
Sections: 

15.20.010 - Permission to move building on streets. 
    It is unlawful for anyone to move any building into, along, or across any public street, alley, or highway within the city without first having obtained permission to do so in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 11-7-1) 
15.20.020 - Application. 
    Anyone desiring to move any building into, along, or across any public street, alley, or highway within the city, shall first apply in writing for permission to do so, to the office of the finance officer, fully stating the name of the applicant, the name of the owner of the building, the description of the lot on which it is to be moved, the street along which it is proposed to move such building, the time when such removal will take place, and the size of the building; which application shall be accompanied with a minimum sum in an amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer, to be deposited with the finance officer as a pledge or guarantee fund to protect the city against loss or damage to crossings, sidewalks, or other public or private property, or expense for protecting such property against the injuries that may be caused by such removal, to be returned to the person depositing same upon an official report of the condition of the streets, sidewalks, crossings, or other public or private property after such removal, made by the chief of police to the officer or employee to whom has been delegated the supervision of the streets. 
(Prior code § 11-7-2) 
15.20.030 - Finance officer to file application. 
    It shall be the duty of the finance officer to file such application upon the payment of the fee and to present such application to the members of the building committee, who shall act on and consider it, by either approving it, suggesting such requirements as will meet approval if made, or by refusing such application. Upon refusal of the committee to grant a permit, the applicant may appeal to the city council as a whole, and such decision as is arrived at by the council shall be final. 
(Prior code § 11-7-3) 
15.20.040 - Guarantee fund. 
    Whenever the officer or employee in charge of the streets shall decide from any examination of the application and from such other information as he or she may obtain, that the amount of the pledge or guarantee fund is not sufficient for ample protection of the city against the probable damages and expenses that may be caused by the removal of such building, the officer is hereby authorized and it shall be their duty to require the deposit of a sum larger than the minimum amount set by the council but not to exceed a maximum amount set by the city council and on file at the office of the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 11-7-4) 
15.20.050 - Permit-Contents. 
    On the receipt of the application as hereinbefore provided, the officer or employee to whom has been delegated the supervision of the streets may personally or through the chief of police, investigate the representations of the application and if such investigation is satisfactory, he or she shall approve the application by endorsement thereon and the finance officer shall thereupon issue to the applicant a permit in writing for the removal of such building along or across the streets, highways, or alleys to be designated by such officer or employee, the removal to be finished prior to the time stated in such permit. 
(Prior code § 11-7-5) 
15.20.060 - Refunding guarantee fund. 
    Before refunding the guarantee fund or any part thereof, it shall be the duty of the officer or employee in charge of the streets to examine the report of the chief of police and pay out of the fund or set aside for such purposes the amount claimed or ascertained as the damages for injuries to the public or private property, including the expenses for protection to electric, telegraph, and telephone wires as aforesaid, caused or occasioned by the removal of such building as aforesaid. 
(Prior code § 11-7-6) 
15.20.070 - Applicant must serve notice to owners of wires, etc. 
    If the permit includes streets, alleys, or highways on which are located, or across or along which are strung electric power lines or telephone wires, it shall be the duty of the applicant to provide to the city proof that all related utilities have been disconnected or that proper arrangements have been made. 
(Prior code § 11-7-7) 
15.20.080 - Permit required. 
    Prior to removing a building, a permit must first be approved by the city council. The permit application shall include all provisions of Section 15.20.020 of this chapter. When granting the permit, the council shall establish the fee based upon necessary supervision of the work, traffic control, cleanup costs incurred by the city, and the portion owed for any municipal bond redemption. 
(Prior code § 11-7-8) 
Chapter 15.24 - CONDEMNED BUILDINGS 
Sections: 

15.24.010 - Renting condemned building-Prohibited. 
    No person shall rent a building or structure to another knowing that the building or structure has been condemned by the city council, the board of health and public safety of the fire marshall. 
(Ord. 550 § 1, 2002: Ord. 465 § 1, 1992) 
15.24.020 - Occupying condemned building-Prohibited. 
    No person shall allow others to occupy a building or structure owned by or under control of that person knowing that the building or structure has been condemned by the city council, the board of health and public safety or the fire marshall. 
(Ord. 550 § 2, 2002: Ord. 465 § 2, 1992) 
15.24.030 - Entering condemned building-Prohibited. 
    No person shall enter or occupy a building or structure knowing that the building or structure has been condemned by the city council, the board of health and public safety or the fire marshall. 
(Ord. 550 § 3, 2002: Ord. 465 § 3, 1992) 
15.20.040 - Boarding required. 
    Once a building or structure has been condemned by the city council, the board of health and public safety or the fire marshall, the structure shall be securely boarded up or enclosed by the owner or person in control of the premises and it is unlawful for anyone to enter or remain on the premises of the building or structure without permission of the owner thereof, the city council, the board of health and public safety or the fire marshall. If the owner or person in control of the premises fails to board up or enclose any structure after notification by mail to do so, the city may, after the ten (10) day appeal period has elapsed, or after the condemnation order has been upheld to the city council, so secure the premises and charge the cost thereof against the premises as taxes. Any building or structure which has once been condemned by the city council, the board of health and public safety or the fire marshall shall be inspected and approved in writing by order of the entity which condemned such building or structure before the owner or person in control of the these premises may rent the building or structure or allow the same to be occupied. 
(Ord. 550 § 4, 2002: Ord. 465 § 4, 1992) 
15.24.050 - Penalty-Violation. 
    Violation of the terms of this chapter shall be a class 2 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), jail sentence of thirty (30) days in the county jail or both. Each day a violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. 550 § 5, 2002: Ord. 465 § 5, 1992) 
15.24.060 - Request for hearing. 
    Any person who feels that the action of the city council or city board or health and public safety in condemnation of any building or structure is unjust, unwarranted or in any way, improper the person shall have ten (10) days from the date he or she is given notice of the condemnation to request a hearing before the city council to determine the necessity for the order. Such request shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city finance officer. Upon receipt of a request for hearing as set forth above, the city finance officer shall set at a time and place for such hearing no later than thirty (30) days from the date of the request and the city council shall hold a hearing to determine the validity of the order condemning such property. 
(Ord. 550 § 6, 2002: Ord. 465 § 6, 1992) 
Chapter 15.28 - IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED OF DEVELOPERS 
Sections: 

15.28.010 - Purpose. 
    The city desires orderly growth which will benefit all citizens of the city and the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 351 § 1, 1978) 
15.28.020 - Approval and agreements. 
A.  Before a final plat may be approved by the city council, the owner shall execute and submit to the council an agreement, which shall be binding on his, hers, or their heirs, personal representative and assigns, that he or she shall cause no private construction on the land, except with approval of the city engineer, until all improvements required under this title have been petitioned for, arranged for or have been constructed. 
B.  No final plat shall be approved by the council without first receiving a report from the city engineer certifying that the improvements described herein, together with the agreements and documents required herein will meet the minimum requirement of all applicable ordinances. 
C.  A certified copy of the plat restrictions shall be filed with the register of deeds which shall include a provision that, in all instruments of sale or conveyance given before all street improvements have been made, the grantee shall agree to and approve such improvements and the assessment off their cost. 
(Ord. 351 § 2, 1978) 
15.28.030 - Financing of improvements. 
A.  City Finances When. Upon recommendation of the engineer and with the approval of the city council, any or all of the required improvements may be financed and assessed by the city pursuant to South Dakota Statutes. Length of assessment period and rate of interest shall be determined by the city council. 
B.  Financing by Developer. If deemed advisable and to be in the best interests of the city, the city council may require the developer to finance and pay for any or all improvements. Prior to the making of such required improvements, the owner or subdivider shall deposit with the city finance officer an amount equal to the city engineer's estimated cost of any or all such improvement which are to be financed by the developer, either in cash or an indemnity bond, with sureties to the satisfaction of the city, conditioned upon payment of all construction costs incurred by the city in making such improvements and all expense incurred by the city for engineering and legal fees and other expenses in connection with the making of much improvement. All improvements must be approved by the city. 
(Ord. 351 § 3, 1978) 
15.28.040 - Required improvements. 
    The following improvement shall be required and the appropriate party financially responsible for improvements: 
A.  Construction Obligated to City. The city will construct, furnish and install at city expense, the following improvements according to city specifications. Furnishing of these improvements shall be commensurate with available city funds for such work and according to programs and priorities as established by the city council. If the developer would desire any of these improvements sooner than the city would be able to furnish them, then the costs of the following improvements shall be paid for by the developer. 
1.  Storm Sewer Mains. Storm sewer mains will be constructed by the city as funds are available. Connections shall be made at the boundary of the subdivision, if available, or to some other approved discharge outlet. The developer shall secure or provide the necessary easements or discharge permits. This requirement shall not prevent the city from acquiring necessary easements by eminent domain. Any costs for such easements shall be borne by the developer. 
2.  Street Lighting. Street lighting shall be constructed by the city, preferably after curb and gutter have been installed. If additional or other type of lighting is desired by the developer, he or she shall pay the increased cost thereof. 
3.  Street Name and Traffic Signs. Street name signs and traffic control signs shall be installed by the city. 
B.  Developer Costs. The developer shall pay the proportionate amount of the following improvements on or for his or her subdivision or development unless otherwise agreed upon in writing between the developer and the city council. 
1.  Site Grading. Necessary site grading shall be accomplished by the subdivider. 
2.  Street Grading and Paving. Street grading and paving for the full width of right-of-way shall be accomplished by the subdivider. If no site grading is to be accomplished, the street grading and paving will be included with subsequent street improvements. Street grading and paving shall precede any under ground work. Where street grading is not to be immediately followed by street paving, the developer may be required to provide permanent grade markers at the right-of-way line of all streets of a standard approved by the city engineer. All streets must be paved within two years after commencement of work on the subdivision. 
3.  Curbs, Gutters and Sidewalks. Street improvements, including curb and gutter, four-foot wide sidewalks in all residential areas, boulevard sodding, inlets and leads, and paving, according to standard city specifications or as approved by the city engineer, shall be constructed. All required underground work shall have preceded any permanent street improvements. Any improvements on a county road shall be approved by the county engineer. 
    Temporary construction may, at the discretion of the city engineer, be required, for just cause, on any street, in any way of existing streets affected by the plat or improvements thereon, shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. All coats therein incurred, for either temporary access or reconstruction, shall be borne by the owner or subdivider. Half streets, if accepted, shall be improved as directed by the city engineer. 
4.  Sewer Construction. 
a.  Where city sewer is, or will be, available at the boundary of the subdivision, it shall be constructed according to city specifications. The cost of any required pumping stations, deemed necessary by the engineer, shall be assessed against the benefiting property. 
b.  Where it is neither practical nor economical for the city to extend city sewer, private sewage disposal facilities shall be constructed according to city and state specifications. Consideration shall be given to future availability of city sewer in such installations. Such information shall be recorded on the plat and in each deed so affected. 
5.  Water Main Construction. 
a.  Where city water is, or will be, available at the boundary of the subdivision, it shall be constructed according to city specifications. Main sizing shall be by the city engineer. All required hydrants and valves are to be included in the construction. 
b.  Where it is neither practical nor economical for the city to extend city water, private water supplies shall be constructed according to city and state specifications. 
(Ord. 351 § 4, 1978) 
15.28.050 - Variances. 
A.  The city council may grant a variance from the provisions of this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required herein below, the council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the council finds: 
1.  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land; 
2.  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; 
3.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is situated. 
B.  Applications for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the plat is filed for consideration by the council, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the council in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan. 
(Ord. 351 § 5, 1978) 
15.28.060 - Engineering. 
    All engineering shall be done by the city engineer or an engineer approved by the city. 
(Ord. 351 § 6, 1978) 
15.28.070 - Authority. 
    The city council upon the recommendation of the city engineer shall have the authority to adopt regulations to implement this chapter. 
(Ord. 351 § 7, 1978) 
15.28.080 - Violation. 
    Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 351 § 8, 1978) 
Chapter 15.32 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS 
Sections: 

15.32.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as: the mobile home ordinance of the city of Sisseton, South Dakota. 
(Ord. 551 § 1, 2002) 
15.32.020 - Administration. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the building committee of the city council for the city after which the committee shall submit their recommendations to the city council which shall have the final power to approve or disapprove the application. 
(Ord. 551 § 2, 2002) 
15.32.030 - Definitions. 
    "Mobile home" means a movable or portable unit, designed and constructed to be towed on its own chassis (comprised of frame and wheels), and designed to be connected to utilities for year-round occupancy. The term shall include: 
1.  Units containing parts that may be folded, collapsed, or telescoped when being towed and that may be expanded to provide additional cubic capacity, 
2.  Units composed of two or more separately towable components designed to be jointed into one integral unit capable of being separated again into the components for repeated towing, and 
3.  Units designed to be used for residential, commercial, educational or industrial purposes, excluding however recreational vehicles as described by South Dakota law. 
    "Mobile home court" means ten (10) or more spaces for mobile homes in an area designated for such use. The term "mobile home court" shall include the terms "trailer park," "trailer court" and "mobile home park." 
    "Structure" means any structure or building which is built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels of movable property is any kind which is affixed to the land. 
(Ord. 551 § 3, 2002) 
15.32.040 - General provisions. 
A.  No mobile home for residential purpose shall be permitted on any lot or lots of record within the city unless the lot or lots are part of an approved mobile home court as established herein. 
B.  Mobile homes shall be prohibited that: 
1.  Do not conform to the requirements of the vehicle code of the state of South Dakota, 
2.  Are in an unsanitary condition or having an exterior in bad repair, 
3.  Are structurally unsound and do not protect the inhabitants against all elements. 
C.  Every structure shall be developed and maintained in a safe, approved and substantial manner. The exterior of such structures shall be kept in good repair and shall be repainted or refinished when directed by the city. 
D.  All land areas shall be properly maintained: 
1.  Adequate drained, 
2.  Free from dust, 
3.  Clean and free from refuse, garbage, rubbish or debris. 
E.  No tents shall be erected or occupied. 
F.  There shall be no outdoor camping anywhere in the mobile home court. 
G.  No public address or loud speaker system shall be permitted. 
H.  Dogs and animals shall not be permitted to run at large within the mobile home court. 
I.  Access to mobile home courts shall be as approved by the city. 
J.  Advertising shall be limited to one sign not to exceed six square feet, with lighting, height and location as approved by the city. 
K.  The operator of every mobile home court shall maintain a registry of the mobile home court showing: 
1.  The name and address or each guest or permanent resident. 
2.  The make, type and license number of each mobile home and automobile. 
L.  No person shall erect, place, construct, reconstruct, relocate, alter, maintain, use, or occupy a cabana or structure in a mobile home court without the written consent of the owner or operator of the mobile home court. 
M.  All structures (fences, sidewalks, roads, storage space, cabana, remade or other) shall require a building permit. 
N.  The area beneath a mobile home coach shall be enclosed except that such enclosure must be openable for inspection. 
O.  Laundry and clothes shall be hung out to dry only on lines located in approved areas established and maintained exclusively for that purpose. 
P.  No more than ten (10) percent of all trailer sited shall be occupied by transient (less than seven days occupancy) coaches. 
Q.  No building, cabana, ramada, carport, awning, storage closet, cupboard or other structure shall be permitted on a transient trailer site except plumbing and electrical service connection. 
R.  Where mobile home court has a central community building with the following features: 
1.  Laundry drying areas and machines, 
2.  Laundry washing machines, 
3.  Showers, 
4.  Public toilets and lavatories. 
    Such buildings shall have central heating and be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 551 § 4, 2002) 
15.32.050 - Site plan requirements. 
A.  Five copies of a plot plan of the proposed mobile home court shall be submitted to the planning commission for its consideration. The plot plan shall be drawn to scale and showing: 
1.  Legal description and size in acres of the proposed mobile home court, 
2.  Location and size of all mobile home sites, dead storage areas, recreation areas, laundry drying areas, roadways, parking sites and all set-back dimensions (parking spaces, exact mobile home sites, etc), 
3.  Detailed landscaping plans and specifications, 
4.  Location and width of sidewalks, 
5.  Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface drainage, water systems, electrical service and gas service, 
6.  Location, size and character of each cabana and cabana site, 
7.  Location and size of all streets abutting the mobile home court and all driveways from such streets to the mobile home court, 
8.  Road construction places and specifications, 
9.  Plans for any and all structures, 
10.  Such other information as required or implies by these mobile home court standards or requested by public officials, 
11.  Name and address and developer, 
12.  Description of the method of disposing of garbage and refuse, 
13.  Detailed description of maintenance procedures and grounds supervision, 
14.  Description of construction plans (i.e. time involved, cost estimates, stage development, if any, and so on). 
(Ord. 551 § 5, 2002) 
15.32.060 - Design standards. 
A.  Site. 
1.  Each mobile home site shall contain at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the occupant: Width shall be no less than forty (40) feet; depth shall be no less than one hundred (100) feet. 
2.  The corners of each mobile home site shall be clearly marked and each site shall be numbered. 
3.  The area occupied by a mobile home shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the total area of a mobile home site; land may be occupied by a trailer, a vehicle, a building, a cabana, a ramada, a carport, an awning, a storage closet or cupboard or any structure; unoccupied land shall be landscaped. 
B.  Placement. 
1.  No coach shall be parked neither closer than five feet to the side lot lines nor closer than twenty (20) feet to the front lot line, or within twenty-five (25) feet of the rear lot line. 
2.  There shall be an open space of at least ten (10) feet between the sides of adjacent coaches. 
3.  Automobiles may park no closer than five feet to the side of any coach; automobiles shall not, however, be parked nearer than five feet to any side lot line. 
4.  No coach, off-street parking space, or building shall be located within twenty (20) feet of the exterior boundary of any mobile home court. 
5.  Mobile home sites with access to public streets shall conform to all setback and other requirements of the zoning district in which the site is located. 
C.  Utilities. 
1.  All mobile homes shall be connected to public water and sanitary sewer system or a water and sewer system approved by the state department of health. 
2.  All plans for disposal of surface storm water must be approved by the city. 
3.  All utility connections shall be as approved by the city. 
4.  The source of fuel for cooking, heating or other purposes at each mobile home site shall be as approved by the city. 
5.  All utilities shall be underground; there shall be no overhead wires or supporting poles except those essential for street or other lighting purposes. 
6.  No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of plumbing, electrical facilities, and related mobile home equipment. 
7.  The proposed method of garbage, waste and trash disposal must be as approved by the city. 
D.  Lighting. 
1.  Artificial light shall be maintained during all hours of darkness in all buildings containing public toilets, laundry equipment and the like. 
2.  The mobile home court grounds shall be lighted as approved by the city from sunset to sunrise. 
(Ord. 551 § 6, 2002) 
15.32.070 - Licensing of mobile home courts. 
A.  The city council shall establish an annual license for the operation of mobile home courts to assure that mobile home courts within the city conform to the requirements of this chapter and do not constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public. 
B.  The city council shall establish a license fee. The fee may be subject to periodic review and revision. 
C.  The license shall continue in effect for one calendar year unless revoked by the city council for failure of the mobile home court operator or owner to meet and maintain the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  The license shall be automatically reviewed at the end of the calendar year. 
E.  If the operator or owner of a mobile home court has not met and maintained the requirements of this chapter they shall be notified of the failure to meet the requirements of this chapter and shall be allowed a period of thirty (30) calendar days from the date of notification to correct all conditions not in conformance with this chapter. If after the thirty (30) day period, the condition of violation remains, the license shall be revoked and all fees forfeited. 
F.  A revoked license may be reissued upon compliance with the chapter and payment of full fees. 
(Ord. 551 § 7, 2002) 
15.32.080 - Variances. 
A.  The city council may grant a variance from the provisions of this chapter concerning the construction and maintenance of mobile home courts, when in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the council shall prescribe conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required herein below, the council shall take into account: 
1.  Whether there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of his or her land for a mobile home court; 
2.  Whether the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner in the construction or operation of a mobile home court; 
3.  Whether the granting of the variance will be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which the mobile home court is located or proposed to be located. 
B.  Application. An application for a variance shall be in writing and shall specifically designate what provisions of this chapter for which the applicant is seeking the variance. 
C.  Council Action. Before taking action on the application for a variance, the council may require the applicant to appear before it to provide additional information or answer questions concerning the application. The council may grant or deny in whole or in part the variance application. It may further grant a variance of a permanent nature or for a specified period of time. In granting a variance, the council may require certain conditions be complied with by the applicant which the council deems to be in the public interest. 
D.  Violation of Terms and Conditions of Variance. A violation of the terms and conditions of this section shall be a class 2 misdemeanor. It may also be grounds for revocation of the variance and/or revocation of the mobile home court license. The operation of a mobile home court in violation of this section is further declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city through any legal method. 
(Ord. 421 §§ 1-4, 1985) 
15.32.090 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  The owner of a building or premises in or upon which a violation of any provision of this chapter has been committed or shall exist or the lessee of any part of the building or premises in or upon which such violation has been committed or shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each and every day that such violation continues, after notice of such violation, or by imprisonment in jail for not more than thirty (30) days. Any such person who, having been served with an order to cease any such violation, shall fail to comply with the order within ten (10) days after such service, or shall continue to violate any provision of the regulation made under authority of this chapter, in the respect named in such order, shall also be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
B.  The foregoing punishment shall not constitute the exclusive remedy for violations of this chapter and the right is hereby expressly granted the city and other affected persons to pursue such civil remedies, including injunctive relief as may be appropriate under the existing circumstances. 
(Ord. 551 § 9, 2002) 
Chapter 15.36 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE[1] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 598, adopted May 11, 2009, repealed former Ch. 15.36, and enacted a new Ch. 15.36 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.36 pertained to flood hazard area regulations and derived from Ord. No. 448, §§ 1.1-1.6, 2.1-2.3, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1 and 4.2. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 

15.36.010 - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the State of South Dakota has in South Dakota Code, Chapters 9-12-1, 9-32-1, 9-36-1 and 9-36-17 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council of the City of Sisseton, South Dakota, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. I, § A, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. I, § B, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.030 - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.  Protect human life and health; 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and, 
7.  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. I, § C, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
A.  In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
4.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and, 
5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. I, § D, 5-11-2009) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application. 
    "Alluvial fan flooding" means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    "Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    "Area of special flood hazard" is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the firm, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    "Critical feature" means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    "Development" means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    "Elevated building" means a nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    "Existing construction" means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood insurance study" is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
    "Floodplain" or "floodprone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    "Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    "Flood protection system" means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    "Floodway (regulatory floodway)" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    "Levee" means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    "New construction" means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    "Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348))", includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    "Variance" is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. II, 5-11-2009) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

15.36.050 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Sisseton. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. III, § A, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.060 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for City of Sisseton," dated July 20, 2009, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. III, § B, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.070 - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. III, § C, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.080 - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. III, § D, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. III, § E, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.100 - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. III, § F, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.100 - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. 
    This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. III, § G, 5-11-2009) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

15.36.120 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The finance officer is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. IV, § A, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.130 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
3.  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
4.  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
5.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
6.  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is [the] Department of Environment & Natural Resources and Emergency Management prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
7.  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
8.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with article 3, subsection 15.36.060 B., the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article V. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. IV, § B, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.140 - Permit procedures. 
A.  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
3.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of article V, subsection 15.36.170 2.; 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
5.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with article IV, subsection 15.36.130 1. 
B.  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
2.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
3.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
4.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
5.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
6.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
7.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
8.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
9.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
10.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. IV, § C, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.150 - Variance procedures. 
A.  The appeal board as established by the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
C.  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
D.  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
E.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
F.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 15.36.140 B. of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
G.  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (article I, section 15.36.030). 
H.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
I.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
J.  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
1.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
K.  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
1.  The criteria outlined in article IV, subsections 15.36.150 A.-I. are met, and 
2.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. IV, § D, 5-11-2009) 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

15.36.160 - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
1.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
2.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
4.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
5.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
6.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and, 
7.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. V, § A, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.170 - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) article III, section 15.36.060, (ii) article IV, subsection 15.36.130 8., or (iii) article V, subsection 15.36.180 C., the following provisions are required: 
1.  Residential construction-New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in article IV, section 15.36.140, is satisfied. 
2.  Nonresidential construction-New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
3.  Manufactured homes-Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. V, § B, 5-11-2009) 
15.36.180 - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
A.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with article I, sections 15.36.020-15.36.040 of this chapter. 
B.  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of article III, section 15.36.070; article IV, section 15.36.140; and the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
C.  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to article III, section 15.36.060 or article IV, subsection 15.36.130 8. of this chapter. 
D.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
E.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 598, § Art. V, § C, 5-11-2009) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.04.010 - Short title. 
    This title shall be known and may be cited as the subdivision regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 557 § 101, 2003) 
16.04.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    This title is enacted for the purpose of safeguarding the best interests of the public, the home owner, the subdivider, and the investor; encouraging well planned subdivisions by the establishment of adequate standards for design and construction; and in order that new subdivisions will be integrated in the general plans for the city, thereby contributing toward an attractive, orderly, stable and wholesome community environment with adequate municipal services and safe streets. 
(Ord. 557 § 102, 2003) 
16.04.030 - Applicability. 
    In accordance of SDCL 11-6-26.1 and any other authority provided by law or as such statutes may be amended, the city does hereby exercise the power and authority to review and approve or disapprove plats for the subdivision of land within the city and for land in the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 557 § 103, 2003) 
16.04.040 - Amendments. 
    Any provision of these regulations from time to time may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed by the city council according to law. 
(Ord. 557 § 104, 2003) 
16.04.050 - Exceptions and variances. 
A.  Exceptional Conditions. 
1.  General. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may grant variances from the provisions of these regulations, but only after determining that: 
a.  There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the property. 
b.  The variance is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the property in question. 
c.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to adjacent property. 
d.  The variance will not permit or encourage uses contrary to the city's zoning regulations. 
2.  Conditions. In approving variances, the city council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
3.  Procedures. A petition for any such variations shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the petition is filed for the consideration of the city council. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
4.  Where a proposed subdivision would contain no more than two parcels or plots of land and no new roads, the procedure of preparing a preliminary plat may be waived by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. 557 § 105, 2003) 
16.04.060 - Enforcement-Violations-Penalty. 
A.  General. 
1.  It shall be the duty of the administrative official to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the city attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
2.  No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the city council, in accordance with the provision of these regulations, and filed with the county register of deeds. 
3.  No building or zoning permits shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the regulations. 
4.  The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land, by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer, or lease with intent of evading these regulations, shall not be permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements contained in these regulations. 
B.  Violation and Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resist the enforcement of any of the provisions of these regulations, or who sells or offers for sale or lease any lot or block of land herewith regulated before all the requirements of these regulations have been complied with, shall be considered to be in violation of the title and may be punishable by a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) and thirty (30) days in jail for each and every day that any violator fails to comply with the provisions of this title. In addition to the penalties described, the city council or any member thereof, may institute an appropriate action or proceedings to seek an injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, retrain, correct or abate such violation or threatened violation and it is the duty of the city attorney to institute such action. All fines for violations shall be paid to the city and shall be credited to the city's general fund. 
(Ord. 557 § 106, 2003) 
16.04.070 - Interpretation, conflict and separability. 
A.  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, these regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  Conflict. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. 
C.  Separability. Should any article, section, sub-section, or provision of these regulations be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the subdivision title as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 557 § 107, 2003) 
16.04.080 - Definitions. 
    The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction: 
A.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular. 
B.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
C.  The word "may" is permissive. 
D.  The word "lot" shall include the words "piece" and "parcel"; the word "building" includes all other structures of every kind regardless of similarity to buildings; and the phrase "used for" shall include the phrase "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
E.  The word "person" includes both male and female, and also extends and applies to bodies political and corporate and to partnerships and other none incorporated associations. 
F.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders. 
    "Administrative official" means the duly designated administrative official(s) of the city with the charge of enforcing the subdivision ordinance. 
    "Alley" means a minor public way having a narrow right-of-way and affording a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
    "Attorney" means the attorney or engineer employed by the city unless otherwise stated in the text. 
    "Block" means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by a combination or combinations of streets exterior boundary lines of the subdivision, and streams of water bodies. 
    "Boulevard" means the portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the property line. 
    "Building line" or "building setback" means the line on a plat indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected. 
    "City finance officer" means the duly appointed finance officer of the city. 
    "City council" ("council") means the duly elected city council of the city. 
    "Comprehensive/development plan" means any legally adopted part or element of the comprehensive/development plan of the city. This may include but is not limited to: zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, community facilities plan, major street plan, capital improvements program, and comprehensive land use plan. 
    "Contiguous property" means adjoining as well as that property that would be across a street, alley or other public area. 
    "Easement" means a right to land generally established in a real estate deed or on a recorded plat to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation, or particular persons for specified uses. 
    "Engineer" means the duly designated engineer acting on behalf of the city council. 
    "Final plat" means the final map, drawing or chart, on which the subdivider's plan of subdivisions is presented for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the county register of deeds. The plat must conform to all state laws. 
    "Lot" means a parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
    "Major street plan" means the major street plan adopted as an element of the comprehensive/development plan. 
    "Minimum subdivision design standards" means the guides, principles, and specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating among other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the preliminary plat. 
    "Owner" means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations. 
    "Planning and zoning commission" means the Sisseton planning and zoning commission. 
    "Preliminary plat" means the map or maps of a proposed subdivision and specified supporting materials, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of this title, to permit the evaluation of the proposal prior to detailed engineering and design. 
    "Protective covenants" means contracts entered into between private parties and constitute a restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair stability of values. 
    "Register of deeds" means the duly designated register of deeds of Roberts County. 
    "Sketch plan" means the sketch map or maps of a proposed subdivision, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of this title, to evaluate feasibility and design characteristics at an early stage in the planning. 
    Streets and Alleys. 
1.  "Street" means a public way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, lance, place or however otherwise designated. 
2.  "Collector street" means a street which carries traffic from minor streets to thoroughfares or from thoroughfare to thoroughfare. It includes the principal entrance streets of a residential development and for circulation of traffic within such a development. 
3.  "Cul-de-sac" means a minor street with only one outlet and having a turnaround. 
4.  "Marginal access street" means service street, or otherwise designated a minor street which is parallel and adjacent to a thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
5.  "Minor street" means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to the abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood. 
6.  "Private street" means a privately owned street serving two or more lots. 
7.  "Street width" means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street. 
8.  "Thoroughfare" means a street primarily designed to carry large volumes of traffic and provide a vehicular movement between and among large areas. 
9.  "Alley" means a minor way which is used primarily for secondary vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties abutting on a street. 
    "Subdivider" means the person(s), firm(s), or corporation(s) owning land in the process of creating a subdivision of the land. 
    "Subdivision" means the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land; provided that a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes replat of a subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
    "Utilities" means municipal and franchised utilities. 
    "Zoning ordinance" means the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 557 Art. VI, 2003) 
Chapter 16.08 - SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS 
Sections: 

16.08.010 - General procedure. 
    The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision plat shall consist of three separate steps, in sequence: an informal discussion meeting with the planning and zoning commission or administrative official, preparation and submission of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, and preparation and submission of a final plat of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 557 § 201, 2003) 
16.08.020 - Advisory meeting-Development of sketch plan. 
A.  Before filing a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall consult with the planning and zoning commission or administrative official for advice regarding general requirements, minimum standards of design and required improvement as set forth in this title. A sketch of the proposal shall be submitted. The subdivider shall also submit a location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing or platted streets and existing community facilities. This informal review should prevent unnecessary costly revisions in the layout and development of the subdivision. The informal advisory meeting does not require formal application, fee, or filing of plat with the planning and zoning commission or city council. 
B.  Six copies of the sketch plan shall be submitted by the subdivider. 
C.  Sketch Plan Information. A proposed subdivision sketch plan, in order to be most useful should contain the following information: 
1.  Site location map showing major street, school location, commercial centers and other significant developments; 
2.  Tract boundaries; 
3.  North point and scale; 
4.  Streets within and adjacent to tract; 
5.  Topography and physical features; 
6.  Proposed general street design; 
7.  Proposed lot size and orientation; 
8.  Location and when requested, dimensions of adjacent existing buildings contiguous to the exterior boundary line of the proposed plat. 
(Ord. 557 § 202, 2003) 
16.08.030 - Preliminary plat approval. 
A.  General. After meeting informally with the planning and zoning commission or administrative official, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat prior to the making of any street improvements or the installation of any utilities. The preliminary plat shall provide all of the information indicated in subsection (C) below. The preliminary plat will be subject to review and revision by the administrative official, planning and zoning commission, and city council. 
B.  Procedure. 
1.  Three copies of the preliminary plat and the required supplemental material shall be filed with the administrative official who shall transmit them to the planning and zoning commission. Such filing shall take place at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which it is to be considered. 
2.  The administrative official shall: 
a.  Refer two copies of the preliminary plat to the planning and zoning for its examination and report and one copy to the engineer designated by the city council for his or her examination and report if requested by the city council. 
b.  Set hearing(s) before the planning and zoning commission and city council on the preliminary plat. The applicant shall be notified by mail at least five days prior to the hearing(s). 
3.  The planning and zoning commission shall study the preliminary plat to see if it is consistent with the standards set forth in these regulations. Following a hearing and due consideration of the preliminary plat, the planning and zoning commission shall transmit all copies of the preliminary plat to the city council together with its recommendation, within sixty (60) days after receipt thereof. The recommendation shall include approval, disapproval, or suggestions for modification and the reasons thereof, and a discussion of the effect of the plat on the comprehensive plan. The recommendation shall be of an advisory nature only. If the planning and zoning commission does not act within sixty (60) days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to have received a favorable recommendation in all respects, and shall receive due consideration by the city council. 
4.  Following a hearing and due consideration of the preliminary plat, the city council shall approve, disapprove, or modify the plat and shall impose those requirements or grant those variances in conformance with this title deemed necessary and appropriate by the city council for final approval. The action of the council, together with all modifications, requirements, variances, and reasons thereof, shall be noted on all copies of the preliminary plat application. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and one copy retained by the administrative official. 
5.  Approval of the preliminary plat by the city council shall indicate approval of the development concept only and shall not constitute acceptance of the final plat. The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse unless a final plat, based thereon, is submitted within two years from the date of such approval. An extension of time may be applied for by the subdivider and granted by the council. 
6.  Should the subdivider desire to amend the preliminary plat as approved he or she may resubmit the amended plan which shall follow the same above procedure. 
C.  Preliminary Plat Information. The preliminary plat shall meet the standards of design as set forth in Chapter 16.12 and shall show the following information: 
1.  Names of subdivision, names and addresses of the owners, and engineer or surveyor, and the names of adjacent property owners. The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, be the same in spelling or alike in pronunciation with the name of any other recorded subdivision, unless it is an extension of or adjacent to the subdivision; 
2.  Date, north point, and scale. Scale shall not be less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet; 
3.  Location of property lines, roads; 
4.  General location of existing utilities with size of lines, and other underground installations; 
5.  Acreage of land to be subdivided; 
6.  Soil tests if required; 
7.  Contours at an interval of not greater than two feet; also, the locations of watercourses, bridges, wooded areas, and such other topographic features as may be pertinent to the subdivision; 
8.  Lot lines, lot numbers, and lot dimensions; 
9.  Location of proposed culverts and other drainage provisions; 
10.  Proposed street improvements and grading; 
11.  Proposed easements, dedications, and reservations of land to be considered for sale or dedication to public use; 
12.  Locations and widths of streets, proposed alleys, pedestrian ways and utility easements; 
13.  Location and size of proposed sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and water mains; 
14.  Provisions for drainage and flood control, if necessary; 
15.  Proposed zoning designation and future land use; 
16.  Existing zoning designation in abutting subdivisions; 
17.  Names of new streets; 
18.  Copies of proposed deed restrictions, if any, shall be attached to the preliminary plat; 
19.  Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the subdivision, the planning and zoning commission may require that the subdivider submit a preliminary plat of the remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and future subdivision. In any event, all subdivision must be shown to relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions; 
20.  Structures which are to be placed on large lots (over one acre) must be situated so as to permit satisfactory future re-subdivision; 
21.  Special Assessments. If the subdivider requests or the city requires that any existing special assessments which have been levied against the premises described in the subdivision be divided and allocated to the respective lots in the subdivision plat, the administrative official shall estimate the clerical cost of preparing the revised assessment roll, filing the same with the county auditor, and making such division and allocation, and upon approval by the city council of such estimated cost the same shall be paid to the city treasurer in addition to the fee mentioned in subsection (C)(2) above, to cover the costs of preparing and filing such revised assessments; 
22.  Such other information as may be requested by the planning and zoning commission. 
D.  Plat Review Fee. A fee shall be levied for the examination and approval or disapproval of every plat reviewed by the council. At the time preliminary plat(s) are filed with the administrative official, the subdivider shall pay to the administrative official the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each plat and five dollars for each lot shown on each plat. 
(Ord. 577 § 203, 2003) 
16.08.040 - Final plat approval. 
A.  General. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved; and it may constitute only a portion of the preliminary plat, which the subdivider proposes to record and develop. 
B.  Procedure. 
1.  Following the approval of the preliminary plat, if the developer/subdivider wishes to proceed, four original copies of the final plat and required supplemental material shall be filed with the administrative official, who shall transmit them to the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission. Such filing shall take place at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which it is to be considered. The administrative official shall set hearing(s) before the planning and zoning commission and city council on the final plat. The applicant shall be notified by mail at least five days prior to the hearing(s). 
2.  The planning and zoning commission shall study the final plat to see if it is consistent with the minimum standards set forth in these regulations. Following due consideration by the planning and zoning commission, the commission shall transmit three copies of the final plat to the city council, together with its recommendation, within forty-five (45) days after receipt thereof. The recommendation shall include approval, disapproval, or suggestions for modifications and reasons thereof, and a discussion of the effect of the plat on the comprehensive plan. The recommendation shall be of an advisory nature only. If the planning and zoning commission does not act within forty-five (45) days, the final plat shall be deemed to have received a favorable recommendation in all respects, and shall then receive due consideration by the city council. 
3.  When the city council has approved the final plat, one original copy shall be returned to the subdivider with the approval of the city council certified thereon, for filing with the county register of deeds as an official plat of record within ninety (90) days after the date of approval thereof by the city council. Another original copy certified by the council will be transmitted to the appropriate director of equalization for his or her records. 
4.  The subdivider shall furnish the city with evidence of recording of the original copy of the plat with attachments with the register of deeds as provided for in SDCL. 
C.  Final Plat Information. The following information is required for final plats for subdivisions: 
1.  The original or reproducible final plat shall be drawn in black ink and shall be uniform size, fifteen (15) inches by twenty-six (26) inches or eight and one-half inches by fourteen (14) inches, or eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches. The scale shall be one inch equals one hundred (100) feet or larger. 
2.  The final plat shall show the following information: 
a.  Date, title, name and location of subdivision, graphic scale, and true north line, 
b.  All dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be tied to primary control points. Locations and descriptions of the control points shall be given. Except where deemed clearly unreasonable or infeasible by the city council, these control points shall be the located section corners of the coordinate system of the state of South Dakota, 
c.  Name and right-of-way width of each street, easements, or other right-of-way, 
d.  Lot numbers, lot lines, and frontage dimensions. Dimensions of lot lines shall be shown in feet and hundredths; no ditto marks will be permitted, 
e.  Location and description of monuments, 
f.  Purpose for which sites are dedicated or reserved. 
3.  The final plat shall be accompanied by: 
a.  Certification on plat of title showing that the applicant is the owner, that the making of the plat receives his or her consent and is in accordance with his or her desires, and a statement by such owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way, and other sites for public use, 
b.  Certification on plat by registered engineer as to the accuracy of survey and plat, 
c.  Certificates attached to the plat as required by SDCL for platting of property for action by owner, planning and zoning commission and city council, and county commission, if necessary, 
d.  Certification on plat by the city council that the plat has been approved for recording in the office of the county register of deeds, 
e.  A copy of the certificate of the county director of equalization that he or she has received a copy of the plat, 
f.  Endorsed on plat or attached to the certificate of the county treasurer that all taxes which are liens upon any land included. 
4.  Additional instruments that may accompany the plat by means of recording include: 
a.  Protective covenants shall either be placed directly on the final plat or attached thereto in form for recording, 
b.  Certification that the subdivider has complied with one of the following alternatives (alternative to be determined by the city council): 
i.  All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of this title, or 
ii.  A security bond or certified check has been posted with the city finance officer in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required improvements, 
iii.  At the city council's discretion, the subdivider shall file a letter of assurance to establish the responsibility for the construction of such improvements in a satisfactory manner and within a period specified by the city council, such period not to exceed three years. An extension to that three-year period may be granted at the discretion of the city council. The letter of assurance shall be recorded with the register of deeds at the time of filing the plat. 
    A copy of each letter of assurance shall be placed on file in the city finance officer's office and prior to the issuance of any permits, the permit applicant shall be presented with the letter of assurance so that he or she will be made aware of where the responsibilities lie for the installation of any improvements not yet in place. 
(Ord. 557 § 204, 2003) 
Chapter 16.12 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN 
Sections: 

16.12.010 - General. 
A.  The city council shall impose the following general requirements and compel all subdividers to comply with the principles of design in the layout of subdivisions hereinafter described. 
B.  All proposed subdivision regulations shall conform to the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. 557 § 301, 2003) 
16.12.020 - Suitability of the land for subdivision development. 
A.  If the city council finds that land proposed to be subdivided is unsuitable for subdivision development due to flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, and other such conditions as may increase the danger of health, life, or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazards and, if from adequate investigations, conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public, the land should not be platted and developed for the purpose proposed, the council shall not approve the land for subdivision unless adequate methods are formulated by the subdivider for meeting the problems that will be created by the subdivision and development of the land. 
B.  The city council may refuse to approve what it considers to be scattered or premature subdivision of land which would necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services such as undue maintenance costs for adequate roads. 
C.  No plat will be approved for a subdivision which covers and area subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor drainage facilities and which would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots impossible. 
(Ord. 557 § 302, 2003) 
16.12.030 - Street extensions. 
A.  The arrangement, character, extent, location and grade of all streets shall be in accordance with good planning principles and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. 
B.  Where, at the determination of the city council, it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining properties, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundaries of such properties, where the city council deems it necessary, such dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turn around having a radius of at least fifty (50) feet. 
C.  The street system for the proposed subdivision shall provide for extending existing streets at the same time or greater width, but in no case shall a street extension be of less width than the minimum width required in these regulations for a street in its category. 
D.  The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall conform to the major street plan and shall make provisions for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas or their proper projection where adjoining land is not subdivided. 
(Ord. 557 § 303, 2003) 
16.12.040 - Dedication of right-of-way and roadway width. 
A.  General. The following conditions shall govern the designation and minimum street right-of-way and roadway width: 
1.  The minimum widths of highways, arterial streets, residential collector streets, local residential streets, and marginal access to be dedicated to the city shall be indicated on the major street plan and where not shown thereon shall not be less than as follows: 
Street Type Minimum Dedicated Right-of-Way Width Arterial 100 Feet Collector 80 Feet Local 66 Feet Alleys 24 Feet  
2.  In undeveloped or vacant areas, the planning and zoning commission and city council shall have the discretion to identify or classify a street as a "collector street." 
3.  The minimum width for right-of-way and roadway widths in commercial and industrial districts shall be the same as required for arterials. 
4.  Minimum Roadway Widths. 
Street Type Pavement Width (Measured from Curb Faces) Arterial 60 Collector 40 Local 35 Alleys 20  
    Greater or lesser widths may be required depending upon anticipated traffic volumes, planned function of the street, and character of planned abutting land uses. 
(Ord. 557 § 304, 2003) 
16.12.050 - Access to arterials and collectors. 
A.  Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial, access to such roads may be limited. The city council upon recommendation from the planning and zoning commission may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
1.  The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the arterial and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the arterial and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
2.  A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such parallel streets, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing on the arterial. 
3.  A marginal access or service road (separated from the arterial by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points). 
4.  Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line. 
5.  Deep lots with rear service drives. 
6.  Other treatment as may be necessary to adequately protect residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(Ord. 557 § 305, 2003) 
16.12.060 - Intersections. 
A.  Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less that seventy (70) degrees. Intersections of more than four corners shall be prohibited. 
B.  Corner Radii. Local street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than fifteen (15) feet. Collector and arterial streets shall be rounded by a radius of not less than twenty (20) feet. Roadways of alley-street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than six feet. Corners at the entrances to the turn around portions of cul-de-sacs shall be rounded by a radius of not less than fifteen (15) feet. When the smallest angle of the street intersection is less than ninety (90) degrees, the city council may require curb radii of greater length. 
C.  No lot or other parcel of land which abuts on and has access to either a collector or a minor street shall have a service drive, curb cut, or other means of access to an arterial street within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way or any street which intersects such arterial street on the side on which such lot or parcel is located. 
D.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be made. 
E.  Deflections. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten (10) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
F.  Sight Easements. Sight easements with property line distances of thirty (30) feet shall be provided at street intersections. 
(Ord. 557 § 306, 2003) 
16.12.070 - Street grades and elevations. 
A.  Street Grades. Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 
Street Type Percentage Grade Arterial 5 Collector 7 Local 8 Access 10  
B.  All street grades shall be approved by the city engineer or engineer designated by city council. 
(Ord. 557 § 307, 2003) 
16.12.080 - Dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs). 
    Minor terminal or dead-end streets or courts which are designed so as to have one end permanently closed shall not be longer than five hundred (500) feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a diameter at the outside of the pavement of at least seventy-five (75) feet and a diameter at the outside of the right-of-way of at least one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. 557 § 308, 2003) 
16.12.090 - Private streets, reserve strips and alleys. 
A.  There shall be no private street platted within a subdivision. 
B.  There shall be no reserve strips in a subdivision except where their control is definitely vested in the city under conditions approved by the city council as authorized by this title. 
C.  Alleys shall not be provided in residential blocks except in cases where the subdivider produces evidence of the need for alleys which is satisfactory to the council. Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts, except that the city council may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access. Such alleys shall be dedicated to the public. 
(Ord. 557 § 309, 2003) 
16.12.100 - Blocks. 
A.  Length. Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet or be less than three hundred (300) feet, except as the city council considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street layout. 
B.  Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth. However, where this would require lots to front on an arterial street or highway or where topographical conditions or the size of the property prevents two tiers of lots, the council may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
(Ord. 557 § 310, 2003) 
16.12.110 - Lots. 
A.  The lot size, width, depth, shape orientation, and minimum setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
B.  Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the city's zoning regulations. 
C.  Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to meet the building setback lines established on both the front street and side street. 
D.  Each lot shall be provided with access to a street. 
E.  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to streets except on curves where they shall be radial. 
F.  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
G.  Natural Features. In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, water courses, historic spots, or similar conditions, which if preserved will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development. 
H.  Lot Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, or a plan shown as to future use rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
I.  Access to Thoroughfares. In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access highway, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual lots to such street and roads. 
(Ord. 557 § 311, 2003) 
16.12.120 - Easements. 
A.  Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the council shall require easements at least twenty (20) feet in width centered along all rear lot lines. Where necessary or advisable in the opinion of the city council, similar easements shall be provided along side lot lines or across lots. 
B.  If the council deems it necessary for proper drainage within or through a subdivision, it shall require that a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way be provided. 
C.  The property owner whose property is subject to such easements shall be responsible for its maintenance. The property owners shall keep the easement clear of any structure, debris trees, shrubs or landscaping whatsoever except that lawn grass, which shall be regularly mowed and annual vegetation, may be grown thereon, and no permanent fences shall be allowed. 
16.12.130 - Street names. 
    Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing or platted street, in which event it shall bear the same name of the existing or platted street so in alignment. 
(Ord. 557 § 313, 2003) 
16.12.140 - Public sites and open spaces. 
A.  Where a proposed park, playground, school site or other public site as shown on the comprehensive development plan is embraced in part or in whole by the boundary of a proposed subdivision and such public sites are not dedicated, such public ground shall be reserved and no action taken towards approval of preliminary or final plat for a period not to exceed six months to allow the opportunity to consider and take action towards acquisition of such public ground or park by purchase or other causes. 
B.  The city may require that in all new subdivisions, four to seven percent of the gross area subdivided shall be dedicated for public recreation space, school sites, or other public use with such four to seven percent being in addition to property dedicated for streets, alleys, easements, or other public ways. No areas may be dedicated for public use until such areas have been approved by city council as being suitable and needed for the public health, safety, convenience, and/or general welfare. 
C.  The city council may accept the subdivision without a dedication of area for public use or may make an agreement with the subdivider for future dedication when additional subdivision is proposed by the developer. 
(Ord. 557 § 314, 2003) 
16.12.150 - Natural features. 
    In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural terrain features, such as trees, water courses, historic spots or similar conditions, which if preserved will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development. 
(Ord. 557 § 315, 2003) 
16.12.160 - Large lot platting. 
    In any case where lots are platted in excess of one acre or two hundred (200) feet in width at the building set-back line, a preliminary re-subdivision plan shall be submitted showing a potential and feasible way in which the lot or lots may be platted in future years for more intensive use of the land. 
(Ord. 557 § 316, 2003) 
16.12.170 - Absence of utilities. 
    In areas which do not have public water and sanitary sewer, no residential lot shall be developed for residence purposes unless it contains at least one acre of land area regardless of the lot area requirements of prevailing zoning regulations. Where public sewer and water is not available and individual wells and disposal systems are to be utilized, the subdivider may be required to submit the results of tests to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and ground water conditions on such lot or lots. On all residential lots platted in excess of one acre and/or two hundred (200) feet in width at the building set-back line, suitable provisions shall be made for potential re-subdivision by suitable placement of the building upon the lot. In areas without public sewer and water service and where lots are platted less than one acre in area, zoning permits may be issued only for alternating lots with zoning permits for intervening lots withheld pending availability of public sewer and water connection. Provided ground conditions are such that areas outside the subdivision shall not be endangered by water pollution, building permits may be issued for lots less than one acre provided public water service is available. 
(Ord. 557 § 317, 2003) 
Chapter 16.16 - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS PREREQUISITE TO FINAL APPROVAL 
Sections: 

16.16.010 - General. 
A.  The subdivider is required to install or construct the improvements hereinafter described prior to receiving approval of his or her final plat or prior to having released the bonds or other securities which guarantee such required improvements. 
B.  All public and private water mains, sanitary sewers, laterals and storm sewers shall be installed as necessary to prevent the future cuffing of pavement of any street, sidewalk, or other requirement pavement. 
C.  The city may participate, at its discretion, by sharing in the responsibility of street and utility construction costs. 
(Ord. 557 § 401, 2003) 
16.16.020 - Property markers. 
    All lot corners shall be with monuments as per SDCL and placed flush with the finished lot grade or below. 
(Ord. 557 § 402, 2003) 
16.16.030 - Streets and alleys. 
A.  The subdivider shall provide street pavements which shall be designed to carry the expected traffic and which shall be approved by the city council. 
B.  The proposed streets shall be designed and inspected by a certified engineer and have the minimum improvements: 
1.  The removal of all top soil and grading to meet drainage requirements; 
2.  A minimum of six inches of crushed gravel; and 
3.  If a paved street is proposed, an additional three inches of crushed gravel and three inches of asphalt paving is required. 
(Ord. 557 § 403, 2003) 
16.16.040 - Curbs and gutters. 
    In areas served by public water and sewer, concrete curb and gutter shall be required. Installed curb and gutter shall be of a design approved by the city council upon advice from city engineer. 
(Ord. 557 § 404, 2003) 
16.16.050 - Sidewalks. 
    The city council may require cement concrete sidewalks, no less than four feet wide and four inches thick on a four inch gravel base, shall be constructed on both sides of all streets within a subdivision having more than three lots per gross acre, unless waived by the city council. Grades shall meet handicap access requirements. Sidewalks shall be placed in the public right-of-way way one foot outside the property line. Each intersection shall be provided with gradual ramp from curb to sidewalk. 
(Ord. 557 § 405, 2003) 
16.16.060 - Street signs. 
    The city council may require the subdivider to install durable street name signs at all intersections, which meet specifications of the city street superintendent. One street sign is required for each intersection. 
(Ord. 557 § 406, 2003) 
16.16.070 - Water supply system. 
A.  The subdivider shall install a complete water distribution system adequate for domestic supply and for fire protection needs to serve each lot or tract in every subdivision where connection is to be made immediately to a community or a utility water system in accordance with the city's design standards (minimum of six-inch line) and specifications. In subdivisions inside the city limits where such connection to a system is not to be made immediately, plans shall be prepared for future installation of a water-distribution system to serve each lot or tract. 
B.  Each house service shall be run from the main to the property line where a cap or plug shall be placed until the service is extended to the structure. A three-forth inch Type K copper or approved PVC water service, corporation cock and curb box and stop and four inch minimum sewer service shall be required. The service lines may be placed in a common trench provided the South Dakota state plumbing code requirements are met. 
(Ord. 557 § 407, 2003) 
16.16.080 - Sanitary sewers. 
    The subdivider shall install a complete sanitary sewer collection system to serve each lot or tract in every subdivision where connection is to be made immediately to the city's sanitary sewer system in accordance with the city's design standards and specifications (minimum of four-inch individual service and main line). In subdivisions inside the city limits where such connection to a system is not to be made immediately, plans shall be prepared for future installation of a sanitary sewer collection system to serve each lot or tract. 
(Ord. 557 § 408, 2003) 
16.16.090 - Storm drainage. 
    The subdivider shall construct an adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., for the proper drainage of all surface water shall be provided. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and they shall be of sufficient length to permit full width roadways and required slopes. 
(Ord. 557 § 409, 2003) 
16.16.100 - Oversize facilities. 
    The city council may participate in the cost of "oversize" improvements within a subdivision if it is adjudged that such oversize improvements are necessary to serve large areas of land not in the subdivision and if the cost of such oversize improvements is an unreasonable burden on the subdivider. 
(Ord. 557 § 410, 2003) 
16.16.110 - Gas lines. 
    The subdivider shall arrange for and shall file his or her request at the earliest feasible date for as service desired for his or her subdivision. Where a source of gas supply is not within a reasonable distance for present installation, but under a gas line extension agreement gas service will be extended within five years following the recording of the final plat, those portions of such lines which will lie within the portions of streets intended for vehicular traffic shall be installed. 
(Ord. 557 § 411, 2003) 
16.16.120 - Electric power and telephone service. 
    The subdivider shall arrange with the appropriate utility and shall file his or her request at the earliest feasible date for electric power and telephone service to his or her subdivision. 
(Ord. 557 § 412, 2003) 
16.16.130 - Individual wells and sewage systems. 
    The following standards shall apply unless otherwise provided by this title, in which case the more restrictive standards shall apply. An individual well shall produce at least five gallons per minute and shall be cased or grouted to provide a safe, potable water supply; a pressure tank equal to ten (10) times the well capacity is required. Each individual sewer system shall meet the South Dakota DENR specification and South Dakota state plumbing code requirements. 
(Ord. 557 § 413, 2003) 
16.16.140 - Utilities location. 
    When practicable and feasible, all utilities shall be placed underground; all underground work shall be completed prior to street surfacing. All utility lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed in rear line easements when carried on over-head poles. 
(Ord. 557 § 414, 2003) 
16.16.150 - Inspection. 
    All required improvements shall be inspected by the city engineer during or other engineer designed by the city council during construction at the expense of the subdivider. 
(Ord. 557 § 415, 2003) 
16.16.160 - Guarantee in lieu of completed improvement. 
A.  No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the city council or accepted for record by the register of deeds until the required improvements have been installed in accordance with the preliminary plat and approved by the council; or in lieu of such prior construction, the council may accept a letter of assurance, or a security bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost installation of the required improvements, whereby improvements may be made and utilities installed without cost to the city in the event of default of the subdivider. 
B.  Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall enter into a contract (letter of assurance) in writing with the city requiring the subdivider to furnish and construct the improvements at his or her sole cost and in accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract conditions, which shall include provision for supervision of details of construction by an engineer and grant to the engineer authority to correlate the work to be done under the contract by any sub-contractors authorized to proceed thereunder and with any other work being done or contracted by the city in the vicinity. At the city's discretion they may require that the agreement require the subdivider make an escrow deposit or in lieu thereof to furnish a performance bond, the amount of the deposit and penal amount of the bond to be equal to one hundred (100) percent of the engineer's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the contract, including the cost of inspection. On request of the subdivider the contract may provide for completion of part or all of the improvements covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat, and in such event the amount of the deposit or bond shall be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to acceptance of the plat only. The time for completion of the work and several parts thereof shall be determined by the city council upon recommendation of the engineer after consultation with the subdivider and shall be reasonable in relation to the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and proper correlation with construction activities in the subdivision. 
1.  If the City Requires a Financial Guarantee. The contract (letter of assurance) provided above shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or in lieu thereof furnish a performance bond as follows: 
a.  Escrow Deposit. An escrow deposit shall be made with the city finance officer in a sum equal to one hundred (100) percent of the total cost as estimated by the engineer, including cost of inspection by the city, of all the improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the contract and which have not been completed prior to approval of the final plat. 
b.  The city shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of the deposit for any cost and expense incurred by the city for completion of the work in case of default of the subdivider under the contract, and for any damages sustained on account of any breach thereof. Upon completion of the work and termination of any liability, the balance remaining in the deposit shall be refunded to the subdivider. 
B.  Performance Bond. In lieu of making the escrow deposit above described, the subdivider may furnish a public contractor's performance bond in form prescribed by statute, with corporate surety in a penal sum equal to one hundred (100) percent of the total cost as estimated by the engineer, including cost of inspection by the city, of all of the improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the contract and which have not been completed prior to approval of the final plat. The bond shall be approved by the city's attorney and filed with the city finance officer. 
(Ord. 557 § 416, 2003) 
16.16.170 - Payment for installation of improvements. 
    The required improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider, which are listed and described, are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the subdivider; provided, however, that if any improvement installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision may be made for causing a portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the benefit to such lands, to be assessed against the same and in such case the subdivider will be required only to pay for such portion of the whole cost of the improvement as will represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision. 
(Ord. 557 § 417, 2003) 
16.16.180 - Construction plans. 
    Construction plans of the required improvements conforming in all respects with the standards of the engineer and the ordinances of the city shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the state of South Dakota, and the plans shall contain his or her seal. Such plans together with the quantities of construction items with an estimated total cost of the required improvements shall be submitted to the engineer for his or her approval; upon approval they shall become a part of the contract required. A copy of the plans approved by the engineer plus two prints shall be furnished to the city to be filed by the engineer as a record. 
(Ord. 557 § 418, 2003) 
Chapter 16.20 - DIVISION AND CONSOLIDATION OF INDIVIDUAL LOT OF RECORD 
Sections: 

16.20.010 - Plats authorized. 
    For purposes of conveying title or securing zoning permits for construction, Chapters 16.04, 16.08, 16.12, and 16.16 shall not apply to the division of one or more lots platted into lots and blocks and designated in a subdivision plan on file and of record in the office of the register of deeds of Roberts County, into one or more separately described tracts, nor shall the chapters apply to the consolidation of two or more such platted lots or parts thereof into one or more tracts, upon compliance with the following conditions. 
A.  The owner or owners of such platted lot or lots to be so divided shall file in the office of the city finance officer a proposed survey plat by registered land surveyor of the lot or lots to be divided or consolidated. Such plat or survey shall show the dimensions of the lots as measured upon the recorded plat and also the proposed division thereof. A written description of the separately described tract or tracts which will result from the proposed subdivision or consolidation shall be filed with such plat or survey. 
B.  The separately described tract of land to be conveyed or designated for a zoning permit for construction purposes by reason of such division or consolidation as described upon the proposed plat, shall not be less than the minimum dimensions required to secure the minimum lot area specified in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
C.  As a result of such division or consolidation as herein authorized, no remaining part of an original subdivision lot shall become a separately described lot upon the proposed plat with a size less than the minimum dimensions required to secure the minimum lot areas specified in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 557 § 501, 2003) 
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

17.04.010 - Title. 
    This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the Sisseton zoning ordinance, except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this title." 
(Ord. 556 § 1.01.01, 2003) 
17.04.020 - Jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this title shall apply to all territory within the boundaries of the city, as established on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. 556 § 1.01.02, 2003) 
17.04.030 - Purpose. 
    This title is adopted to protect and to promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. More specifically, this title is adopted in order to achieve the following objectives: 
A.  To assist in the implementation of the city's comprehensive land use plan which in its entirety represents the foundation upon which this title is based; 
B.  To foster a harmonious, convenient, workable relationship among land uses; 
C.  To promote the stability of existing land uses that conform with the comprehensive land use plan and to protect them from inharmonious influences and harmful intrusions; 
D.  To insure that public and private lands ultimately are used for the purposes which are most appropriate and most beneficial from the standpoint of the community as a whole; 
E.  To prevent excessive population densities and overcrowding of the land with structures; 
F.  To foster the provision of adequate off-street parking and off-street truck loading facilities; 
G.  To facilitate the appropriate location of community facilities and institutions; 
H.  To protect and enhance real estate values; 
I.  To safeguard and enhance the appearance of the community, including natural amenities; 
J.  To place the power and responsibility of the use of land in the hands of the property owner contingent upon the compatibility of surrounding uses and the comprehensive land use plan; 
K.  To divide the city into zoning districts restricting and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of structures and land. 
(Ord. 556 § 1.01.03, 2003) 
17.04.040 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows, except where the context would plainly indicate a different intent: 
1.  The present tense includes the future tense; 
2.  The singular number includes the plural; 
3.  The plural number includes the singular; 
4.  The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; 
5.  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied; 
6.  The word "lot" shall include the words "plot," "piece," and "parcel" the word "building" includes all other structures of every kind regardless of similarity to buildings; and the phrase "used for" shall include the phrase "arranged for," "designated for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for". 
7.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases have the following meanings, except where the context would plainly indicate a different intent: 
    "Accessory use or structure" means a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
    "Adjacent property" means any lot, parcel, or property bordering by means of adjoining, abutting, or intersecting a specified lot boundary, and those lots immediately across a public right-of-way from a specified lot. See Figures below. 

    "Airport" or "heliport" means any land or structure which is used or intended for use, for the landing and take-off of aircraft, and any appurtenant land or structure used or intended for use for port buildings or other port structures or rights-of-way. 
    "Alley" means a public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property and provides a location for public utilities. 
    "Animals" means: 
1.  Domestic Pets-Fish, dogs, cats, birds, and similar animals. 
2.  Domestic Farm Animals-Cattle, hogs, horses, bees, sheep, goats, chickens, and other commonly known farm animals. 
    "Animal unit" means one animal unit is equivalent to one feeder/slaughter cattle, 0.5 horse; 0.7 mature dairy cow; 2.5 finishing swine; ten (10) nursery swine; ten (10) sheep/goats; fifty-five (55) turkeys; five ducks/geese; thirty (30) hens, cockerels, capons, broilers. 
    "Apartment" means a room or suite of rooms with cooking facilities available which is occupied as a residency by a single family. Includes building with two or more dwelling units and efficiency units. 
    "Automobile service station" means buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail. This definition does not include storage, body repair or auto salvage operations. 
    "Automobile repair, major" means general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, frame work, welding and major painting service. 
    "Automobile repair, minor" means the replacement of any part or repair of any part which does not require the removal of the engine head or pan, engine, transmission or differential; incidental body and fender work, minor painting and upholstering service when the service above stated is applied to passenger automobiles and trucks not in excess of seven thousand (7,000) pounds gross vehicle weight. 
    "Auto or motor vehicle salvage yard" means a lot or yard where one or more unlicensed motor vehicles, or the remains thereof, are kept for the purpose of dismantling, wrecking, crushing, repairing, rebuilding, sale of parts, sale as scrap, storage, or abandonment. 
    "Basement" means a portion of a building located partly underground and having one-half or less of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    "Bed and breakfast (B & B's)" means a private single-family residence, which is used to provide, limited meals and temporary accommodations for a charge to the public. Such establishments should be located where there will be minimal impact on surrounding residential properties and should comply with the following conditions: 
1.  B & B's shall be limited to residential structures with an overall minimum of one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of floor. Preference will be given to structures with historic or other unique qualities. 
2.  They shall be in compliance with applicable state laws including registration with the South Dakota Department of Health, maintaining a guest list, and providing a smoke detector in each sleeping room. 
3.  Accessory use signs shall be based on similar requirements for a home occupation permit and shall not be more than one square foot in area. 
4.  Such uses shall be an incidental use with an owner occupied principal dwelling structure provided that not more than four bedrooms in such dwelling structure shall be used for such purpose. 
5.  Off-street parking requirements shall be one space per guestroom and shall be in addition to parking requirements for the principal use. Off-street parking shall not be located in a required front or side yard and screening shall be required when adjacent to residentially used property. 
6.  The length of stay shall not exceed fourteen (14) days during any one hundred twenty (120) day consecutive period. 
7.  Meals shall be limited to breakfast, which is prepared in a common facility (household kitchen). Meals may be served only to overnight registered guests and cooking is not permitted in the sleeping rooms. 
8.  The building shall meet all building codes and zoning requirements. A site plan showing the location of guest parking spaces and floor plan showing a location of the sleeping rooms, lavatories, and bathing facilities, and kitchen shall be submitted with application. 
    "Boarding house" means a building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodgings are provided for three or more persons, but not to exceed eight persons. 
    "Building" includes the word "structure" and means a structure which is entirely separated from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors or windows or similar openings. 
    "Building height" means the vertical distance from: (1) The average elevation of the adjoining ground level or (2) The established grade adjacent to the building, whichever is lower to the top of a flat roof, to a point of the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, to the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof. 
    "Building area" means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
    "Business" means any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where services are offered for compensation. 
    "Carport" means an automobile shelter having one or more sides open. 
    "Cellar" means that portion of the building having more than one-half of the floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    "Church" means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its accessory building and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
    "Club" or "lodge" means a non-profit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, use of premises being restricted to members and their guests. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. Serving of alcoholic beverages to members and their guest may be allowed, providing such serving is secondary and incidental to the operation of the dining room for the purpose of serving food and meals and providing further that such serving of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal, state and municipal laws. 
    "Commercial horticulture" means the art or science of growing flowers, fruit, and vegetables. 
    "Commercial kennel" means any premises where three or more dogs, at any one time over three months of age, are owned, boarded, bred or offered for sale. 
    "Commercial recreation" means bowling alley, cart track, jump center, golf, pool hall, vehicle racing or amusement, dance hall, skating, tavern, theater, firearms range, and similar uses. 
    "Commission" means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
    "Comprehensive land use plan" means, unless otherwise stated, the general plan for land use, transportation, and community facilities prepared and maintained by the planning and zoning commission. 
    "Conditional use permit" means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district by which if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. The board of adjustments may permit such uses when specific provision is made in the zoning district regulations. 
    "Council" means the city council of the city. 
    "Curb level" means the grade elevation established by the governing body of the curb in front of the center of the building. Where no curb level has been established previously, the city shall have an engineer determine a curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this title. 
    "Day care center, licensed" means any operation, which provides childcare services. To be considered a day care center under these regulations, the state of South Dakota must license such operation. 
    "Dwelling" means a building or one or more portions thereof occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residence purposes, but not including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding house, nor trailers, tents, cabins or trailer coaches. A "dwelling" shall not be interpreted to include lodging rooms. 
    "Dwelling, farm" means any dwelling located on a farming operation, which is used or intended for use as a residence by the farm's owner, relative of the owner, or a person employed on the premises. 
    "Dwelling, multiple-family" means a residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
    "Dwelling, single-family" means a detached residential dwelling building, other than a manufactured home but to include modular homes, designed for and occupied by one family only. 
    "Dwelling, two-family" means a residential building containing two household units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families. 
    "Dwelling unit" means one room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may in the same structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities. 
    "Essential services" means underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems collection, communications supply or disposal systems including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police calls boxes, traffic signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith; but not including buildings. 
    "Family" means one or more individuals living, sleeping, cooking or eating on the premises as a single housekeeping unit; but it shall not include a group or more than four individuals not related by blood or marriage. 
    "Feedlot" means a lot, yard, corral, building or other area where animals in excess of ten (10) animal units per acre or in excess of animal units per parcel of land have been, are, or will be stabled or confined for a total of forty-five (45) days or more during any twelve-month period, and where crops, vegetation, forage growth, or post harvest residues are not sustained over any portion of the lot or facility. 
    "Fence" means any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier, or enclosure. 
    "Floor area" means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements and attached accessory buildings, excepting that area primarily devoted to window display, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings utilized as dead storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space. 
    "Floor area ratio" means the numerical value obtained through dividing the floor area of a building or buildings by the lot area on which such building or buildings are located. 
    "Garage, private" means a detached accessory building or portion of the principal building, including a carport, which is used primarily for storing passenger vehicles, trailers or one truck of a rated capacity not in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight. 
    "Garage, public" means a building or portion of a building, except any herein defined as a private garage or as a repair garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles, or where any such vehicles are kept for remuneration or hire and in which any sale of gasoline, oil and accessories is only incidental to the principal use. 
    "Garage, repair" means a building or space for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles but not including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or junk yards. 
    "General floor plans" means a graphic representation of the anticipated utilization of the floor area within a building or structure but, not necessarily as detailed as construction plans. 
    "Home occupation" means an occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that: 
1.  No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; 
2.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinated to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
3.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding one square-foot in area, non-illuminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; 
4.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation, which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises; 
5.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street; 
6.  Notwithstanding the preceding standards, any operation that provides care for more than twelve (12) children in a twenty-four (24) hour period shall not be considered a home occupation. 
    "Hotel" or "motel" means a building designed for occupancy as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which there are four or more guest rooms, and which is open to the public and transients. 
    "Junk yard" means the use of more than fifty (50) square feet of any land, building, or structure, whether for private or commercial purposes, or both, where waste discarded or salvaged materials such as scrap metals, used building materials, used lumber, used glass, discarded vehicles, paper, rags, rubber, cordage, barrels, machinery, etc., or parts thereof with or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the same. 
    "Landscaping" means plantings such as trees, grass, and shrubs. 
    "Loading space, off-street" means space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space. 
    "Lot" means any plot or parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. 
1.  Lot Area. The lot area is the land in square feet, within the lot lines. 
2.  Lot Depth. The depth of a lot is the mean distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the general direction, of the side line of the lot. 
3.  Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured parallel to the front lines of the lot at the front building set-back line. 
    "Lot frontage" means the front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage. Minimum frontage for lots located on cul-de-sacs shall be determined as the average of the widest and narrowest width of the lot. 
    "Lot line" means the property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this title. 
    "Lot of record" means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Roberts County register of deeds, prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. 
    Lot Types. See figure below: 

1.  "Corner lot" means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. (Lot A and Lot A & D) 
2.  "Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street. (Lot B) 
3.  "Through lot" means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double frontage lots (Lot C and Lot C & D). 
4.  "Reversed frontage lot" means a lot on which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles (interior angle less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees) to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot (Lot A & D in the diagram), an interior lot (Lot B & D in the diagram) or through lot (Lot C & D in the diagram). 
    Manufactured home. See Section 17.96.020. 
    Manufactured home park. See Section 17.40.050. 
    Modular home. See Section 17.96.010. 
    "Manufacturing, heavy" means all manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment or assembly of products and materials that may emit objectionable and offensive influences beyond the lot on which the use is located. Such uses include but are not limited to the following: sawmill, refineries, commercial feed lots, acid, cement, explosives, flour, feed, and grain milling or storage, meat packing, slaughter houses, coal or tar asphalt distillation, rendering of fat, grease, lard or tallow, alcoholic beverages, poisons, exterminating agents, glue or size, lime, gypsum, plaster of Paris, tanneries, automobile parts, paper and payer products, glass, chemicals, crude oil and petroleum products including storage, electric power generation facilities, vinegar works, junk yard, auto reduction yard, foundry, forge, casting of metal products, rock, stone, and cement products. 
    "Manufacturing, light" means all uses which include the compounding, processing, packaging, treatment, or assembly of products and materials provided such use will not generate offensive odors, glare smoke, dust, noise, vibrations or other objectionable influences that extend beyond the lot on which the use is located. Generally, these are industries dependent upon raw materials refined elsewhere. Such uses include but are not limited to the following: lumber yard; machine shops; products assembly; sheet metal shops, plastics, electronics, general vehicle repair, body work, and painting, contractors shops and storage yard; food and non-alcoholic beverages; signs and displays; printing; publishing; fabricated metal parts; appliances; clothing; textiles; used auto parts. 
    "Motor freight terminal" means a building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is transferred and/or stored for movement in intrastate or inter-state shipment by motor truck. 
    "Motor fuel station convenience store" means a store operated in conjunction with a major motor fuel station or truck stop for the purpose of offering for sale goods not essential to the motoring public. 
    "Motor fuel station" means a retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels, but also may be engaged in supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles. This may include sale of petroleum products, sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories, and replacement items, washing and lubrication services; and the performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair. 
    "Motor fuel station, major" means a motor fuel station abutting the right-of-way of a designated state trunk highway or a federally aided interstate highway and on a major thoroughfare, collector street, highway service road, or highway. 
    "Motor fuel station, minor" means a motor fuel station located at the intersection of: (1) two or more major thoroughfares, (2) two or more collector streets or (3) one or more major thoroughfare with one or more collector street, but not abutting the right-of-way of a designated state trunk highway or a federally aided interstate highway. The major thoroughfares and collector streets shall be designated by the city council in accordance with the comprehensive land use plan. 
    "Moved-in building" means a building that previously existed on a lot of different location relocated for use as a residence, out-building, commercial, industrial or any building used in relation to these uses shall be recognized as a moved-in building. 
    "Non-conforming use" means any building or structure, or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of this title or amendment which does not conform after the passage of this title or amendment with the use regulation of the district in which it is situated. 
    "Noxious matter or materials" means material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals. 
    "Nursery, landscape" means a business growing and selling trees, flowering and decorative plants, and shrubs and which may be conducted within a building or without. 
    "Nursing home" means a private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm or place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such a home does not contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of disease or injury, nor does it include maternity care or care for mental illnesses or infirmities. 
    "Open sales lot" means land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent, lease or trade where such goods are not enclosed within a building. 
    "Open storage" means storage of any material outside of a building. 
    "Outdoor advertising business" means provisions of outdoor displays or display space on a lease or rental basis only. 
    "Parking space, off-street" means a suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately owned property either within or outside of a building of sufficient size to store one standard automobile. 
    "Party wall" means a wall which divides two independent structures. 
    "Performance standard" means criterion established to control noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings. 
    "Person" means, in addition to an individual, the following terms: "firm," "association," "organization," "partnership," "trust," "company," or "corporation." 
    "Planned development" means an urban development having two or more principal uses or structures on a single lot and developed according to an approved plan. 
    "Plat" means the map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is legally recorded. 
    "Property line" means the surveyed and legal boundaries of a parcel of property which may also coincide with a right-of-way line of a road, cart way, and the like. 
    "Public land" means land owned or operated by municipal, school district, county, state or other governmental units. 
    "Publication" means notice placed in the official city newspaper stating time, location and date of meeting and a description of the topic. 
    "Public hearing" means a meeting of the planning and zoning commission where data on a particular topic is heard and the time, date and location of meeting and topic has been advertised in the official newspaper of the city prior to hearing. 
    "Public utility substation" means an area where facilities are provided for the distribution of telephone, radio communications, water, gas, and electricity. These facilities shall be permitted as a conditional use in the various zoning districts subject to conditions which will assure their harmony, especially aesthetically with the nature of the respective district. 
    "Recreation equipment (in residential districts)" means play apparatus such as swing sets and slides, sandboxes, poles for nets, unoccupied boats and trailers not exceeding twenty (20) feet in length, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecues stands, and similar equipment or structures but not including tree house, swimming pools, playhouses exceeding twenty-five (25) square feet of floor area, or sheds utilized for storage of equipment. 
    "Retail shopping" means stores and shops selling the personal services or goods over a counter. 
    "Sale or auction yard/barn" means a place or building where the normal activity is to sell or exchange livestock. Livestock normally in a yard or farm for one day during sale or auction. 
    "Setback" means the setback of a building is the minimum horizontal distance between the front line or street line and the nearest edge of any building or any projection thereof, except cornices and unenclosed porches, and entrances, vestibules and window bays projecting not more than three and one-half feet from the building and not more than fifty (50) square feet in area, and which do not extend above the first story of the building. 
    "Shelter, fallout or blast" means a structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to human life during periods of danger to human life from nuclear fallout, blasts, air raids, storms or other emergencies. 
    "Sign" means any written announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or illumination used to advertise or promote the interest of any person when the same is displayed or placed out of doors in view of the general public and shall include every detached sign. 
    "Sign, advertising (billboard)" means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is located. 
    "Sign, business" means a sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered on the premises on which such sign is located. 
    "Sign, flashing" means an illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained constant in intensity and colors at all times in which such sign is in use. 
    "Sign, gross area of" means the area within the frame shall be used to calculate the gross area except that the width of the frame in excess of twelve (12) inches shall be added thereto. When letters or graphics are mounted without a frame the gross area shall be the area bounded by straight lines six inches beyond the periphery of the letters or graphics. Each surface utilized to display a message or to attract attention shall be measured as a separate sign. However, only one side of double face sign shall be measured in computing the gross area thereof. 
    "Sign, illuminated" means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes. 
    "Sign, nameplate" means a sign which states the name or address or both of the business or occupant of the lot where the sign is placed or may be a directory listing the names, address and business of occupants. 
    "Street line" means a right-of-way line of a street. 
    "Street" means a right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a primary means of access. 
    "Story" means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story. 
    "Structure" means anything constructed or erected with affixed location on the ground, or attached to something having fixed location on the ground. Among other things structures include, but are not limited to, buildings, manufactured homes, walls, fences, billboards, swimming pools, and signs. 
    "Travel trailer" means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and/or recreational purposes having a body width not exceeding eight feet. 
    "Truck or equipment terminal" means any lot, structure, or premises used for the parking or storage of capital equipment such as trucks, trailers, or other like equipment. 
    "Truck stop" means a motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of tractor trailer units and trucks and which shall include eating and/or sleeping facilities and abutting the right-of-way of a designated state trunk highway and/or a federally aided interstate highway and on a major town thoroughfare, city collector street, highway service road, or highway. 
    "Use" means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized, or maintained, and shall include the performance of such utilized, or maintained, and shall include the performance of such activity or defined by the performance standards of this title. 
    "Use, accessory" means a use subordinate to and serving the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto. 
    "Use, open" means the use of a lot without a building or including a building incidental to the open use with a ground floor area equal to five percent or less of the area of the lot. 
    "Use, permitted" means a public or private use which of itself conforms with the purposes and objectives of a particular district which conforms with all requirements, regulations and performance standards (if any) of such district. 
    "Use, principal" means the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses. A "principal use" may be either permitted or conditional. 
    "Variance" means a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this title, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of non-conforming in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. 
    "Veterinary" means those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment, and care of animals, including animal or pet hospitals. 
    "Warehousing" means the storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed building as a principal use. 
    "Wetlands" means any area where ground water is at or near the surface at least six months of the year; the boundary of which shall be defined as that area where the emergent aquatic vegetation ceases and the surrounding upland vegetation begins. 
    "Wholesaling" means the selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to another business that in turn sells to the final customer. 
    "Yard" means a required open space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky and lies between the building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line. 
    "Yard, front" means a yard extending between the side lot lines across the front of a lot adjoining a public right-of-way. 
    Depth of required front yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line adjoining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded property corners at street intersections, shall be assumed to be the point at which the side and front lot lines would have met without such rounding. Front and rear front yard lines shall be parallel. 
    "Yard, rear" means a yard across the whole width of the lot, extending from the rear line of the building to the rear line of the lot. In the case of through lots and corner lots, where will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards. 
    "Yard, side" means a yard between the building and the adjacent sideline of the lot, which separates it from another lot, extending from the front lot line to the rear yard. In the case of through lots and corner lots, side yards remaining after the full and half-depth front yards have been established shall be considered side yards. 
    "Zoning district (district)" means a section of the city for which the regulations governing the use of land, the construction and use of buildings and the occupancy of premises are hereby made. 
(Ord. 556 Art. 5, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-8-2013) 
17.04.050 - Minimum requirements. 
    Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail. 
(Ord. 556 § 1.02.01, 2003) 
17.04.060 - Violations-Penalties. 
A.  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or any building or structure or land is used in violation of this title or other regulation or resolution of the city council made under authority conferred, hereby the administrative official, or the city, as a corporation or any interested person, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of the building or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in and to and of such premises. 
B.  Violation of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in the granting of variance or conditional uses, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this title or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case, and each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 556 § 1.02.02, 2003) 
Chapter 17.08 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 
Sections: 

17.08.010 - Established. 
    There is hereby established a planning and zoning commission for the city and for land within its planning jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 525 § 1, 2002) 
17.08.020 - Membership. 
    The membership of the planning and zoning commission shall consist of the seven individuals appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. The members of the planning and zoning commission shall be resident electors of Sisseton, South Dakota, qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development and administration of the comprehensive land use plan. The mayor may appoint administrative officials of the city as ex-officio members of the commission. 
(Ord. 525 § 2, 2002) 
17.08.030 - Terms of members. 
    Elected Members. The term of each member of the planning and zoning commission shall be for a period of one year. 
(Ord. 525 § 3, 2002) 
17.08.040 - Duties. 
    It shall be a function and duty of the planning and zoning commission to propose a plan for the physical development of the city, including areas outside the boundary and within its planning jurisdiction which, in the commission's judgment bear relation to the planning of the municipality. It shall also be a function and duty of the planning and zoning commission to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council a zoning ordinance for the regulation of the height, area, bulk, location, and use of private and public structures and premises, and of population density as may be provided by law may be included as an adjunct to the comprehensive plan. It is also the function and duty of the planning and zoning commission to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. The planning and zoning commission may from time to time propose amendments, extensions, or additions to the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. 525 § 4, 2002) 
17.08.050 - Compensation. 
    All members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Ord. 525 § 5, 2002) 
17.08.060 - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall elect its chairperson from its membership for a term of one year with eligibility for re-election, and may fill such other offices as it may create in a manner prescribed by the rules of such commission. The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and shall adopt rules for transaction of its business and keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, and findings and determinations width shall be a public record. The planning and zoning commission may contract with planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of those made from funds by gift, shall be within the amount appropriated for the purpose by the city council, which shall provide funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the commission's work. 
(Ord. 525 § 6, 2002) 
Chapter 17.12 - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 
Sections: 

17.12.010 - Official zoning map. 
A.  The city is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this title. 
B.  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor of the city attested by the city finance officer under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 17.04.060 of Title 17 of the City of Sisseton, State of South Dakota," together with the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. The official zoning map shall be on file at the office of the city finance officer. 
C.  If, in accordance with the provisions of this title, as amended, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall not become effective until after the changes have been made on the official zoning map by the city finance officer or in his or her absence a person designated by the city council. Any unauthorized change by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided under Section 17.04.060. 
D.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map, which shall be located in the office of the city finance officer, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the city. 
(Ord. 556 § 1.03.01, 2003) 
17.12.020 - Designation uncertain. 
A.  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the various zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  The district boundaries are streets or alleys, highways, rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, lot lines, property lines, quarter section lines, half section lines, or full section lines, unless otherwise shown. 
2.  Where the designation on the official zoning map indicates lot lines approximately bound the various districts, the lot lines shall be the boundaries of such districts unless boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map. 
3.  In subdivided property, the zoning district boundary line on the official zoning map may be determined by use of the scale contained on the map. 
(Ord. 556 § 1.03.02, 2003) 
17.12.030 - Changes and/or replacement of official zoning map. 
A.  In the event that official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by ordinance adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city finance officer, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sisseton, State of South Dakota." 
B.  Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
C.  Changes to the official zoning map shall require amendment of this chapter by ordinance, as provided for in Chapter 17.76, Section 17.76.050 of this title. 
(Ord. 556 § 1.03.03, 2003) 
17.12.040 - Annexation. 
    Subsequent of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, any land annexed into the municipal boundaries of the city shall be automatically placed into the "A" Agricultural Zoning District, unless and until such time as the area is rezoned by amendment of these regulations by ordinance, as provided for in Chapter 17.76, Section 17.76.050 of this title. 
(Ord. 556 § 1.03.04, 2003) 
Chapter 17.16 - APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

17.16.010 - Applicability of regulations. 
    The regulations set forth by this title within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.01.01, 2003) 
17.16.020 - Compliance-Generally. 
    No building, or any part thereof shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or any part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, converted, altered, enlarged, extended, raised, moved or used, and no premises shall be used for any purpose other than a purpose permitted in the zoning district in which the building or premise is located, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.01.02, 2003) 
17.16.030 - Structures and lots-Construction or alteration-Limitations. 
    No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
A.  To exceed the height or bulk; 
B.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
C.  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 
D.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this title. 
E.  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this title shall be reduced in dimension or below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this title shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this title. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.01.03, 2003) 
Chapter 17.20 - NON-CONFORMING USES 
Sections: 

17.20.010 - Intent. 
A.  Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may later be adopted there exist: lots; structures; uses of land and structures; and characteristics of use which were lawful before the ordinance codified in this title was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendment. 
B.  Non-conforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these non-conformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that after passage of the ordinance codified in this title non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.02.01, 2003) 
17.20.020 - Repairs and maintenance. 
A.  On any non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a non-conforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing to an extent not exceeding ten (10) percent of the current replacement cost of the non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became non-conforming shall not be increased. 
B.  If a non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.02.02, 2003) 
17.20.030 - Uses and structures. 
    A lawful use or structure existing at the time the ordinance codified in this title is adopted or amended may continue even though such use does not conform to the district regulations subject to the following provisions: 
A.  A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land may not be changed to another non-conforming use; 
B.  Whenever a non-conforming use or structure has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not be changed back to a non-conforming use; 
C.  If any non-conforming building is destroyed or damaged by any casualty, such building may be repaired or replaced and use continued providing the reconstruction shall not add to the non-conformity or add to the cubic contents of the building as the same existed at the time of such casualty; and provided further that such repair or reconstruction of such building shall begin within six months after such casualty and completed within a reasonable time thereafter. However, if the damage caused by such casualty is such as to cause a loss in value exceeding fifty (50) percent of the replacement value immediately prior to such casualty then it cannot be rebuilt for a non-conforming use. The loss in value shall be computed as the difference between the actual cash value of the structure immediately before and after the casualty. Cash value shall be the same as that used for insurance purposes as approved by the state of South Dakota Insurance Code. 
D.  When a non-conforming use or structure is discontinued for a period of one year, it shall not be continued unless in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and SDCL 11-6-39; 
E.  Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any part of a structure, which was arranged or designed for such use previous to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, but shall not be extended outside each structure; 
F.  No existing non-conforming use or structure shall be enlarged, moved, or structurally altered except to change to a permitted use. This is not to include normal repairs and maintenance, which do not enlarge, move or structurally alter a non-conforming use; 
G.  Any structure which will, under this chapter, become non-conforming but for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or of amendments thereto, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans; provided construction is started within sixty (60) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or amendment thereof and continues to completion within one year. Such structure shall thereafter be a legally existing non-conforming structure. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.02.03, 2003) 
17.20.040 - Conditional uses-Exemptions. 
    Any use which is permitted as a conditional use in a district under the terms of this chapter (other than a change through board of adjustment action from a non-conforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district) shall not be deemed a non-conforming use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.02.04, 2003) 
17.20.050 - Non-conforming lots of record. 
A.  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record after the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. Such lots must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such a lot fails to meet the requirements of area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations of the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment. 
B.  If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title, and all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements in this chapter. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.02.05, 2003) 
Chapter 17.24 - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

17.24.010 - Generally. 
A.  The district regulations included in this chapter may be qualified or supplemented by additional regulations appearing elsewhere in this title. 
B.  Any use or uses not expressly permitted in a particular district shall be prohibited, unless such uses exist at the effective date of these regulations and qualify as non-conforming uses. 
C.  Deviation from zoning district lot, yard and related requirements, and deviation from city-wide zoning regulations, shall be prohibited, unless a variance is granted as provided for in Section 17.76.020. 
D.  The board of adjustment may establish additional requirements and standards for uses and structures permitted by conditional use permit as conditions to the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.03.01, 2003) 
17.24.020 - Zoning districts. 
    The following zone and use districts are hereby established for the purposes of administration and enforcement of this title. 
A.  "A" Agricultural District. 
1.  The purpose of the "A" Agricultural District is to: 
a.  To prevent premature urban development of certain lands which eventually may be appropriate for urban uses, until the installation of drainage works, streets, utilities, and community facilities and until objective projections of appropriate land uses are possible, 
b.  To permit the conduct and perpetuation of certain agricultural pursuits on land within the city, 
c.  To ensure adequate light, air and access for various land uses and to provide adequate separation between dwellings and facilities for housing animals. 
B.  "C1" Central Commercial District. The purpose of the "C1" Central Commercial District is to provide commercial areas oriented to the pedestrian shopper. 
C.  "HC" Highway Commercial District. 
1.  The purpose of the "HC" Highway Commercial District is to: 
a.  Serve the needs of the highway user and the automobile, and in so doing to establish appropriate locations along major streets and highways for highway and automobile-related retail and service establishments in locations which will not cause undue traffic congestion, 
b.  Permit development of highway service centers in the appropriate locations shown in the comprehensive land use plan. 
D.  "I1" Light Industrial District. 
1.  The purpose of the "I1" Light Industrial District is: 
a.  To establish and maintain high standards of site planning, architecture, and landscape design that will create an environment attractive to the most discriminating industries and research and development establishments, 
b.  To provide and ensure the continuity of locations for industries that can operate on small sites with minimum mutual adverse impact, 
c.  The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced in a manner to clearly support objectives of the community organizations and civic groups to locate industrial development in the city, 
d.  To reserve appropriately located areas for industrial and related activities, 
e.  To protect areas appropriate for industrial uses from intrusion by inharmonious uses, 
f.  To protect residential and commercial properties and to protect nuisance-free, non-hazardous industrial uses from noise, odor, insect nuisance, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat and cold, glare, truck and rail traffic, and noxious fumes, radiation and other hazards incident to certain industrial uses, 
g.  To provide opportunities for certain types of industrial uses to concentrate in mutually beneficial relationships to each other, 
h.  To provide adequate space to meet the needs of industrial development, including off-street parking and truck loading areas and landscaping, 
i.  To provide sufficient open space around industrial structures to protect them from the hazard of fire and to minimize the impact of industrial plants on nearby uses, 
j.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of building of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them. 
E.  "I2" Heavy Industrial District. 
    The purpose of the "I2" Heavy Industrial District is: 
a.  To provide locations where industries that desire larger sites and outside storage can operate with minimum restriction and without adverse effect on other uses, 
b.  The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced in a manner to clearly support objectives of the city, community organizations, and civic groups to locate industrial development in the city, 
c.  To reserve appropriately located areas for industrial and related activities, 
d.  To protect areas appropriate for industrial uses from intrusion by inharmonious uses, 
e.  To protect residential and commercial properties and to protect nuisance-free, non-hazardous industrial uses from noise, odor, insect nuisance, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat and cold, glare, truck and rail traffic, noxious fumes, radiation and other hazards incidental to certain industrial uses, 
f.  To provide opportunities for certain types of industrial uses to concentrate in mutually beneficial relationships to each other, 
g.  To provide adequate space to meet the needs of industrial development, including off-street parking and truck loading areas and landscaping, 
h.  To provide sufficient open space around industrial structures to protect them from the hazard of fire and to minimize the impact of industrial plants on nearby uses, and 
i.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them. 
F.  "PUD" Planned Unit Development. 
    The purpose of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) is to permit great flexibility in the use and design of structures and land in situations where modifications of specific provisions will not be contrary to its intent and purpose of significantly inconsistent with the planning on which it is based and will not be harmful to the neighborhood in which they occur. 
G.  "R1" Single-family Residential District. The purpose of the "R1" Single-family Residential District is to provide locations for low-density site-built single-family dwellings. Restrictions and requirements are intended to preserve and protect the residential character by preventing incompatible land uses. 
H.  "R2" General Residential District. The purpose of the "R2" General Residential District is to provide a stable environment for the development of two-family and multiple-family dwelling units free from incompatible land uses. 
I.  "R3" Multiple-family Residential District. The purpose of the "R3" Multiple-family Residential District is to permit a broad variety of housing types with an emphasis of encouraging many of the desirable characteristics of the single-family residential district while permitting higher population densities. It is further the purpose of the "R3" District provide for the development of a single-family residential manufactured home park located in an appropriate environment. Finally this district encourages site development in accordance with good planning principles; to prevent detrimental effects to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood; and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city. 
J.  Purpose of Residential Districts, Generally. The purpose of Residential Districts, Generally, is: 
1.  To reserve appropriately located areas for single-family living at reasonable population densities consistent with sound standards of public health and safety with sanitary sewers; 
2.  To insure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling; 
3.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excess size in relation to the land around them; 
4.  To protect residential properties from noise, elimination, unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, and other objectionable influence. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.03.02, 2003) 
Chapter 17.28 - "A" AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 

17.28.010 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses and structures shall be permitted in the "A" Agricultural District: 
A.  Any form of agriculture activity and related farm buildings, but excluding feed lots and sales or auction yards/barns; 
B.  Site-built single-family dwellings; 
C.  Modular homes; 
D.  Type I Manufactured homes (See Section 17.96.020); 
E.  Public parks and recreation areas. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.04.01, 2003) 
17.28.020 - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the "A" Agricultural District: 
A.  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted uses and structures when established within the space limits of this district. 
B.  Roadside stands for sales of agricultural products grown or produced on the premises. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.04.02, 2003) 
17.28.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  The following uses may be permitted, as a conditional use in the "A" Agricultural District by the board of adjustment subject to such requirements as the board deems necessary to protect adjacent property, prevent objectionable or offensive conditions and promote the health, safety, and general welfare: 
1.  Airports; 
2.  Cemeteries; 
3.  Commercial or private recreation areas not normally accommodated in commercial areas such as golf courses, campgrounds, drive in theatres, riding stables, race tracks, swimming pools, etc.; 
4.  Private clubs; 
5.  Riding and boarding stables; 
6.  Extraction of sand, gravel, minerals and petroleum or natural gas; 
7.  Public buildings or facilities erected or established and operated by any governmental agency; 
8.  Communication towers and antenna over forty-five (45) feet in height; 
9.  Home occupations; 
10.  Utility substations; 
11.  Veterinarian offices and animal hospitals; 
12.  Nurseries and greenhouses; 
13.  Commercial kennel; 
14.  Off-site/On-site signs; 
15.  Indoor firearms range; 
16.  Restricted use site; 
17.  Temporary liquid waste containment facility; 
18.  Sales or auction yards or barns. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.04.03, 2003) 
17.28.040 - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses and structures not specifically permitted or not permitted by conditional use are prohibited in the "A" Agricultural District. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.04.04, 2003) 
17.28.050 - Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements. The minimum lot area for residential uses is one acre or forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. The minimum lot width for residential uses is one hundred fifty (150) feet. Other permitted uses and uses permitted by conditional use shall have a minimum lot area and lot width as determined by the board of adjustment. 
B.  Minimum Yard Requirements. Permitted uses shall have a minimum front yard of seventy-five (75) feet, minimum side yards of thirty (30) feet, and a minimum rear yard of fifty (50) feet. Uses permitted by conditional use shall have minimum yard requirements as determined by the board of adjustment. 
C.  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total lot area. 
D.  Height Regulations. 
1.  Single-family Dwellings. Two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, excluding basement, or thirty-five (35) feet. 
2.  Other Allowable Uses. Seventy-five (75) feet for towers or steeples and not more than forty-five (45) feet for the principal building. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.04.05, 2003) 
Chapter 17.32 - "R1" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 

17.32.010 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses and structures shall be permitted in the "R1" Single-family Residential District: 
A.  Site-built single-family dwellings; 
B.  Modular homes; 
C.  Type I manufactured homes; 
D.  Public park and recreation areas; 
E.  Public and private schools. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.05.01, 2003) 
17.32.020 - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the "R1" Single-family Residential District: 
A.  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted uses, except stables. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.05.02, 2003) 
17.32.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the "R1" Single-family Residential District by the board of adjustment, subject to such requirements as board deems necessary to protect adjacent property, prevent objectionable or offensive conditions and promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
1.  Bed and breakfast establishments; 
2.  Two-family dwellings; 
3.  Multiple-family dwellings not to exceed eight units; 
4.  Home occupations; 
5.  Churches and parish houses; 
6.  Public buildings or facilities established and operated by any governmental agency; 
7.  Hospitals, nursing homes, and homes for the aged. Any building approved for such use shall be set back not less than fifty (50) feet from the street on which it fronts and shall have side and rear setbacks of not less than thirty (30) feet and shall meet other requirements of this chapter; 
8.  Licensed commercial day care facilities; 
9.  Utility substations; 
10.  Public and private golf courses; 
11.  Public and private swimming pools; 
12.  Museums. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.05.03, 2003) 
17.32.040 - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses and structures not specifically permitted or not permitted by conditional use shall be prohibited in the "R1" Single-family Residential District. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.05.04, 2003) 
17.32.050 - Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements. The minimum lot area for single-family residences is nine thousand (9,000) square feet. The minimum lot area for two-family and multiple-family dwellings up to four units shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet for the first dwelling unit plus two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet for each additional dwelling unit. The minimum lot area for multiple-family apartments, condominiums and townhouses for single-family occupancy of more than four dwelling units shall have a minimum lot area of thirteen thousand two hundred (13,200) square feet for the first four dwelling units plus one thousand eight hundred fifteen (1,815) square feet for each additional dwelling unit. The minimum lot width for single-family residences shall be seventy-five (75) feet. The minimum lot width for two-family dwelling shall be eighty-five (85) feet. The minimum lot width for multiple-family dwellings shall be one hundred (100) feet. The minimum lot depth width for residences shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet. Other permitted uses and uses permitted by conditional use shall have a minimum lot area, width, and depth as determined by the board of adjustment. All lots shall front on and have ingress and egress by means of a public right-of-way. 
B.  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total lot area. 
C.  Minimum Yard Requirements. Single-family residential dwellings shall have a minimum front yard of thirty (30) feet, measuring the same from the building foundation. In the case of corner lots, both front yards shall be provided according to the pattern of existing structures. Single-family and two-family residential dwellings shall have minimum side yards of seven feet, and a minimum rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet; however, accessory structures may be placed within five feet of an alley. The minimum side yards for multiple-family dwellings with three to eight units shall be ten (10) feet. The minimum rear yards for multiple-family dwellings with three to eight units shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Other permitted uses and uses permitted by conditional use shall have minimum yard requirements as determined by the board of adjustment. 
D.  Height Regulations. 
1.  Single-family Dwellings. Two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, excluding basement, or thirty-five (35) feet. 
2.  Other Allowable Uses. Seventy-five (75) feet for communication or public utility towers or steeples and not more than forty-five (45) feet for the principal building. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.05.05, 2003) 
Chapter 17.36 - "R2" GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 

17.36.010 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses and structures shall be permitted in the "R2" General Residential District: 
A.  Any permitted use in the "R1" District; 
B.  Two-family dwellings; 
C.  Multiple-family dwellings, not to exceed eight units; 
D.  Type I manufactured homes. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.06.01, 2003) 
17.36.020 - Permitted accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted uses. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.06.02, 2003) 
17.36.030 - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the "R2" General Residential District by the board of adjustment, subject to such requirements as the board deems necessary to protect adjacent property, prevent objectionable or offensive conditions and promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
A.  Any conditional use permitted in the "R1" District; except two-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings, not to exceed eight units which are permitted uses in this district; 
B.  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.06.03, 2003) 
17.36.040 - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses and structures not specifically permitted or not permitted by conditional use are prohibited in the "R2" General Residential District. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.06.04, 2003) 
17.36.050 - Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements. The minimum lot area for single-family residences shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet. The minimum lot area for two-family and multiple-family dwellings up to four units shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet for the first dwelling unit plus two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet for each additional dwelling unit. The minimum lot area for multiple-family apartments, condominiums and townhouses for single-family occupancy of more than four dwelling units shall have a minimum lot area of thirteen thousand two hundred (13,200) square feet for the first four dwelling units plus one thousand eight hundred fifteen (1,815) square feet for each additional dwelling unit. The minimum lot width for single-family residences shall be fifty (50) feet. The minimum lot width for two-family dwelling shall be eighty-five (85) feet. The minimum lot width for multiple-family dwellings shall be one hundred (100) feet. The minimum lot depth for residences shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet. Other permitted uses and uses permitted by conditional use shall have a minimum lot area, width, and depth as determined by the board of adjustment. All lots shall front on and have ingress and egress by means of a public right-of-way. 
B.  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total lot area. 
C.  Minimum Yard Requirements. Single-family residential dwellings shall have a minimum front yard of thirty (30) feet, measuring the same from the building foundation In the case of corner lots, both front yards shall be provided according to the pattern of existing structures. Single-family and two-family residential dwellings shall have minimum side yards of seven feet, and a minimum rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet; however, accessory structures may be placed within five feet of an alley. The minimum side yards for multiple-family dwellings with three to eight units shall be ten (10) feet. The minimum rear yards for multiple-family dwellings with three to eight units shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Other permitted uses and uses permitted by conditional use shall have minimum yard requirements as determined by the board of adjustment. 
D.  Height Regulations. 
1.  Single-family Dwellings. Two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, excluding basement, or thirty-five (35) feet. 
2.  Other Allowable Uses. Seventy-five (75) feet for communication or public utility towers or steeples and not more than forty-five (45) feet for the principal building. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.06.05, 2003) 
Chapter 17.40 - "R3" MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 

17.40.010 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses and structures shall be permitted: 
A.  Any permitted use in the "R2" District; 
B.  Multiple-family dwellings exceeding eight units. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.07.01, 2003) 
17.40.020 - Permitted accessory uses. 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident thereto, excluding stables. 
B.  No part of any manufactured home park shall be used for non-residential purposes, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well being of park residents and for the management and maintenance of the park. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.07.02, 2003) 
17.40.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the "R3" Multiple-family Residential District by the board of adjustment, subject to such requirements as the board seems necessary to protect adjacent property, prevent objectionable or offensive conditions and promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
1.  Any conditional use permitted in the "R2" District; 
2.  Type II manufactured home located in a manufactured home park; 
3.  Manufactured home park developments. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.07.03, 2003) 
17.40.040 - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses and structures not specifically permitted or not permitted by conditional use shall be prohibited in the "R3" Residential District. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.07.04, 2003) 
17.40.050 - Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  The minimum lot area for single-family residences shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet. The minimum lot area for two-family and multiple-family dwellings up to four units shall have a minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet for the first dwelling unit plus two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet for each additional dwelling unit. The minimum lot area for multiple-family dwellings with five to eight units shall be thirteen thousand two hundred (13,200) square feet for the first four dwelling units plus one thousand eight hundred fifteen (1,815) square feet for each additional dwelling unit. The minimum lot area for multiple-family dwellings exceeding eight dwelling units shall be eighteen thousand six hundred forty-five (18,645) square feet for the first eight dwelling units plus one thousand eight hundred fifteen (1,815) square feet for each additional dwelling unit. The minimum lot width for single-family residences shall be fifty (50) feet. The minimum lot width for two-family and multiple-family dwellings up to four dwelling units shall be eighty-five (85) feet. The minimum lot width for multiple-family dwellings with five to eight dwelling units shall be one hundred (100) feet. The minimum lot width for multiple-family dwellings with more than eight dwelling units shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
2.  The minimum lot depth width for residences shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet. All lots shall front on and have ingress and egress by means of a public right-of-way or approved street. 
B.  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total lot area. 
C.  Minimum Yard Requirements. Single-family residential dwellings shall have a minimum front yard of thirty (30) feet, measuring the same from the foundation wall of the building. In the case of corner lots, both frontage yards shall be provided according to the required depth for front yards in that district or according to the prevailing yard pattern of existing structures. Residential dwellings shall have a minimum rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet. Single-family and two-family residential dwellings shall have minimum side yards of seven feet, measuring the same from the foundation wall of the building. The minimum side yards for multiple-family dwellings with three to eight units shall be ten (10) feet. The minimum side yards for multiple-family dwellings with more than nine units shall be fifteen (15) feet. Other permitted uses and uses permitted by conditional use shall have minimum yard requirements as determined by the board of adjustment. Uses permitted by conditional use shall have minimum yard requirements as determined by the board of adjustment. 
D.  Height Regulations. 
1.  Single-family Dwellings. Two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, excluding basement, or thirty (30) feet. 
2.  Other Allowable Uses. Seventy-five (75) feet for communication or public utility towers or steeples and not more than forty-five (45) feet for the principal building. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.07.05, 2003) 
Chapter 17.44 - "C1" CENTRAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 

17.44.010 - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses and structures shall be permitted in the "C1" Central Commercial District: 
1.  Retail and wholesale sales; 
2.  Finance, insurance and real estate services; 
3.  Business services excluding any warehousing and storage services; 
4.  Churches, welfare and charitable services; business associations, professional membership organizations, labor unions, and similar labor organizations, and civic, social and fraternal associations; 
5.  Eating establishments; 
6.  Communication and utility uses; 
7.  Public buildings and grounds; 
8.  Service establishments; 
9.  Professional, governmental and education services; 
10.  Bar or tavern; 
11.  Printing and publishing establishments; 
12.  Offices; 
13.  Parking lot and/or parking garages; 
14.  Bed and breakfast; 
15.  Hotels and motels; 
16.  Theaters, bowling alleys, and pool halls. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.08.01, 2003) 
17.44.020 - Permitted accessory uses. 
A.  The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the "C1" Central Commercial District: 
1.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted uses. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.08.02, 2003) 
17.44.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  The board of adjustment, subject to such requirements, may permit the following uses as a conditional use in the "C1" Central Commercial District as the board deems necessary to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare: 
1.  Adult uses; 
2.  Apartments; 
3.  Licensed day care centers; 
4.  On/off-sale liquor establishments; 
5.  Lumberyards; 
6.  Garages, repair shops, and service stations; 
7.  Car washes provided that their operative machinery is within an enclosed structure and adequate drainage is provided; 
8.  Second floor apartments; 
9.  Nursing home; 
10.  Assisted living center; 
11.  Group Home; 
12.  Laundromat; 
13.  Public and private hospitals; 
14.  Public and private business or trade schools; 
15.  Wholesale business; 
16.  Bus depot; 
17.  Automobile sales. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.08.03, 2003) 
17.44.040 - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses and structures not specifically permitted or not permitted by conditional use shall be prohibited in the "C1" Central Commercial District. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.08.04, 2003) 
17.44.050 - Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements. Permitted uses shall have a minimum lot area of two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) square feet and a minimum lot width of twenty-two (22) feet. Uses permitted by conditional use shall have a minimum lot area and width as determined by the board of adjustment. 
1.  Minimum Yard Requirements. No side or front yard requirements for buildings adjacent to Main Avenue, Veterans Avenue or Second Avenue. All other buildings in the "C1" Central Commercial District shall observe a yard requirement to the minimum yard requirements of the "R2" Residential District. 
2.  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all permitted uses shall not exceed ninety (90) percent. The maximum lot coverage for all uses permitted by conditional use shall be as determined by the board of adjustment. 
3.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty (50). 
(Ord. 556 § 2.08.05, 2003) 
Chapter 17.48 - "HC" HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 

17.48.010 - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses and structures shall be permitted in the "HC" Highway Commercial District: 
1.  Horticulture and the raising of field crops; 
2.  Automobile garages, repair shops, and service stations; 
3.  Motor fuel stations; 
4.  Utility substations; 
5.  Wholesale or retail sales of: lumber and other building materials, farm equipment, motor vehicles, marine crafts, manufactured homes, trailers, farm and garden supplies, fuel and ice; motor vehicles and automobile equipment; drug, chemicals, all allied products; dry goods and apparel; groceries, and related products; electrical goods, hardware, plumbing, heating and equipment and supplies; machinery, equipment and supplies; beer, wine, and distilled alcoholic beverages; paper and paper products; furniture and home furnishings; lumber and construction materials; 
6.  General farm products (other than animals), household goods, and equipment maintenance; 
7.  Mortuaries; 
8.  On/off-site signs; 
9.  Truck or bus terminal; 
10.  Wholesale merchandising or storage warehouse; 
11.  Hotel/motel; 
12.  Offices; 
13.  Retail shopping; 
14.  Cafes, restaurants, and taverns; 
15.  Car washes provided that their operative machinery is within an enclosed structure and adequate drainage is provided. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.09.01, 2003) 
17.48.020 - Conditional uses. 
A.  The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses in the "HC" Highway Commercial District by the city board of adjustment subject to such requirements, as the board deems necessary to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare: 
1.  Public and private hospitals and nursing homes; 
2.  Veterinary services; 
3.  Churches and convents; 
4.  Light manufacturing; 
5.  Public utility buildings and storage. 
6.  Truck stop; 
7.  Commercial kennel; 
8.  Drive-in restaurant; 
9.  Drive-in theater; 
10.  Bowling alley; 
11.  Pool hall; 
12.  Dance hall; 
13.  Poultry and livestock processing (meat locker); 
14.  Private or commercial campground and recreation; 
15.  Contractor storage yards; 
16.  Communication towers or antenna over forty-five (45) feet in height; 
17.  Public highway/public works garages; 
18.  Propane distribution facility; 
19.  Cement plant. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.09.02, 2003) 
17.48.030 - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses and structures not specifically permitted or not permitted by conditional use are prohibited in the "HC" District. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.09.03, 2003) 
17.48.040 - Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements. The minimum lot area for permitted uses shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. The minimum lot width for permitted uses shall be one hundred (100) feet. The minimum lot area and width for uses permitted by conditional use shall be as determined by the board of adjustment. 
B.  Minimum Yard Requirements. Permitted uses shall have a minimum front yard of twenty-five (25) feet, minimum side yards of ten (10) feet, and a minimum rear yard of twenty (20) feet. The minimum side or rear yard requirement shall be thirty-five (35) feet when the permitted or conditional use is adjacent to residentially zoned property. The minimum yard requirements for uses permitted by conditional use shall be as determined by the board of adjustment. 
C.  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the total lot area. The maximum lot coverage for uses permitted by conditional use shall be as determined by the board of adjustment. 
D.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.09.04, 2003) 
Chapter 17.52 - "I1" LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 

17.52.010 - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses and structures shall be permitted in the "I1" Light Industrial District: 
1.  Horticulture and the raising of field crops; 
2.  On/off-site signs; 
3.  Utility substations; 
4.  Motor freight terminals, garaging and equipment maintenance; 
5.  Contract construction services; 
6.  Storage plants, lumber yards, distributing stations and warehouses; 
7.  Wholesale business; 
8.  Research facilities; 
9.  Light manufacturing-Light assembly work, machine shops doing assembling or shaping and light cutting and sampling; 
10.  Woodworking shops or plants; 
11.  Public utility buildings and storage; 
12.  Public highway/public works garages; 
13.  Automobile garages, repair shops; 
14.  Motor fuel stations; 
15.  Any industrial use, other than those permitted by conditional use, which can meet the performance standards listed in Section 17.52.060. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.10.01, 2003) 
17.52.020 - Permitted accessory uses. 
A.  The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the "I" Industrial District: 
1.  Caretaker and watchman quarters; 
2.  Buildings and structures customarily incidental to permitted uses. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.10.02, 2003) 
17.52.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the "I1" Light Industrial District by the board of adjustment, subject to such requirements as the board deems necessary to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare: 
1.  Poultry and livestock processing (meat locker); 
2.  Land reclamation; 
3.  Open storage as a primary use; 
4.  Communication towers over forty-five (45) feet in height; 
5.  Building material sales; 
6.  Contractors storage yards; 
7.  Auto and truck wash; 
8.  Grain and feed storage; 
9.  Bulk liquid storage; 
10.  Grain elevator (storage); 
11.  Grain and feed milling. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.10.03, 2003) 
17.52.040 - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses and structures not specifically permitted or not permitted by conditional use shall be prohibited in the "I1" District. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.10.04, 2003) 
17.52.050 - Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements. The minimum lot area for permitted uses shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. The minimum lot width for permitted uses shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet. The minimum lot area and width for uses permitted by conditional use shall be as determined by the board of adjustment. 
B.  Minimum Yard Requirements. 
1.  Permitted uses shall have a minimum front yard of fifty (50) feet; minimum side yards of ten (10) feet, except when bordering a residential district, then a side yard should be thirty-five (35) feet and such side yards shall be landscaped or fenced in a suitable manner to buffer residential uses; and a minimum rear yard depth of thirty-five (35) feet shall be required which abut a residential district and such rear yard shall be landscaped or fenced in a manner to buffer residential uses. All other rear yards shall be twenty-five (25) feet. The minimum yard requirements for uses permitted by conditional use shall be as determined by the board of adjustment. 
2.  All outdoor storage within five hundred (500) feet of a residential district must be completely enclosed in a building or by a solid walled fence at least two feet above the highest point of the stock pile which fence shall be maintained in safe and good repair. 
3.  Storage yards for junk shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any adjoining street line and thirty-five (35) feet from any other property line, and shall be screened by a solid wall at least two feet above the highest stock pile and maintained in a state of good repair. Further provided, that no storage yard for junk shall be allowed on any lot in an "I" Industrial zone that is within five hundred (500) feet of a residential zone. 
C.  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total lot area. The maximum lot coverage for uses permitted by conditional use shall be as determined by the board of adjustment. 
D.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.10.05, 2003) 
17.52.060 - Performance standards. 
A.  Purpose. The guiding of urban development so as to develop a compatible relationship of uses depends upon certain standards being maintained. Uses permitted in the various district; conditional and accessory uses shall conform to the following standards. These standards shall apply in all industrial districts. 
B.  Noise. Any use established shall be so operated that no noise resulting from the use is perceptible beyond the boundaries of that plat line of the site on which such use is located. This standard shall not apply to incidental traffic, parking, loading, construction, or maintenance operations. 
C.  Odor. The emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines or to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited. 
D.  Air Pollution. State emission standards shall be met by all possible sources of air pollution. In any case, there shall not be discharged from any sources whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants, smoke or detriment, nuisance or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public in general to endanger the comfort, health or safety of any such considerable number of persons or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business, vegetation or property. 
E.  Smoke and Particulate Matter. Any use established, enlarged or remodeled after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be so operated as to control the emission of smoke or particulate matter to the degree that it is not detrimental to or shall endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare of the public. For purpose of grading the density of the smoke, the Ringelmann Chart published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines shall be employed. The emission of smoke shall not be a density greater than Number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart. 
F.  Toxic or Noxious Matter. Any use established shall be so operated as not to discharge across the boundaries of the lot or through percolation into the subsoil beyond the boundaries of the lot wherein such use is located toxic or noxious matter is such concentration as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause injury or damage to property or business. 
G.  Vibration. Any use creating periodic earth-shaking vibrations, such as may be created from a drop forge shall be prohibited if such vibrations are perceptible beyond the lot line of the site on which the use is located. The standard shall not apply to vibrations created during the process of construction. 
H.  Glare or Heat. Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission shall be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the use is located. Lighting in all instances shall be diffused or directed away from residentially zoned districts and public streets. 
I.  Explosives. Any use requiring the storage utilization or manufacturing of products which could decompose by detonation shall be located not less than four hundred (400) feet from any residentially zoned district line provided that this section shall not apply to the storage or usage of liquefied petroleum or natural gas for normal residential or business purposes. 
J.  Sewage and Liquid Wastes. No operation shall be carried on which involves the discharge into a sewer, watercourse, river or the ground of liquid wastes of any radio-active nature, or liquid wastes of chemical nature, which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operations or corrosive or damaging to sewer pipes and installations. 
K.  Fire Hazard. All flammable substances involved in any activity or use, shall be handled in conformance with the standard of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and any additional regulations that may from time to time be adopted by the city council. 
L.  Physical Appearance. All operations shall be carried on within an enclosed building except that new or operable equipment and waste materials stored in enclosed containers, not readily visible from the street, may be displayed or stored in the open. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.10.06, 2003) 
Chapter 17.56 - "I2" HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
Sections: 

17.56.010 - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses and structures shall be permitted in the "I2" Heavy Industrial District: 
1.  All permitted uses in the "I1" Light Industrial District; 
2.  Grain elevator (storage); 
3.  Grain and feed milling; 
4.  Poultry and livestock processing (meat locker); 
5.  Land reclamation; 
6.  Open storage as a primary use; 
7.  Communication towers over forty-five (45) feet in height; 
8.  Building material sales; 
9.  Contractors storage yards; 
10.  Auto and truck wash; 
11.  Grain and feed storage; 
12.  Bulk liquid storage. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.11.01, 2003) 
17.56.020 - Permitted accessory uses. 
A.  The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the "I2" Heavy Industrial District: 
1.  Buildings and structures customarily incidental to permitted uses. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.11.02, 2003) 
17.56.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the "I2" Heavy Industrial District by the board of adjustment, subject to such requirements as the board deems necessary to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare: 
1.  Automobile wrecking, cars and parts, storage and sale; 
2.  Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture; 
3.  Explosives, manufacture or storage; 
4.  Fat, grease, lard or tallow rendering or refining; 
5.  Fertilizer manufacture from organic material; 
6.  Glue or size manufacture; 
7.  Junk and salvage, such as metal, paper, rags, waste or glass, storage, treatment or bailing; junk or salvage yards, provided that the area is enclosed or screened from public view as required by the board of adjustment; 
8.  Petroleum or asphalt refining; 
9.  Petroleum products terminal; 
10.  Storage or processing of raw hides or furs; 
11.  Stockyards or slaughter of animals; 
12.  Communication towers; 
13.  Those uses which have been declared a nuisance in any court of record, or which may be noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, gas, smoke, or noise; 
14.  Rock crushing and gravel processing; 
15.  Livestock sales or auction barns and yards; 
16.  Heavy manufacturing; and 
17.  The board of adjustment may permit other uses which in its opinion are not detrimental to other uses and are in the general character of other uses in the "I2" Heavy Industrial District. These may include all manufacturing and processing uses, which can meet the performance standards listed in Section 17.52.060, but do not include extractive or mining operations. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.11.03, 2003) 
17.56.040 - Prohibited uses. 
    All uses and structures not specifically permitted or not permitted by conditional use shall be prohibited in the "I2" District. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.11.04, 2003) 
17.56.050 - Area regulations. 
A.  Minimum Lot Requirements. The minimum lot area for permitted uses is thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. The minimum lot width for permitted uses is one hundred fifty (150) feet. The minimum lot area and width for uses permitted by conditional use are as determined by the board of adjustment. 
B.  Minimum Yard Requirements. 
1.  Permitted uses shall have a minimum front yard of fifty (50) feet minimum side yards of ten (10) feet, except when bordering a residential district, then a side yard should be thirty-five (35) feet and such side yards shall be landscaped or fenced in a suitable manner to buffer residential uses; and a minimum rear yard depth of thirty-five (35) feet shall be required which abut a residential district and such rear yard shall be landscaped or fenced in a manner to buffer residential uses. All other rear yards shall be twenty-five (25) feet. The minimum yard requirements for uses permitted by conditional use shall be as determined by the board of adjustment. 
2.  All outdoor storage within five hundred (500) feet of a residential district must be completely enclosed in a building or by a solid walled fence at least two feet above the highest point of the stock pile which fence shall be maintained in safe and good repair. 
3.  Storage yards for junk shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any adjoining street line and thirty-five (35) feet from any other property line, and shall be screened by a solid wall at least two feet above the highest stock pile and maintained in a state of good repair. Further provided, that no storage yard for junk shall be allowed on any lot in an "I" Industrial zone that is within five hundred (500) feet of a residential zone. 
C.  Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total lot area. The maximum lot coverage for uses permitted by conditional use shall be as determined by the board of adjustment. 
D.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.11.05, 2003) 
Chapter 17.60 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 
Sections: 

17.60.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of a planned unit development (PUD) is to permit great flexibility in the use and design of structures and land in situations where modifications of specific provisions of this chapter will not be contrary to its intent and purpose of significantly inconsistent with the planning on which it is base and will not be harmful to the neighborhood in which they occur. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.12.01, 2003) 
17.60.020 - Application and modification powers. 
    The provisions of this chapter may be applied, upon application of the owner, to any area exceeding five acres in size. The owner shall file with the planning and zoning commission a proposed site plan, a description of the structures to be erected, and the other facilities of the project and the land uses involved. In addition, he or she shall furnish such other information as the planning and zoning commission may reasonably require. In acting upon the application, the city may alter setback requirements, height limits, building size limits, off-street parking regulations, landscaping rules and density and intensity limits. It may also authorize uses not permitted in the district where the lot is located, providing such uses are desirable or convenient for the users of the lot as developed or the immediate neighborhood, and provided that such uses are planned so as to assure that they will not materially alter the existing character of the neighborhood. Where the city determines application is consistent with the purpose of the section and with other requirements hereof, it shall enter an order authorizing development and use in accordance with the site plan and description contained in the application, modified as the city may require to carry out the intent and purpose of this section and containing any conditions or restrictions which the city may consider necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The order shall recite the reasons and findings of fact upon which it is based. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.12.02, 2003) 
17.60.030 - Procedure. 
    The following procedural and informational requirements shall be followed for planned unit development requests: 
A.  Planning and Zoning Commission and Staff Review. Applicant shall meet with the planning and zoning commission on an informal basis at its regular meeting to relate his or her intent. The planning and zoning commission will evaluate the consistency of his or her intent with the comprehensive plan. Thereafter, the planning and zoning commission may refer the application to the city staff or consultants to review materials presented and to discuss the plan proposal, suggest alternatives as necessary, and authorize presentation of concept plan and supportive information. 
B.  Concept Plan and Supportive Information. Applicant shall prepare the following supportive graphic and written information materials as follows: (1) Property description and acreage, identification of owner and developer, (2) Existing conditions, area relationships, surrounding property ownership, relationship to guide plan, existing land use, transportation, zoning, utilities, etc, (3) Natural features, water, topography, soils, vegetation, etc., and their implications, if any, for development, (4) Concept plan showing land use areas, land use intensities, acreage, number of units, proposed circulation, open space, recreation and development staging, (5) Written information describing proposed land use and land use objectives, the type and character of buildings, methods of providing utilities, etc. 
C.  Final Development Plan. 
1.  Applicant shall prepare a final development plan for that part to be rezoned. Required graphic and written information for the final plan is on file at city hall. 
2.  Applicant shall prepare the following supportive graphic and written information materials as follows: 
a.  Legal descriptions of all parcels to be rezoned, 
b.  Detailed site plan showing all dimensions, structures, parking and streets, utilities, common open spaces and grading, 
c.  Covenants and restrictions, if any, applying to each tract and to open spaces and including the responsibility for the maintenance and operation of common areas and facilities, 
d.  Density and gross building computations, 
e.  Preliminary architectural drawings for each different building type, except single-family dwellings showing building elevations, schematic floor plans, unit relationships, activity areas, building materials, etc. 
f.  Construction and occupancy schedule, 
g.  A description of the nature and character of non-residential developments including a description of waste emissions, activities conducted on the premises, etc. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.12.03, 2003) 
17.60.040 - Final application and rezoning. 
    Applicant shall file a rezoning petition, pay fees and submit all required information for review by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.12.04, 2003) 
17.60.050 - Review. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall review the final development plan to determine if it conforms with the comprehensive plan and the approved concept plan and shall recommend approval, revision or reapplication or denial of the final development plan and rezoning before making its recommendation to the city council. The city council shall hold public hearings and approve or disapprove the rezoning request. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.12.05, 2003) 
17.60.060 - Final development plan. 
    Requested changes in the final development plan, if the approval has been granted, will require a public hearing and the submission of an emended plan document unless the changes are minor enough to authorize by administrative judgment. Building permits for construction in a planned development shall be issued by the administrative official based on the approved final development plan and the zoning. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.12.06, 2003) 
Chapter 17.64 - PERMITS 
Sections: 

17.64.010 - Required. 
    No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit issued by the administrative official. No permit shall be issued by the administrative official except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, unless he or she received a written order from the board of adjustment in the form of an administrative review, under conditional use, or variance as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.01.01, 2003) 
17.64.020 - Building permits. 
A.  No new construction, modification of the footprint of any structure, change of use, moving in/moving out of structures, demolition, or other action which may be regulated by the provisions of this chapter including use, height, number of occupants, lot area, off-street parking or yard requirements, shall occur without a building permit issued by the administrative official. No construction or attachment to city water or sewer utility mains or the removal of any public street surface shall be undertaken which does not comply with the plans and specifications or detailed statement contained in the application for a permit. 
B.  A permit shall be required whenever there is a structural change in any building. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no permit shall be required for siding, shingling, window repair or replacement, foundation repair or replacement, or painting of any buildings. 
C.  The City shall have authority to fine the property owner up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) for failure to apply for and receive a building permit. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.01.02, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 650, 12-28-2017) 
17.64.030 - Applications. 
A.  All applications for permits shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the administrative official, including legal description, existing or proposed buildings or alterations; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformity with, and provide for the enforcement of, this title. Such plans and data accompanying the permit shall be final and conclusive, and a deviation therefrom shall require a new permit. 
B.  The administrative official shall return one copy of the permit application to the applicant, after such copy has been marked either approved or disapproved and attested to by his or her signature on such copy. The administrative official shall retain the original of the permit application and site plan, similarly marked. The administrative official shall then, if the application is approved, issue a signed building permit; or if the application is disapproved he or she shall notify the party making the application as to rejection of the plans. 
C.  Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the administrative official authorize only the use, arrangement, or construction set forth in such approved plans and specifications. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance without authorization shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as provided by this chapter. The failure to obtain the necessary building permit shall be punishable under this chapter. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.01.03, 2003) 
17.64.040 - Building permit process. 
A.  An application for a building permit, accompanied with the appropriate fee, available from the administration official, shall be completed by the landowner requesting the building permit. Completed applications shall be returned to the administrative official for review. To be considered complete, the application form shall be accompanied by the following additional items: 
1.  Applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale with the following information indicated in order to determine compliance with this chapter. 
a.  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the exact size, shape, and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of all existing buildings and structures, and the exact size and location on the lot of the structure or building proposed to be repaired, altered, erected, or moved, and the size, arrangement, number of parking stalls, movement of vehicles and ingress and egress drives for all off-street parking and loading facilities. 
b.  The location of the lot with respect to existing rights-of-way and adjacent lots. 
c.  A letter of certification stating that the lot to be built upon has been accurately surveyed or lot markers (pins) have been located. This requirement may be waived by the administrative official. 
d.  Any other information which the administrative official may deem necessary for consideration in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  One copy of the application shall be returned to the applicant, after the administrative official has marked such copy as either approved or disapproved, and attested to the same by signing the copy of the plans. The administrative official shall retain one copy of the application, similarly marked for city records. 
C.  The administrative official shall then, if the applicant is approved, issue a signed building permit. If the administrative official determines the proposed action would not be in compliance with the provisions of these regulations, a building permit may not be issued, and the applicant may then appeal the action of the administrative official to the board of adjustment. 
D.  Building permits shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises and visible from a public right-of-way at all times from the beginning until completion of such construction, alteration, or repair. 
E.  With application for a building permit, the site must be clearly staked out and/or plans that clearly indicate the structure to be erected or remodeled, or alterations of the existing structure will be examined by the administrative official. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.01.04, 2003) 
17.64.050 - Fee schedule. 
    The city council shall by resolution establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expense and a collection procedure for building permits, conditional use permits, variances, amendments, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees may be altered or amended only by the city council. 
    The current fee schedule shall be available from the administrative official. All fees shall be the property of the city and shall be paid over to the city finance officer or credit to the general fund of the city, which under no condition shall be refunded. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.01.05, 2003) 
17.64.060 - Expiration of building/use permit. 
    If the work described in any building/use permit has not been substantially completed within one year of the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall expire and be canceled by the administrative official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new permit has been obtained. A building/use permit may be extended for a period of up to one year. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.01.06, 2003) 
Chapter 17.68 - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL 
Sections: 

17.68.010 - Establishment and purpose. 
    The position of administrative official is hereby established for the city. The administrative official shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. Further, he or she may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the city council may direct. The administration official shall administer and enforce this title. It is the intent of this chapter that questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official and that such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the administrative official. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.02.01, 2003) 
17.68.020 - Duties. 
    The powers and duties of the administrative official shall be as follows: 
A.  Issue all building permits and make and maintain records thereof; 
B.  Keep a record book of all building permits issued; 
C.  Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and the use of land to determine compliance with this title; 
D.  Notify in writing persons responsible for violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering action necessary to correct; 
E.  Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions; alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions; 
F.  Maintain permanent and current records of this regulation, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments, variances, appeals, and applications; 
G.  Provide public information relative to all matters arising out of this title; 
H.  Forward to the planning and zoning commission all applications for amendments to this title; 
I.  Forward to the board of adjustment, applications for appeals, variances, conditional uses, or other matters on which the board of adjustment is required to pass under this title; 
J.  Initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of this title, and to make such reports available to the planning and zoning commission. The administrative official shall receive applications for building permits, conditional uses, variances, and zoning amendments; 
K.  Institute in the name of the city any appropriate actions or proceeding against a violator as provided by law; 
L.  Serve as an ex-officio non-voting member of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.02.02, 2003) 
17.68.030 - Powers. 
    If the administrative official shall find that any of the provisions of this title are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this title to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.02.03, 2003) 
Chapter 17.72 - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
Sections: 

17.72.010 - Establishment. 
    A board of adjustment is hereby established. The Sisseton City Council and mayor shall act as board of adjustment. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.03.01, 2003) 
17.72.020 - Procedures for meetings. 
A.  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this title. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairperson, or in his or her absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
B.  The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its meetings of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official action, all of which shall be filed in the office of the city finance officer of the city and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.03.02, 2003) 
17.72.030 - Powers and duties. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  Administrative Review. 
1.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administration official in the enforcement of this title. 
2.  To hear and decide appeals to decisions made by the administrative official regarding zoning permits. 
B.  Conditional Uses. To hear and decide only such conditional uses as the board of adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this title; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether conditional uses should be granted; and to grant conditional uses with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this title, or to deny conditional uses when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this title. 
C.  Variances. To hear requests for variances from this title in instances where strict enforcement would cause unnecessary hardship, and to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this title as which will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.03.03, 2003) 
17.72.040 - Hearings-Appeals-Notice. 
A.  Appeals to the board of adjustment concerning interpretation or administration of this title may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer of the governing body of the city affected by any decision of the administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days or such lesser period as may be provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the administrative official and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative official shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
B.  The board of adjustment shall hear and decide, on not less than ten (10) days public notice prior to an affixed time and place for hearing appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit decision, determination or refusal made by the administrative official or other administrative officers in carrying out the enforcement of any provision of this title, and for interpretation of the zoning map. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.03.04, 2003) 
17.72.050 - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause an imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.03.05, 2003) 
Chapter 17.76 - CONDITIONAL USES, VARIANCES AND ZONING AMENDMENTS-PROCEDURE 
Sections: 

17.76.010 - Conditional uses. 
A.  In order to give the district use regulation of this title the flexibility necessary to achieve the objectives of the comprehensive plan, in certain districts conditional uses are permitted, subject to the granting of a use permit. Conditional uses include those uses generally not suitable in a particular zoning district, but which may under some circumstances be suitable. When such circumstances exist, a conditional use permit may be granted. Conditions may be applied to issuance of the permit and a periodic review of the permit may be required. 
B.  The following procedure for requesting a conditional use permit shall be followed: 
1.  The board of adjustment shall follow the following procedure in considering the recommendation of the administrative official. A conditional use permit from the terms of this title shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until: 
a.  An application for a conditional use permit, available from the administrative official, shall be completed by the landowner requesting the conditional use permit. Any required attachments and fees as in Section 17.64.050 shall further accompany the application. The written application for a conditional use shall indicate the section of this title under which the conditional use is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested; completed applications shall be returned to the administrative official for review. To be considered by the board of adjustment, the application form shall be completed. If any of the information required by Section 17.64.020 has changed since the original building permit application, the revised, update or corrected information shall accompany the application for a conditional use permit. 
b.  The administrative official shall review the application and forward it to the board of adjustment for their decision to either approve or not approve the application. 
c.  The administrative official shall set the date, time and place for a public hearing to be held by the board of adjustment. The administrative official shall notify the adjacent landowners (excluding streets and alley) by certified mail at the expense of the applicant, at least one week before the public hearing. The administrative official shall publish notice of the public hearing, with all costs to be paid by the applicant, not less than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the area affected by the proposed conditional use permit. 
d.  A public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. 
e.  The board of adjustment shall rule that it is empowered under the section of this title described in the application to grant the conditional use, and that the granting of the conditional use will not adversely affect the public interest. 
f.  Before any conditional use shall be issued, the board of adjustment shall make written finding certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual conditional uses and that satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made concerning the following, where applicable: 
i.  Utilities, refuse, and service areas, with reference to locations, availability, and compatibility; 
ii.  Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and character; 
iii.  Required yards and other open space; 
iv.  General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district; 
v.  Entrance and exit to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe; 
vi.  Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties; 
vii.  Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention on effects of the conditional use on adjoining properties and properties generally within the district. 
2.  In order to preserve the intent of these zoning regulations and to protect the public interest, the board of adjustment may attach conditions to a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall remain valid only as long as the original applicant complies with any terms and conditions of the conditional use permit, as attached by the board of adjustment. 
3.  Approval of any application for a conditional use permit shall be by a two-thirds majority (five votes) of all members of the board of adjustment. 
4.  Revocation. A violation of any condition set forth in a conditional use permit shall be a violation of this title and automatically terminate the conditional use permit. 
5.  Denial. Conditional use permits may be denied by motion of the board of adjustment and such motion shall constitute a finding and determination that the conditions required for approval do not exist. No application for a conditional use permit which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of six months from the date of the order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the board of adjustment. 
6.  Lapse of Conditional Use Permit. A conditional use permit shall become void one year after it was granted unless made use of within the year or such longer period as the board of adjustment within the year may provide. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.04.01, 2003) 
17.76.020 - Variances. 
A.  Variances are designed to allow some flexibility in this title in cases where use of a property is overwhelmingly effected by exceptional topographic conditions, or any other extraordinary situation or condition of such a parcel of land. 
B.  Variances are to be approved only when a property owner demonstrates that the provisions of all or part of these regulations present an undue hardship on such property owner's use of such parcel land. A variance shall include a description of the specific regulatory item or items in these regulations, which are found to produce, the undue hardship. Variances shall only be granted when the board of adjustments finds that such relief from this title will be neither detrimental to the public good nor in conflict with the intent of this title. 
C.  The following procedure for requesting a variance shall be followed: 
1.  The board of adjustment shall follow the following procedure in considering the recommendation of the administrative official. A variance from the terms of this title shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until: 
a.  An application for variance, available from the administrative official, shall be completed by the landowner requesting the variance and shall be accompanied by any required attachments and fees as in Section 17.64.050. The written application for a variance shall indicate the section of this title under which the variance is sought and stating the grounds for which it is requested. Completed applications shall be returned to the administrative official for review. To be considered by the board of adjustment, the application form shall be completed. If any of the information required by Section 17.64.020 has changed since the original building permit application, the revised, updated or corrected information shall accompany the application for a variance. 
b.  The administrative official shall review the application and forward it to the board of adjustment for their decision to either approve or not approve the application. 
c.  The administrative official shall set the date, time and place for a public hearing to be held by the board of adjustment. The administrative official shall notify the adjacent landowners (excluding streets and alleys) by certified mail at the expense of the applicant, at least one week before the public hearing. The administrative official shall publish notice of the public hearing, with all costs to be paid by the applicant, no less than (10) days prior to the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the area affected by the proposed variance. 
d.  A public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. 
e.  The board of adjustment shall follow the following procedure in considering the recommendation of the administrative official. A variance from the terms of this title shall not be granted by the board of adjustments unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating: 
i.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved, and which are not applicable to other land, structures, or buildings in the same district; 
ii.  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this title; 
iii.  That the special conditions and circumstance do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
iv.  Financial disadvantage of the property owner shall not constitute conclusive proof of unnecessary hardship within the purposes of zoning; 
v.  That granting the variance request will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; 
vi.  No non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or non-conforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
f.  The board of adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of subsection (C)(1)(e) above have been met by the applicant for a variance. 
g.  The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of land, building, or structure. 
h.  The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
i.  Approval of any variance shall be by a two-thirds majority (five votes) of all members of the board of adjustment. 
2.  In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title and punishable under Chapter 1.16 of this code. 
a.  Under no circumstances shall the board of adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this title in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this title in the district. 
3.  Denial. Variances may be denied by motion of the board of adjustment and such motion shall constitute a finding and determination that the conditions required for approval do not exist. No application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of six months from the date of the order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the board of adjustment. 
4.  Revocation. A violation of any condition set forth in granting a variance shall be a violation of this title and automatically terminates the variance. A variance shall become void one year after it was granted unless made use of within the year or such longer period prescribed by the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.04.02, 2003) 
17.76.030 - Board's powers-Appeals. 
A.  It is the intent of this title that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, and that such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the administrative official. 
B.  In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
C.  The concurring vote of three-fourths of all members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this title, or to effect any variation in the application of this title. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.04.03, 2003) 
17.76.040 - Appeals. 
    Any persons, or any board, taxpayer department, board, or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may seek review by a court of record of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.04.04, 2003) 
17.76.050 - Zoning amendments. 
A.  Whenever the public necessity, safety, and general welfare or good zoning practices justifies such action, and after consideration and recommendation by the city planning and zoning commission, as provided herein, the city council may change zoning district boundaries, use groups, or the regulations established by this title. A proposed change of zoning district boundaries or regulations may be initiated by the city planning and zoning commission, city council, or by application of one or more of the owners of property within the area requested to be changed. However, no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published once ten (10) days prior to the date of the meetings as provided in South Dakota Compiled Laws Chapter 11-4, and its and amendments. Unless otherwise provided for in these regulations, any change in these regulations, shall require city council approval of an ordinance describing the changes. The city council may not consider the ordinance until the planning and zoning commission has delivered a recommendation to either approve or not approve the ordinance. 
B.  The following procedure for requesting a zoning amendment shall be followed: 
1.  The landowner or other person(s) requesting the amendment shall complete an application for amendment, available from the administrative official. Completed applications shall be returned to the administrative official for review. To be considered by the planning and zoning commission and city council, the application form shall be completed and shall be accompanied by the following items: 
a.  Any required attachments and fees, including registered or certified mail costs in Section 17.64.050. 
b.  Any additional information, as requested by the administrative official, as lawfully may be required to determine conformance with and provide for enforcement of this title. 
c.  The administrative official shall review the application, and shall forward a summary of the application, and his or her comments regarding the application, to the planning and zoning commission for their review. 
d.  The administrative official shall set the date, time, and place for individual or joint public hearings to be held by the planning and zoning commission and city council. The administrative official shall publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the area affected by the proposed amendment; such notice shall be published not less than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. If the proposed amendment will change the boundaries of a zoning district, the administrative official shall notify all owners of property within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the proposed boundary change, by certified mail at the expense of the applicant, at least one week before the public hearing. The city council may waive the above mailed notice requirements in connection with a city wide zoning initiated by the planning and zoning commission or city council. 
e.  The public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. Minutes of the public hearing shall be recorded and kept in the records of the planning and zoning commission. 
f.  The planning and zoning commission shall either recommend or not recommend approval of the amendment to the city council. 
g.  The city council may adopt the amendment(s) to the zoning ordinance by a simple majority vote unless the amendment has been denied by the planning and zoning commission in which case a two-thirds (four votes) vote of the city council is required date. 
h.  When the city council approves a proposed amendment affecting the zoning classification of property, affected property owners may file a written protest to stop such an amendment from taking effect. If the protest meets the following standard, such amendment shall not become effective unless the amendment is approved by two-thirds (four votes) of the city council. 
i.  Protest Standard. The protest shall be signed by at least forty (40) percent of the owners of equity in the parcels in the area affected by the amendment, and the parcels or parts of parcels within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the area affected by the amendment. 
j.  Effect of Denial. Rezoning applications may be denied by motion of the council and such motion shall constitute a finding and determination that the proposed rezone is not in the best interest for the physical development of the city. No application which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of six months from the date of the order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. 556 § 3.04.05, 2003) 
Chapter 17.80 - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

17.80.010 - Accessory buildings. 
A.  Only specifically authorized accessory uses allowed; accessory uses must be subordinate to principal use. 
B.  No accessory use shall be permitted in any district unless such use is specifically authorized by this chapter. No accessory use shall be deemed to be authorized by this chapter unless such use is in fact subordinate to and on the same zoning lot with the principal use in conjunction with which it is maintained. 
C.  No accessory building may be used for residential dwelling purposes at any time. 
D.  No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
E.  No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building. However, in no case, shall such accessory building exceed twenty (20) feet in height, in all residentially zoned districts except by conditional use permit. 
F.  No detached garages or other accessory building shall be located nearer the front lot line than the principal building on that lot. 
G.  No accessory building or structure unless an integral part of the principal building, shall be erected, altered, or moved within five feet of the principal building. 
H.  Residential Districts. Accessory uses shall be permitted for the principal permitted uses and conditional uses of the residential districts only in accordance with the provisions of the following table hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. 
I.  Commercial and Industrial Districts. 
1.  In any commercial or industrial district, any accessory use customarily incidental to the principal permitted use or conditional use shall be permitted, except those uses specifically prohibited in the district. 
2.  Accessory buildings in the "Commercial" and "Industrial" Districts may be located any place to the rear of the principal building, subject to any other city ordinances. 
Permitted Uses: 
Principal Use Permitted Accessory Uses Single-family dwellings; duplexes; townhouses and multiple-family dwellings; nursery schools and day care centers 1. Private garages.  a.  Attached garages shall be limited to maximum dimensions of 36 feet by 48 feet and conform to the design of the house.  b.  Unattached garages shall be limited to maximum sidewalls of 12 feet; maximum dimensions of 36 feet by 48 feet; and a maximum of 4/12 roof pitch or to conform to the design of the house. 2. Buildings or structures for customary residential storage purposes not over 10 feet in height and not exceeding 150 square feet in gross floor area. 3. Readily moveable sports, recreation, or outdoor cooking equipment. 4. Permanent sports or recreational structures or facilities, such as tennis courts, swimming pools, barbeque pits, and similar improvements provided a site plan for such facility is approved. 5. Home occupations but only as defined herein. 6. Non-commercial greenhouses provided that greenhouses over 100 square feet in floor area must have an approved site plan. 7. Off-street parking and storage of vehicles, but only as provided in Chapter 17.88. Churches, Convents and Monasteries 1. All customarily incidental uses reasonably necessary to allow the free exercise of religion, but not to include commercial use. All Conditional Uses 1. All customarily incidental uses reasonably necessary to promote the primary purposes of the principal use, provided that such use must be specifically authorized by the Board of Adjustment for the principal use. All other items 1. No accessory uses permitted.  
(Ord. 556 § 4.03, 2003) 
17.80.020 - Fences. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this title, fences, walls, and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided that no solid fences, walls and hedge extending past the building setback into the front yard and side yard setback shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height above the ground level, and fences of a chain-link material extending past the building setback into the front yard shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches in height above the ground level. However, if the fence, wall or hedge running parallel to the street is further than forty (40) feet from the street line, it may be seven feet high. 
B.  No person shall hereafter construct, erect, or maintain or cause to be constructed, erected, or maintained in the city limits of this city any fences of any character or material, without first securing permission from the administrative official. Further, no such fence of any kind shall be built closer than one foot to the inside sidewalk line or street right-of way, and no electric fence or fence with barbed wire may be constructed in any residential district within the city limits. Except that barbed wire may be used in connection with a security fence when the barbed wire is at least six feet from the ground. 
C.  Fences that are adjacent to alleys shall be set back five feet from the street/boulevard right-of-way. 
D.  Fences shall be permitted in all yards subject to the following: 
1.  Fences may be placed along property lines provided no damage of any kind results to abutting property. 
2.  Prior to issuance of a building permit for any fence, abutting property owners shall be notified. 
3.  That side of the fence considered to be the face (facing as applied to fence post) shall face abutting property. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.02, 2003) 
17.80.030 - Maintenance. 
    In all districts, all structures, required landscaping and fences shall be maintained so as not to be unsightly or present harmful health or safety conditions. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.23, 2003) 
17.80.040 - Visibility at intersections in residential districts. 
    On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one-half and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along the street lines fifty (50) feet from the point of intersection. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.01, 2003) 
17.80.050 - Structures-Access. 
    Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to private streets approved by the board of adjustment, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for services, fire protection and required off-street parking. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.06, 2003) 
17.80.060 - Access driveways. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for the design of safe ingress and egress for uses oriented to serving the motoring public but not including parking lots. 
A.  The distance from a driveway to the intersection of two streets shall not be less than twenty (20) feet measured along the curb line with the property line and the point of tangency of the curb lines with the curb return of the driveway, provided, however, that if, in the option of the administrative official, present or future traffic conditions warrant greater distances, such greater distances shall be required subject to the approval by the city council. 
B.  The minimum distance between driveways shall be twenty-five (25) feet measured at the property or street right-of-way line; provided however, that if, in the opinion of the administrative official, present or future traffic conditions warrant greater distances, such greater distances shall be required subject to approval by the city council. 
C.  The minimum driveway angle to the street shall be forty-five (45) degrees unless otherwise recommended by the administrative official and approved by the city council. 
D.  The distance from a driveway to the property line of an adjacent property shall not be less than five feet measured along the curb line between the point of intersection of the curb line with the property line extended and the point of tangency of the curb line with the curb return of the driveway unless otherwise recommended by the administrative official and approved by the city council. 
E.  Access driveways shall be thirty (30) feet wide measured along the property line between the curb faces of the driveway unless otherwise recommended by the administrative official and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.28, 2003) 
17.80.070 - Traffic control. 
    The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that will avoid congestion on public streets, safety hazards, or excessive traffic through residential areas. Traffic into and out of all business and industrial uses or areas shall in all cases be forward moving with no backing onto streets or pedestrian ways. No access drive to any lot shall be located within twenty (20) feet of any two intersecting street right of way lines. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.27, 2003) 
17.80.080 - Vacated streets. 
    Whenever any street, alley, easement or public way is vacated by official action, the zoning district abutting the centerline of the vacated area shall not be affected by such proceeding. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.19, 2003) 
17.80.090 - Screening. 
A.  Where any commercial or industrial use (structure, parking or storage) is adjacent to property zoned or developed for residential use, that business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a business or industry is across the street from a residential zone, but not on that side of a business or industry considered to be the front as determined by the administrative official. 
B.  The screening required herein shall consist of a solid fence or wall at least fifty (50) percent opaque not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height but shall not extend within fifteen (15) feet of any street or driveway opening onto a street. The screening shall be placed along the property lines or in case of screening along a street, fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way with landscaping (trees, shrubs, grass and other planting) between the screening and the pavement. A louvered fence shall be considered solid if it blocks direct vision. Planting of a type approved by the planning and zoning commission may also be required in addition to or in lieu of fencing. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.14, 2003) 
17.80.100 - Exterior storage. 
    In all the "R" Districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following: laundry drying and recreational equipment, construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises, agricultural equipment and materials if these are used or intended for use on the premises, off-street parking except as otherwise regulated herein. Boats and unoccupied trailers, less than twenty (20) feet in length, are permissible if stored in the rear yard more than ten (10) feet distinct from any property line. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.24, 2003) 
17.80.110 - Utility easements. 
    No building or addition thereto shall be erected over or across any existing public utility or upon any platted easement. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.12, 2003) 
17.80.120 - Permanent foundations required for dwellings. 
    No dwelling shall be constructed, installed, or moved into the area under the jurisdiction of these regulations, unless the dwelling is constructed upon, installed on or moved onto a permanent foundation, as defined in these regulations. Exempted from this requirement are manufactured homes in an approved manufactured home park, provided the manufactured homes are anchored with tie downs to prevent the manufactured home from dangerous motion during high wind or other weather related events. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.11, 2003) 
17.80.130 - Dwelling units prohibited. 
    No cellar, garage, tent, trailer, basement with unfinished structure above, or accessory building shall at anytime be used as a dwelling unit except trailers located in an approved manufactured home court. The basement portion of a finished home or apartment building may be used for normal eating and sleeping purposes provided it is property damp-proofed, has suitable fire protection and exits, and is otherwise approved by the administrative official. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.20, 2003) 
17.80.140 - Erection of more than one principal structure on a lot. 
    In any district, only one structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on single lot, provided that yard and other requirements are met. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.08, 2003) 
17.80.150 - Moved in buildings. 
A.  It is unlawful to move any house or other building onto any lot or to any new location within the city unless and until a permit to do so has been obtained from the administrative official. No permit shall be issued until the following requirements are met: 
1.  The fee for the permit as prescribed in Section 17.64.030, shall have been paid. 
2.  Before any house or other structure is moved onto a vacant lot, the planning and zoning commission shall report to the board of adjustment whether the structure will be compatible with other development in the area. If the board of adjustment concurs with the decision of the planning and zoning commission that a structure would depreciate the area into which it is to be moved, it may withhold issuance of a permit for such relocation. The applicant shall submit photographs taken from two or more angles of the structure to be moved and photos of the lot on which the structure is to be located together with adjacent lots and structures. These requirements do not apply to construction sheds or other temporary structures to be located on a lot for eighteen (18) months or less. 
3.  That it shall have been shown to the satisfaction of the administrative official that the house or other building complies with the gas, plumbing, electrical, and construction requirements of the city. 
4.  That the work is to be completed within twelve (12) months after the permit has been issued by the administrative official. 
5.  If the applicant does not utilize a licensed mover, the applicant may also be required to file with the city finance officer a sufficient bond conditioned so that the applicant will indemnify the city and any public utility for any damage done to any property, street, alley or public grounds. No building shall be moved other than during the period from daylight to sundown. Before any permit is granted under this section, the applicant must furnish proof that all taxes legally assessed against the property have been paid. If a building or structure is to be moved onto any lot within the city, the administrative official shall have the power to deny the granting of a moving permit on the grounds that the intended use of the structure or location thereof is contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
6.  Any building, which is not newly constructed to be used for first occupancy, shall also meet the following minimum requirements to obtain a permit. 
a.  The written consent of all property owners owning property immediately adjacent (excluding streets and alleys) to the proposed building site. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.13, 2003) 
17.80.160 - Refuse. 
    In all zoning districts, refuse (rubbish, garbage, trash, waste or debris) shall be kept within a complete enclosed building or specially designed closed container made for such purpose. Owners of vacant lots shall be responsible for keeping their property free of trash. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.29, 2003) 
17.80.170 - Waste material. 
    Waste material shall not be washed into the public storm sewer system nor the sanitary sewer system without first having received a permit to do so from the city. If the permit is not granted a method of disposal shall be devised which will not require continuous land acquisition for permanent operation and will not cause a detrimental effect to the adjacent land. Should the waste be of a solid form rather than fluid the storage area shall be so located and fenced as to be removed from the public view. In all districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, garbage, materials not currently in use for construction or otherwise regulated herein shall be kept in an enclosed building or property contained in a closed container for such purposes. The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such vacant land free of waste material and noxious weeds. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.25, 2003) 
17.80.180 - Private wastewater treatment systems (septic tanks). 
    All existing septic tanks shall be considered non-conforming uses. All structures used for human habitation, commercial and industrial use must be connected to a sewage disposal system approved by the city board of adjustment. Minimum requirements include watertight septic tank connected to a drain field; and no drain area to be deeper than five feet. If the city sanitary sewer system is available within two hundred (200) feet, all such structures must be connected at the landowner cost. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the city council in the event that connection to the city's sanitary sewer system would result in the construction of a lift station. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.09, 2003) 
17.80.190 - Drainage. 
    No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water run-off causing flooding, or erosion on adjacent properties. Such run-off shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, water course, pond area or other suitable facility. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.26, 2003) 
17.80.200 - Farming operations. 
    All farms currently in existence will be permitted to continue operation subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Agriculture, excepting commercial animal farms, fur farms, kennel and poultry farms, is a permitted use in the district in which an existing operation is located, provided that any new private stable or other new building in which farm animals are kept shall only be allowed via a conditional use permit. 
B.  Limited sales of products produced may be conducted on the premises from a roadside stand but such stand shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height or five hundred (500) square feet in floor area, and no portion of any such stand shall be located or erected nearer than forty (40) feet from any street line. 
C.  The city council may require any farm operation to secure a conditional use permit to continue the operations in the event the farming operations are so intensive as to constitute feed lot or an Industrial type use consisting of the compounding, processing and packaging of products for wholesale or retail trade and further that such operations may tend to become a permanent industrial type operation that cannot be terminated as can a normal farming operation. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.15, 2003) 
17.80.210 - Soil processing. 
    The processing of sand, gravel, or other material mined from the land shall be permitted only by conditional use permit. Such conditional use permit shall include a site plan where the processing is to be done, showing the route of trucks moving to and from the site in removing processing material from the site the condition in which the site shall be left upon completion, and such permit shall not be granted for a period of longer than twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.18, 2003) 
17.80.220 - Land reclamation. 
    Under this chapter, land reclamation is the reclaiming of land by depositing of material so as to elevate the grade. As a condition of the building permit, the administrative official may require the applicant to furnish a finished grade plan which will not adversely affect the adjacent land, and as conditions thereof shall regulate the type of fill permitted, program for rodent control, plan for fire control and general maintenance of the site, controls of vehicular ingress and egress, and for control of material disbursed by with or hauling of material to or from the site. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.16, 2003) 
17.80.230 - Mining. 
    The extraction of sand, gravel, or other material from the land in the amount of four hundred (400) cubic yards or more and removal thereof from the site without processing shall be mining. In all districts the conduct of mining shall be permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use permit. Such permit shall be permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use permit. Such permit shall include as a condition thereof, a plan for a finished grade which will not adversely affect the surrounding land or the development of the site on which the mining is being conducted and the route of trucks moving to and from the sites. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.17, 2003) 
17.80.240 - Drive-in establishments. 
    Drive-in theatres and restaurants shall be subject to the following performance standards. 
A.  A screening fence not over six feet in height nor less than four feet which is at least fifty (50) percent opaque throughout its height shall be constructed along the property line or a planting strip not less than fifteen (15) feet in which width reserved and planted along the property line shall be developed according to a submitted planting plan that meets the approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
B.  The outside lighting, if installed, shall be in accord with a plan approved by the council. 
C.  The entire area shall have a drainage system designed by an engineer and approved by the city council. 
D.  The entire area other than that occupied by structure or planting shall be surfaced with a material which will control dust and drainage. 
E.  A box curb at least six inches above grade shall separate the public walk area from the lot except at approved entrance or exit drives. 
F.  Should the use be a drive-in theater, a solid fence not less than eight feet in height and extending at least to within two feet of the ground shall be constructed around the property. 
G.  The lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as to have no direct source of light visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent land in residential use. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.21, 2003) 
17.80.250 - Motor fuel stations. 
A.  Motor fuel stations in all districts shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  The set-back of any overhead canopy or weather protection, free standing or projecting from the station structure shall be not less than ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line nor less than twenty (20) feet from an adjacent property line; 
2.  The total height of any overhead canopy or weather protection shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height; 
3.  Open dead storage of motor vehicles, other than motor vehicles for rent, shall not be permitted for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours; 
4.  No sales of motor vehicles or trailers or campers shall be permitted; 
5.  All goods for sales by a motor fuel station convenience store other than those generally required for the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles shall be displayed within the principal motor fuel station structure; 
6.  Each motor fuel station shall be architecturally designed so as to be as compatible as possible with the general architectural intent of the area in which it is located; 
7.  For the purposes of architectural appropriateness each and every side of a motor fuel station shall be considered as a front face; 
8.  A minimum ten (10) foot landscaped yard shall be planted and maintained behind all property lines except at driveway entrances; 
9.  The entire motor fuel station site, other than that part devoted to landscaping and structures shall be surfaced with concrete or bituminous surfacing to control dust and provide adequate drainage, and such surfaces shall be designed to meet the requirements of a minimum four ton axle load; 
10.  Wherever a motor fuel station abuts on "R" District, a fence or compact evergreen hedge not less than fifty (50) percent opaque nor less than six feet high shall be erected and maintained along the side and rear property line that abuts the "R" District. Application of this provision shall not require a fence within fifteen (15) feet of any street right-of-way line; 
11.  All trash, waste materials, and obsolete automobile parts shall be stored within a separate enclose behind the principal structure of the motor fuel station; 
12.  All interior curbs shall be constructed within the property lines to separate driving and parking areas form landscaped area. Such curbing shall be constructed of concrete and shall be of six inch non-surmountable design; 
13.  All rental campers, trailers, or motor vehicles shall be stored within the rear and/or side yard not adjacent to the street. The rentals shall not be stored within the front yard set-back nor the side yard adjacent to the street; 
14.  All outside parking spaces shall be located to the side and/or rear of the principal structure; 
15.  All outdoor illumination shall be provided with lenses, reflectors, or shades which will concentrate the light upon the premises so as to prevent any undue glare or rays of light there form being directly visible upon any adjacent street, roadway, or private property occupied for residential purposes; 
16.  Not withstanding anything to the contrary in other sections of this chapter the following requirements shall be observed for signs for motor fuel stations: 
a.  Internal motor fuel stations shall have no more than one pedestal type business identification sign not to exceed twenty-six (26) feet in height erected within any yard except that no part of the sign shall be less than six feet from a property line measured as a horizontal distance. No part of the sign surface shall be less than sixteen (16) feet vertical distance from the grade of the nearest driveway or parking area. The pedestal shall not be less than five feet from a driveway at its nearest point. The signs shall have no more than three faces and shall not exceed more than one hundred (100) square feet per face. 
b.  An internal motor fuel station may have two additional signs. The signs shall be not more that two faces and shall not exceed more than thirty (30) square feet per face. The top of the sign shall not be more than twenty (20) feet in height. 
c.  Major motor fuel stations and truck stops shall have no more than two pedestal type business identifications signs not to exceed thirty (30) feet in height erected within any yard except that no part of the sign shall be less than six feet from a property line measured as a horizontal distance. The sign shall have no more than three faces and shall not exceed more than one hundred and fifty (150) square feet per face. No part of the sign surface shall be less than sixteen (16) feet vertical distance from the grade of the nearest driveway or parking area. The pedestal shall not be less than five feet from a driveway at the nearest point. 
d.  Major motor fuel stations and truck stops may have two additional signs. The sign shall have no more than two additional signs. The sign shall have no more than two faces and shall not exceed more than thirty (30) square feet per face. The top of the sign shall not be more than twenty (20) feet in height. 
17.  Not withstanding anything to the contrary in other sections of this chapter the following minimum requirements shall be observed for yards and set-backs for motor fuel stations: 
Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Adjacent to Another Lot Side Yard Adjacent to Street Rear Yard Pump Yard Set-Back Fuel Station 150' 60' 30' 60' 30' 25' Major Motor Fuel Station 200' 60' 30' 60' 30' 30' Major Motor Fuel Station With Trailer or Motor Vehicle Rentals 150' 60' Either side yard adjacent to street or rear yard 50' other yard 60' Either side yard adjacent to street or rear yard 50' other yard Either side yard adjacent to street or rear yard 50' other yard Truck Stop 200' 80' 60' 80' 60' 30'  
(Ord. 556 § 4.22, 2003) 
Chapter 17.84 - SIGNS 
Sections: 

17.84.010 - Permitted. 
    Signs are a permitted accessory use in all use districts subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Private signs are prohibited within the public right-of-way or easements except that the council may grant a conditional use permit to locate signs and decorations on or within the right-of-way for a specified time not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
B.  Illuminated signs may be permitted within all districts. 
C.  Illuminated signs or devices giving off an intermittent or rotating beam existing of a collection or concentration of rays of light shall not be permitted in any district. 
D.  For purpose of selling, renting or leasing property, sign not in excess of twenty-five (25) square feet per surface may be placed within the front yard of such property to be sold or leased. Such signs shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line unless flat against the structure. 
E.  For purpose of selling or promoting a residential project of ten (10) or more dwelling units, a commercial area of three acres or more, or an industrial area of ten (10) acres or more, one sign not to exceed two-hundred and forty (240) feet of advertising surface may be erected upon the project site. Such sign shall not remain after ninety (90) percent of the project is developed. 
F.  Signs existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein which do not conform to the regulations set forth in this chapter or any previous ordinance are a non-conforming use. 
G.  No sign be erected that, by reason of position, shape or color would interfere in any way with the proper functioning or purpose of a traffic sign or signal. 
H.  In districts other than "I2" Heavy Industrial District, signs shall not be painted directly on the outside wall of a building. Signs shall not be painted on a fence, rocks, or similar structure or feature in any district. Paper and similar sign shall not be attached directly to a building wall by an adhesive or similar means. 
I.  There shall be no more than one temporary (three months or less) sign on any lot. The total area of such signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet. 
J.  Election signs are permitted on private property in any district provided such signs are removed within thirty (30) days following the election as related to the sign. No election sign shall be permitted in any residentially zoned district sooner than three months preceding the election relating to the sign. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.04, 2003) 
17.84.020 - "R" Districts. 
    Within the "R" Districts the following signs are permitted: 
A.  One nameplate sign for each dwelling and such sign shall not exceed two square feet in area per surface, and no sign shall be so constructed as to have more than two surfaces. 
B.  One nameplate sign for each dwelling group of six or more units, and such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area per surface and no sign shall be so constructed as to have more than two surfaces. 
C.  One nameplate sign for each permitted non-residential use or use by conditional permit. Such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area per surface and no sign shall be so constructed as to have more than two surfaces. 
D.  Symbols, statues, sculptures and integrated architectural features on buildings may be illuminated by flood-lights provided the direct source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or interferes with adjacent landowners. 
E.  Any sign over one-half square foot shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any property line. No sign shall exceed ten (10) feet from any property line. No sign shall exceed ten (10) feet in height above the average grade level. Signs may be illuminated but such lighting shall be diffused or indirect and not illuminated beyond any lot line. Any sign over ten (10) square feet may project only two feet into any required yard area. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.04.01, 2003) 
17.84.030 - "C1," "HC," "I1," and "I2" Districts. 
    Within the "C1," "HC," "I1" and "I2" Districts, advertising signs, nameplate signs and business signs are permitted subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Within the "HC" District, the aggregate square footage of sign space per lot shall not exceed the sum of one square foot for each front foot of lot which fronts on a public right-of-way fifty (50) feet or more in width. No individual sign surface shall exceed two hundred and forty (240) square feet in area, nor shall two or more signs be so arranged and integrated as to cause an advertising or display surface over two hundred and forty (240) square feet. 
B.  Within the "C1" District, the aggregate square footage of sign per lot shall not exceed the sum of three square feet per front foot of building, with the least width of the lot fronting on a public right-of-way, fifty (50) (or more) feet in width being the front for applying this chapter, plus one square foot for each foot of side yard abutting along a public right-of-way fifty (50) feet or more in width. No individual sign shall exceed two hundred and fifty (250) square feet in area. 
C.  Within any "I" District, the aggregate square footage of sign space per lot shall not exceed the sum of four square feet per front foot of building, plus one square foot per front foot of property not occupied by a building. No individual sign's surface shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet except advertising signs. Advertising signs permitted as an accessory use shall not exceed seven hundred (700) square feet of sign surface and such sign, when permitted as a principal use, shall not exceed the sum of five square feet per front foot of lot. 
D.  Within the "C1" District, no sign shall extend in height more than two feet above the highest outside wall parapet of any principal structure nor shall any sign be located closer than ten (10) feet from any property line except that any sign over ten (10) square feet may project only two feet into any required yard area from the principal building. 
E.  Within any industrial district, no ground sign shall exceed a height of forty (40) feet above the average grade and no roof sign or sign attached to a building shall exceed a height of thirty (30) feet above the highest outside wall or parapet of any principal building. No sign shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from any lot line and no sign exceeding ten (10) square feet shall project more than two feet into any required yard area. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.04.02, 2003) 
Chapter 17.88 - PARKING 
Sections: 

17.88.010 - Major recreation equipment. 
A.  No off-street parking of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, watercraft or trailers should be permitted in the required front yard of any residence except as follows: 
1.  Upon a driveway providing direct access to the garage or rear yard; 
2.  Upon any other driveway provided that it is no wider than twenty-two (22) feet; 
3.  Upon the yard area between the driveway and the nearest side lot line. 
B.  No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.05.01, 2003) 
17.88.020 - Without current license plates. 
    Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type not in use and/or without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any property other than in completely enclosed buildings or within a designated junk or salvage yard. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.05.02, 2003) 
17.88.030 - Off-street parking and loading space requirements. 
A.  Regulation of off-street parking and loading spaces in this chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and so to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking, loading and unloading from motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land and structures. 
B.  Except in the "C1" Central Commercial District, off-street motor vehicle parking and loading spaces shall hereafter be provided on the same lot as, and in the number stated, for each use set forth in the schedule of minimum off-street parking and loading requirements below. In the event the minimum number of spaces specified cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot as the principal use for which the spaces are required, the planning and zoning commission may permit such spaces to be provided on other off-street property within four hundred (400) feet of the entrance to such principal use. 
C.  The location of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be in compliance with the following requirements: 
1.  Application of Off-Street Parking Regulations. The regulations and requirements set forth in this chapter shall apply to the required and non-required off-street parking facilities in all use districts. 
2.  General Parking Provisions. 
a.  Permits Prior to Effective Date. Structures or uses for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, but for which work has not been completed shall be exempt from the hereinafter stated parking requirements if the structure is completed within six months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
b.  Reduction of Existing Off-Street Parking Space. Off-street parking spaces and loading spaces existing upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall not be reduced in number unless the number exceed the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use. 
c.  Floor Area. The term "floor area" for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces shall be the net usable floor area of the various floors, devoted to retail sales, services, office spaces, processing and fabrication exclusive of hallways, utility space, storage areas other than warehousing. 
d.  Benches in Places of Public Assembly. In stadiums, churches, and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each twenty-two (22) inches of such seating facility shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining required parking. 
e.  Parking Spaces. Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length and each space shall be served adequately by access drives. For purposes of calculating parking space requirements, one parking space for one vehicle shall equal three hundred (300) square feet of storage and maneuvering area including access drives. 
f.  Use of Parking Facilities. Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use shall be utilized solely for the parking of passenger automobiles. No motor vehicle over seven thousand (7,000) pounds gross vehicle weight bearing a commercial license and no commercially licensed trailer shall be parked or stored in a residential district except when loading, unloading, or rendering a service except that one such vehicle, excluding licensed trailer, may be parked at the residence of the owner or operator of the vehicle. Under no circumstances shall parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used for open area storage of commercial vehicles nor for open air parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owner, tenant or customers of business or manufacturing establishments. 
g.  Location of Parking Facilities. Required off-street parking in the "R" Districts shall be on the same lot or contiguous lots as the principal building. Required off-street parking in all districts shall meet the following set-back requirements. 
i.  Within all "R" Districts, all vehicles normally owned or kept by the occupants on the premises must have a garage stall or open parking space on the same lot or contiguous lots as the principal use served. Garage stalls accessory to residential structures may be located anywhere on the lot or contiguous lots other than a required yard area except that such stall may be within five feet of a rear lot line. Open parking spaces accessory to one and two family structures may be located anywhere on the lot or contiguous lots, other than a required yard area containing the principal structure. Open parking spaces designed for three or more cars must have a location other than a required yard, except that such parking may be located in a rear yard to within five feet of an interior side lot line or a rear lot line. 
ii.  Within the "C1" District off-street parking spaces shall not be less than ten (10) feet from a street right-of-way line nor less than five feet from any interior side lot line or rear lot, except where a side lot line or rear lot line is abutting an "R" District when off-street parking shall be not less than ten (10) feet from the lot lines. 
iii.  Within the "H," "I1," or "I2" District off-street parking spaces shall be not less than twenty (20) feet from any street right-of-way line nor less than five feet from any interior side lot line or rear lot line, except when a side or rear lot line is abutting and "R" District then off-street parking shall be not less than twenty (20) feet from the lot lines. 
h.  Joint Parking Facilities. Required parking facilities serving two or more uses may be located on the same lot or contiguous lots or in the same structure except in "R" Districts provided that the total number of parking spaces so furnished shall be not less than the sum total of the separate requirements for each use during any peak hour parking period when the parking facility is utilized at the same time by two or more uses. Conditions required for joint use are: 
i.  The proposed joint parking space is within four hundred (400) feet of the use it will serve. 
ii.  The applicant(s) shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the two or more buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
iii.  A properly drawn legal instrument approved by the city attorney, executed by the parties concerned for joint use of off-street parking facilities shall be filed with the city finance officer. The instrument may be a three or more party agreement including the city. 
i.  Control of Off-Street Parking Facilities. When required accessory off-street parking facilities are provided elsewhere that on the lot on which the principal use served is located, written authority for using such property for off-street parking shall be filed with the city so as to maintain the required number of off-street parking spaces during the existence of the principal use. No such parking facilities at its closest point shall be located more than one hundred (100) feet from neither the premises nor more than four hundred (400) feet from the principal use or building served. 
j.  Use of Parking Area. Required off-street parking space in all districts shall not be utilized for open storage of goods or for the storage of vehicles which are inoperable, for lease, rent or sale. 
3.  Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas. 
a.  Access and parking areas shall be designated so as to provide inadequate means of access to a public alley or street. The driveway access shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width at the public street right-of-way line and shall be so limited so as to cause the least interference with the traffic movement. All public-parking areas shall have access off driveways and not directly off a public street. All outside parking spaces shall be clearly marked on the pavement. 
b.  Calculating Space. When the determining of the number of required off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half or more shall constitute another space. 
c.  Signs. Signs located in any parking area necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement shall be in addition to accessory signs permitted in other sections of this chapter. 
d.  Surfacing. All of the area intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage and subject to the approval of the council except parking areas for less than three vehicles. This requirement also applies to the open sales lots. 
e.  Lighting. Exterior lighting shall not be directed upon adjacent land or the public right-of-way. 
f.  Curbing. All open off-street parking areas designated to have head-in parking along any lot line shall provide a tire bumper or curb of adequate height and properly located to insure that no part of any car will project beyond the required set-backs as established in Chapter 17.82. 
4.  Application of Off-Street Loading and Unloading Regulations. The regulations and requirements set forth in this section shall apply to the required and non-required loading and unloading facilities in fall districts. If, in the application of the requirements of this section, a fractional number is obtained, one loading space shall be provided for a fraction of one-half or more, and no loading space shall be required for a fraction of less than one-half. 
a.  Location. All loading berth shall be twenty-five (25) feet or more from the intersection of two street right-of-way lines. Loading berths shall not occupy any yard requirement bordering a street. 
b.  Size. Unless otherwise specified the first berth required shall not be less than twelve (12) feet in width and fifty (50) feet in length. Additional berths shall be not less than twelve (12) feet in width and twenty-five (25) feet in length; all loading berths shall maintain a height of fourteen (14) feet or more. 
c.  Access. Each loading berth shall be located with approximate means of access to a public street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic. 
d.  Surfacing. All loading berths and access ways shall be improved with a durable material. 
e.  Accessory Uses. Any area allocated as a required loading berth or access drive so as to comply with the terms of this chapter shall not be used for storage of goods, inoperable vehicles nor be included as part of the areas necessary to meet the off-street parking area. 
D.  Parking shall be provided according to the following schedule: 
USE OR STRUCTURE MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS MINIMUM OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS Auto repair-major, bus terminals, taxi terminals, boat and marine sales, bottling companies, shop for trade employing six (6) people or less, garden supply stores, building material sales At least eight (8) off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) additional space for each eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet One (1) space per establishment Bed & Breakfast One (1) space for each guest room None Bowling Alleys Four (4) spaces per alley One (1) space per establishment Churches One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the main seating area None Community Center, Post Office, YMCA, YWCA, Physical Cultural, Studio, Pool Halls, Libraries, Private Clubs, Lodges, Museums, Social Or Fraternal Organizations Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area in the principal structure. None Day nurseries Four (4) plus one (1) for each five hundred (500) square feet in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space in the principal structure. One (1) space per establishment Drive-in establishments At least one (1) parking space for each fifteen (15) square feet of floor area in the building. One (1) space per establishment Eating & Drinking Places One (1) space for each eighty (80) square feet of public floor area. One (1) space per establishment Furniture store, appliance store, Warehouse under 15,000 square feet of floor area, auto sales, grain houses, kennels and studios At least one (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet in excess of the first five hundred (500) square feet in excess of the first five hundred (500) square feet of floor area in the principal structure. One (1) space per establishment Golf courses, country clubs, tennis club, public swimming pools Twenty (20) spaces plus one (1) for each three hundred (300) square feet in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space in the principal structure One (1) space per establishment Hospitals One (1) space for each three (3) beds Three (3) spaces per establishment Hotels/Motels One (1) space for each guest room plus one for each employee One (1) space per establishment Libraries One (1) space for each five hundred-(500) square feet of floor area One (1 ) space per establishment Manufacturing, fabrication or processing of a product or material At least four (4) off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) additional space for each eight hundred (800) square feet of building. One (1) additional off-street parking space shall be provided for each twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet or fraction thereof of land devoted to outside storage. There shall be provided adequate off-street loading space in connection with any structure which requires receipt of distribution of materials by vehicles. At least one (1) loading berth twenty-five (25) feet in length for each building having three thousand (3,000) square feet or fraction thereof plus one (1) loading berth fifty (50) feet in length for each twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor area up to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet plus one (1) loading berth for each fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor area over the first one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area. The operator of the business shall have the option to declare the length of the berths required for buildings above one hundred thousand (100,00) square feet of floor area, except that one-half or more of the total number of berths required shall be fifty (50) feet length. Manufactured home parks Two (2) spaces for each manufactured home None Medical or dental clinics One (1) space for each examining or operating room plus one (1) space for each doctor and employee None Mortuaries & funeral homes Five (5) spaces for each reposing room (2) spaces per establishment Multiple-family dwellings Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit exclusive of required yards None Nursing, Convalescent & Rest Homes One (1) space for each five beds; plus one for each employee not resident on the premises None Office buildings and professional offices having six (6,000) thousand square feet or more of floor area, banks, saving institutions At least one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. At least one (1) loading berth twenty-five (25) feet in length for each building having six thousand (6,000) square feet of floor area or more plus one (1) additional loading berth fifty (50) feet in length for each twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor area up to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet. Retail sales and Service establishments At least one (1) off-street parking space for each one thousand (1000) square feet of net floor area. At least one (1) loading berth twenty-five (25) feet in length for each building having six thousand (6,000) square feet of floor area or more plus one (1) additional loading berth fifty (50) feet in length for each twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor area up to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet. Schools One (1) space for each seven students and one for each three (3) classrooms At least one (1) loading berth twenty-five (25) feet in length for each building having one thousand (1,000) to ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area. For these buildings having ten thousand and one (10,001) square feet of floor space to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof, one (1) additional loading berth fifty (50) feet in length. Skating rinks, dance hall, public auction house, golf driving range, miniature golf, trampoline center, and similar uses At least fifteen (15) off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) additional space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area over two thousand (2,000) square feet. One (1) space per establishment Single-family dwellings Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit exclusive or required yards None Theatres, auditoriums, & places of public assembly One (1) space for each six (6) seats One (1) space per establishment Warehouse over 15,000 square feet of floor area, storage handling of bulk goods At least one (1) for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area. Two (2) spaces per establishment  
(Ord. 556 § 4.05.03, 2003) 
Chapter 17.92 - YARDS 
Sections: 

17.92.010 - Restrictions. 
    No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to satisfy yard, other open space, or minimum lot area requirements for any other building. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.07, 2003) 
17.92.020 - Reduction in size. 
    No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this title shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. If the existing yard or other open space is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced. Yards and lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.07.01, 2003) 
17.92.030 - Additional requirements. 
    The following yard requirements must be observed in addition to the yard requirements of the various districts: 
A.  Except in the, "A" and "C1" Districts, a corner lot must have a front yard on both streets; 
B.  On lots in any residentially zoned block fronting on one side of the street between two streets where one or more residences already exist, no building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be reconstructed or altered in such a way that any portion thereof shall be closer to the street line than the average improved building front on that street in that block, but in no case shall the set-back line be less than twelve (12) feet from the front lot line. Provided, however, that on lots in any block fronting one side of a street between two intersecting streets in the above districts, the set-back line may be increased, providing that the owners of three-fourths of the front footing on the side of the street in the block shall petition the planning and zoning commission to establish the set-back line at a certain distance named in the petition. If the planning and zoning commission shall approve of establishing the set-back line as petitioned, it may be so established; 
C.  On through lots and reversed frontage lots, a front yard must be provided on both streets; 
D.  Required front yards shall be devoted entirely to landscaped area except for the necessary paving or driveways and sidewalks to reach parking or loading areas in the side or rear yard. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.07.02, 2003) 
17.92.040 - Exceptions. 
    The following shall not be considered to be encroachments on yard requirements: 
A.  Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lentils, ornamental features, mechanical devices, cornices, eaves, gutters and the like, provided they do not extend more than two and one-half feet, off-street parking except as hereinafter regulated. 
B.  Yard lights and nameplate signs for one and two family dwellings, lights for illuminating parking area, loading areas or yards for safety and security purposes, provided the direct source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential property, may be located to within five feet of the front lot line. 
C.  Fences which do not exceed two and one-half feet in height or as required elsewhere in this title and terraces, steps, uncovered porches, stoops or similar structures, which do not extend above the height of the ground floor level of the principal building and extend to a distance of less than two feet from any lot line. 
D.  Inside or Rear Yards Only. Bays not to exceed a depth of two feet nor to contain an area of more than twenty (20) square feet, fire escapes not to exceed a width of three feet, fences and walls not to exceed a height of seven feet above grade and open off-street parking. 
E.  Rear Yard Only. Balconies, accessory structures except that no structure shall be closer than five feet from the rear lot-line, breezeways, detached outdoor picnic shelters and recreational equipment, except as regulated hereinafter. 
F.  Inside Yards Only. Accessory structures except that no accessory structure shall be closer than seven feet from any side lot line. 
G.  On a corner lot, nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets within fifteen (15) feet of the street intersecting right-of-way lines. 
H.  In no event shall off-street parking space, structures of any type, buildings, or other features cover more than seventy (70) percent of the lot area resulting in less than twenty-five (25) percent landscaped area in residential districts. 
I.  Rear Yards. Recreational and laundry drying equipment, picnic tables, open arbors and trellises, balconies, breezeways, porches, detached outdoor living rooms, and outdoor eating facilities, provided these are no less than two feet from any lot line. 
J.  Height limitations shall not apply to barns, silos, and other structures on farms; to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; chimneys and smokestacks; flag poles; public and public utility facilities; transmission towers of commercial and private radio broadcasting station; television antennae, and parapet walls extending not more than four feet above the limiting height of the building except as hereinafter provided. 
1.  Heights in excess of those allowed within this chapter shall be permitted only by conditional use permit granted by resolution of the board of adjustment determining that such structure would not be dangerous and would not adversely affect adjoining or adjacent property; 
2.  On any lot sloping downhill from the street, which has an average ground slope on that portion of the lot to be occupied by the main building of twenty-five (25) percent or more (measured in the general direction of the side lot lines) an additional twelve (12) feet of height may be permitted in such main building provided the lowest floor shall not be less than ten (10) feet below the average established property line grades along the front of the lot. The floor of the basement shall be considered the lowest floor and a cellar floor shall not be counted. 
K.  In commercial and industrial districts, filling station pumps and pump islands may occupy required yards, provided, however, that they are not less than fifteen (15) feet from all lot lines. 
L.  An accessory structure may be located in a rear yard but not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of a rear yard. 
M.  Any accessory buildings closer than ten (10) feet to a main building shall be considered as part of the main building and shall be provided with the same side and rear yard requirements as the main building. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.07.03, 2003) 
Chapter 17.96 - MANUFACTURED HOME PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

17.96.010 - Modular homes. 
    Modular homes shall meet the following regulations: 
A.  Modular homes shall meet or exceed Uniform Building Codes; 
B.  Modular homes will include all off-site constructed homes, which may be transported to the site in one or more sections; 
C.  Modular homes shall have more than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet and be placed on a permanent foundation; 
D.  Modular homes shall not have attached running gear and a trailer hitch or the capacity to have attached running gear and trailer hitch; 
E.  Modular homes shall have a minimum of a 4/12 -roof pitch; 
F.  Have siding material of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences; and 
G.  Have roofing material of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.10.01, 2003) 
17.96.020 - Type I and Type II manufactured homes. 
A.  For the purpose of this chapter, manufactured homes will be regulated by type. Two types of homes are defined under these regulations. 
1.  Type I manufactured home shall: 
a.  Have more than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet of occupied space in a double section or larger multi section unit; 
b.  Have a minimum width of twenty-three (23) feet; 
c.  The running gear and hitch have been removed; 
d.  Has been anchored to a permanent foundation, which shall include a permanent exterior footing with permanent foundation walls, with or without a basement; 
e.  The foundation shall be (i) an approved wood basement constructed of 2 x 6 frame-work and treated with water resistant materials; or (ii) a foundation shall be constructed with eight inches poured concrete or concrete block; 
f.  The footing to be a minimum of eight inches thick by sixteen (16) inches wide poured concrete with top of footing to be a minimum of sixteen (16) inches below grade; 
g.  Prior to placement of a home on the foundation, it must be inspected and approved by the administrative official; 
h.  Have a gabled roof with a pitch of at least 3/12 feet; 
i.  Have siding material of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences; 
j.  Have roofing material of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences; 
k.  The age of the manufactured house may not exceed ten (10) years from the date of manufacture. 
2.  Type II manufactured home shall: 
a.  Have more than seven hundred (700) square feet of occupied space in a single, double, expanded or multi-section unit; 
b.  Either utilize a permanent perimeter enclosure or be placed onto a support system in accordance with approved installation standards, as specified in subsection (B) of this section; 
c.  Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with manufacturer's specifications; 
d.  Have siding material of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences; 
e.  Have roofing material of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences; 
f.  Have a gabled roof with a pitch of at least 3/12 feet; 
g.  The age of the manufactured house may not exceed fifteen (15) years from the date of manufacture. 
B.  Installation Standards. 
1.  Permanent Perimeter Enclosure as Required for Type I and II Manufactured Homes. Those manufactured homes designated in this chapter (Type I), as requiring a permanent perimeter enclosure must have footings and crawl space or basement walls. The space between the floor joints of the home shall be completely enclosed with the permanent perimeter enclosure (except for required openings). 
2.  Foundation Siding/Skirting. All manufactured homes without a permanent perimeter (Type II) enclosure shall have an approved foundation siding/skirting enclosing the entire perimeter of the home. 
3.  Support System. 
a.  All HUD-Code manufactured homes of the Type I classification shall be installed with load bearing foundations in conformance with the manufacturer's installation specifications. 
b.  Type II manufactured homes not placed on a permanent foundation shall be installed on a support system in conformance with the manufacturer's installation specifications. 
C.  Non-conforming Homes. A manufactured home placed and maintained on a tract of land and deemed to be a legal non-conforming use prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue to be a legal non-conforming use. If the non-conforming use is discontinued for a period of one year, the land thereafter must be used in conformity with all provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Replacement of Non-conforming Homes. Type I and Type II Manufactured homes located upon any lot or lots of record at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title may be replaced by Type I and/or Type II manufactured homes of like dimensions and the replacement shall not be deemed to have changed the use thereof from a non-conforming to a conforming use. If a replacement Type I and/or Type II manufactured home is of larger dimension than the replaced Type I and/or Type II manufactured home, then application must first be made to the city planning and zoning commission for conditional use permit. 
E.  Structural Alteration. Due to its integral design, the administrative official after it is placed on the site must approve any structural alteration or modification of a manufactured home. 
F.  Variance from Maximum Age Requirement. Type I and Type II manufactured homes may receive a variance from the maximum age requirement. The board of adjustment may grant a variance if the manufactured home meets the following requirements: 
1.  The applicant shall provide a photograph of the manufactured home's exterior and interior. 
2.  That it shall have been shown to the satisfaction of the administrative official that the said manufactured home complies with the gas, plumbing, electrical, and construction requirements of the city. 
3.  That the applicant shall obtain the written consent of all property owners owning property immediately adjacent (excluding streets and alleys) to the proposed building site and the consent of sixty-six (66) percent of the property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed location has been received. 
(Ord. 556 § 4.10.02, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 621, 7-8-2013) 
Chapter 17.100 - MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 
Sections: 

17.100.010 - Minimum standards. 
    Manufactured home parks shall meet the following minimum standards: 
A.  Streets. Each manufactured home shall abut or face a public private roadway or street, such roadway or street having an all-weather surface of at least thirty (30) feet in width where parking is permitted on both sides, and twenty-six (26) feet in width where parking is restricted to one side only. Where private streets are proposed, they shall have a minimum right-of-way of forty (40) feet. 
B.  Open Space or Buffer Zone. A landscape buffer area of ten (10) feet in width shall be provided and maintained around the perimeter of the park, except where walks and drives penetrate the buffer. 
C.  Lot Area. Each lot provided for the occupancy of a single manufactured home unit shall not be less than fifty (50) feet in width and have an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, and the same shall be defined by markers at each corner. 
D.  Density. No park shall be permitted an average net density of manufactured home lots of more than six units per acre and each park shall provide an area of not less than two acres. 
E.  Spacing and Yard Requirements. All manufactured housing units will be positioned on the manufactured home space in compliance and accordance with the zoning requirements at the time of establishment of the manufactured home park. Manufactured home parks established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, will comply with the following: 
1.  Front Yard. All manufactured homes shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from any road or street. The distance will be measured from the face or wall of the manufactured home to the street or roadway at the closest point. 
2.  Side and Rear Yards. All manufactured homes shall have minimum side yards of seven feet and a minimum rear yard of ten (10) feet. 
3.  Exceptions to Minimum Yard Requirements. 
a.  A garage, canopy, or carport may project into a required side or rear yard provided it is located no closer than ten (10) feet to another manufactured home garage, canopy, carport, or addition thereto, and provided further that the maximum depth be twenty-four (24) feet. 
b.  A deck may project into a required side or rear yard provided it is located no closer than four feet to any other structure. 
c.  An enclosed vestibule containing not more than forty (40) square feet in area may project into a required yard for a distance not to exceed four feet, but in no event closer than ten (10) feet to another manufactured home, garage, canopy, carport, or addition thereto. 
d.  Detached accessory buildings with a projected room area of not more than one hundred and twenty (120) square feet may project into a required side or rear yard provided it is located no closer than four feet to another structure or right-of-way. 
4.  Maximum Lot Coverage. No manufactured home shall occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the lot on which it is situated. 
F.  Parking. Two off-street automobile parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home. Such off-street parking spaces shall be set-aside in a location convenient to the occupants of the trailer or camping units and shall have ingress and egress by means of a public way. Where parking areas are provided adjacent to a public street, ingress and egress thereto shall be made accessible only through driveways or openings not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in width in the curb line of the street. 
G.  Refuse Collection. In the event there is no individual refuse collection, a manufactured home courts shall be required to utilize one refuse collection station shall be provided, with a minimum of one two-yard dumpster situated on concrete, screened on four sides, for each twelve (12) families or fractions thereof, conveniently located to serve tenants not more than one hundred fifty (50) feet from any trailer unit served, and to be conveniently located for collection. 
H.  Recreation Area. The city council may require the developer of the manufactured home park to dedicate no less than eight percent of the gross site area shall to recreational facilities appropriate to the needs of the occupants. The planning and zoning commission shall approve the designated recreation area. 
I.  On-Site Management. Each manufactured home park may provide on-site management, by the owner or his or her representative. This requirement may be waived if a point of contact is established to ensure that the management, repairs, maintenance and janitorial work connected with the manufactured home park and all provisions of this chapter are complied with. 
J.  Water Supply and Distribution System and Sewage Disposal. Each manufactured home shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer and water system. 
K.  Tie Down Requirements. All manufactured homes, regardless of location, unless such manufactured homes are securely anchored to a permanent foundation approved by the administrative official, shall be anchored to the ground, in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. 
L.  Maximum Age Limitation. No manufactured home placed within a manufactured home park within the city limits of Sisseton may exceed fifteen (15) years from the date of manufacture. 
M.  Expansion. Existing manufactured home parks may be extended provided the area of expansion is at least one acre and complies with all other regulations herein set forth. 
N.  Building/Moved-in Building Permit Required. Whenever a manufactured home is moved into a manufactured home park, a permit from the administrative official shall be required. 
O.  Skirting. All manufactured homes, regardless of location, unless such manufactured homes are securely anchored to a permanent foundation, approved by the administrative official, shall be skirted within thirty (30) days of placement. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.07.06, 2003) 
17.100.020 - Application procedure. 
A.  Each application for a manufactured home park shall be accompanied by a development plan incorporating the regulations established herein. The plan shall be drawn to scale and indicate the following: 
1.  Location and topography of the proposed manufactured home park, including adjacent property owners and proximity to federal and state highways, and county, township, and city roads/streets; 
2.  Property lines and square footage of the proposed park; 
3.  Location and dimensions of all easements and right-of ways; 
4.  Proposed general lay-out, including parking and recreation areas; 
5.  General street and pedestrian walkway plan; 
6.  General utility, water, and sewer plan. 
B.  Upon approval of the application, the plan becomes part of the permanent record and it shall serve as the basis for the final site plan submission. 
(Ord. 556 § 2.07.07, 2003) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR SOUTH DAKOTA CITIES AND TOWNS 
    The statutory references listed below refer the Code user to state statutes applicable to South Dakota cities and towns. They are up to date through March 31, 2014. 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Local government 
  South Dakota Const. art. IX 
Incorporation 
  SDCL chs. 6-10, 9-3 
Home rule Charters 
  SDCL ch. 6-12 
Classification 
  SDCL ch. 9-2 
Change of boundaries 
  SDCL ch. 9-4 
Annexation 
  SDCL ch. 9-5 
Ordinances 
  SDCL ch. 9-19 
Ordinance violation penalties 
  SDCL 9-19-3 
Municipal elections 
  SDCL ch. 9-13 and SDCL title 12 
Initiative and referendum 
  SDCL ch. 9-20 
Extraterritorial jurisdiction 
  SDCL 9-29-1 
Official newspaper 
  SDCL 9-12-6 
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Aldermanic form of government 
  SDCL ch. 9-8 
Commissioner form of government 
  SDCL ch. 9-9 
City manager 
  SDCL ch. 9-10 
Change of form of government 
  SDCL ch. 9-11 
Municipal elections 
  SDCL ch. 9-13 and 9-12-16 
Campaign finances 
  SDCL 12-1-2.1 and ch. 12-25 
Powers generally 
  SDCL ch. 9-12 
Municipal officers and employees 
  SDCL ch. 9-14 and 9-12-3 
Municipal records and proceedings 
  SDCL ch. 9-18 
City retirement systems and pensions 
  SDCL ch. 9-16 
Association of municipalities 
  SDCL ch. 9-17 
Library 
  SDCL 9-12-15 and ch. 14-2 
Disposal of surplus property 
  SDCL ch. 6-13 
REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Annual fiscal report 
  SDCL ch. 6-9 
Fiscal powers generally 
  SDCL 9-12-2; ch. 9-21 
Fiscal year 
  SDCL 9-21-1 
Municipal funds 
  SDCL ch. 9-22 
Warrants and disbursements 
  SDCL ch. 9-23 
Municipal bonds and notes 
  SDCL ch. 9-25 
General obligation bonds 
  SDCL ch. 9-26 
Municipal gross receipts tax 
  SDCL ch. 10-52A 
Acquisition and disposition of real estate 
  SDCL ch. 9-27 
BUSINESS LICENSES, TAXES 
AND REGULATIONS 
Alcoholic beverages 
  SDCL 9-29-6, 9-29-7 
Regulation generally 
  SDCL 9-34-1 
Transient merchants, hawkers and peddlers 
  SDCL 9-34-7, 9-34-8 
Taxicabs 
  SDCL 9-34-10 
Secondhand and junk stores 
  SDCL 9-34-9 
Exhibitions, shows and amusements 
  SDCL 9-34-13 
Franchise regulations 
  SDCL ch. 9-35 
Mind readers and fortunetellers 
  SDCL 9-34-16 
Tattooing and body piercing 
  SDCL 9-34-17 
Weights and measures 
  SDCL 9-34-3, 9-34-4 
ANIMALS 
Cruelty to animals 
  SDCL 9-29-11 
Animals at large 
  SDCL 9-29-12 
HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Health boards 
  SDCL 9-32-2 
Nuisances generally 
  SDCL 9-29-13; chs. 21-10 and 34-16 
Sanitation and health 
  ch. 9-32 
Garbage disposal systems 
  SDCL 9-32-11 
Combustible materials and fireworks 
  SDCL 9-33-1; 9-33-3; ch. 34-37 
Municipal litter control 
  SDCL 34A-7-14 
Groundwater protection 
  SDCL 9-12-17 
PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE 
General police powers 
  SDCL ch. 9-29 
Crimes 
  SDCL title 22 
Municipal protection of human rights 
  SDCL ch. 20-12 
Firearms preemption 
  SDCL 9-19-20 
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Regulations generally 
  SDCL ch. 9-31 
Power of local authorities 
  SDCL 32-14-3 
Speed regulations 
  SDCL 9-31-3 
Parking facilities 
  SDCL ch. 9-51 
Pedestrian crossings 
  SDCL 32-27-3 
Bicycles 
  SDCL ch. 32-20B 
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND 
PUBLIC PLACES 
Regulations generally 
  SDCL ch. 9-30 
Municipal parks and recreation facilities 
  SDCL ch. 9-38 
Street and alley improvements 
  SDCL ch. 9-45 
Sidewalk improvements 
  SDCL ch. 9-46 
Cemeteries 
  SDCL 9-12-18, 9-32-13 et seq. 
PUBLIC SERVICES 
Municipal utilities 
  SDCL ch. 9-39 
Water supply system 
  SDCL ch. 9-47 
Sewer systems 
  SDCL 9-32-9; ch. 9-48 
Municipal parking facilities 
  SDCL ch. 9-51 
Municipal telephone system 
  SDCL ch. 9-41 
Municipal power agency 
  SDCL ch. 9-41A 
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Fire protection and safety regulations 
  SDCL ch. 9-33 
Fire limits 
  SDCL 9-33-2 
Adoption of uniform codes 
  SDCL 9-33-4.1 
Housing and redevelopment regulations 
  SDCL chs. 11-7, 11-7A 
SUBDIVISIONS 
Regulations generally 
  SDCL ch. 11-3; 11-6-26 et seq. 
ZONING 
Regulations generally 
  SDCL 9-12-13 and ch. 11-4 
Planning commission 
  SDCL 11-6-2 et seq. 
Board of adjustment 
  SDCL 11-4-13 et seq. 
Zoning commission 
  SDCL 11-4-11, 11-4-12 
PRIOR CODE CROSS-REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table provides users with the legislative history and the current disposition of the sections in the Sisseton Municipal Code. 
    Thus, prior code Section 1-1-1 appears in this Code in Chapter 2.08. 
Prior Code § Ordinance History Herein 1-1-1 2.08.010 1-1-2 2.08.020 1-1-3 2.08.030 1-1-4 Not codified 1-2-1 2.04.020 1-2-2 2.04.030 1-2-3 2.04.040 1-2-4 2.04.010 1-2-5 2.12.010 1-2-6 2.04.050 1-2-7 2.04.060 1-2-8 2.04.070 1-3-1 3.04.010 1-3-2 3.04.020 1-3-3 3.04.030 1-3-4 3.04.040 1-3-5 3.04.050 1-4-1 2.16.010 1-4-2 2.16.020 1-4-3 2.16.030 1-5-1 2.20.010 1-5-2 2.20.020 1-5-3 2.20.030 1-5-4 2.20.040 1-5-5 2.20.050 1-5-6 2.20.060 1-5-7 2.20.070 1-5-8 2.20.080 1-5-9 2.20.090 1-5-10 2.20.100 2-1-1 1.08.010 2-2-1 1.12.010 2-2-2 Ord. 544, 2002 1.12.020 3-1-1 Ord. 541, 2002 15.04.010 3-1-2 15.04.020 3-1-3 Ord. 524 §§ 1-3, 2002 15.04.030 3-1-4 15.04.040 3-1-5 15.04.050 3-1-6 15.04.060 3-1-7 15.04.070 3-1-8 15.04.080 3-1-9 15.04.090 4-1-1 Not codified 5-1-1 15.16.010 5-1-2 15.16.020 5-1-3 15.16.030 5-1-4 15.16.040 5-1-5 15.16.050 5-1-6 15.16.060 6-1-1 Ord. 456, 1990 8.04.010 6-1-2 Ord. 456, 1990 8.04.020 6-1-3 Ord. 456, 1990 8.04.030 6-1-4 Ord. 456, 1990 8.04.040 6-1-5 Ord. 456, 1990 8.04.050 6-1-6 Ord. 456, 1990 8.04.060 6-1-7 Ord. 456, 1990 8.04.070 6-2-1 8.08.010 6-2-2 8.08.020 6-3-1 8.16.010 6-3-2 8.16.010 6-3-3 8.16.010 6-3-4 8.16.010 6-3-5 8.16.020 6-3-6 8.16.030 6-3-7 8.16.040 6-3-8 8.16.050 6-3-9 8.16.060 6-3-10 8.16.070 6-3-11 8.16.080 6-3-12 8.16.090 6-3-13 8.16.100 6-3-14 8.16.110 6-4-1 8.28.010 6-4-2 8.28.020 6-5-1 8.12.010 6-5-2 8.12.020 6-5-3 8.12.030 6-5-4 8.12.040 6-5-5 8.12.050 6-6-1 8.20.010 6-6-2 8.20.020 6-7-1 8.24.010 6-7-2 8.24.020 6-7-3 8.24.030 6-7-4 8.24.040 6-7-5 8.24.050 6-7-6 8.24.060 6-7-7 8.24.070 6-7-8 8.24.080 6-7-9 8.24.090 6-7-10 8.24.100 6-7-11 8.24.110 7-1-1 Repealed by 531 7-1-2 Repealed by 531 7-1-3 Repealed by 531 7-1-4 Repealed by 531 7-1-5 Repealed by 531 7-1-6 Repealed by 531 7-1-7 Repealed by 531 7-1-8 Repealed by 531 7-2-1 5.24.010 7-2-2 5.24.020 7-2-3 5.24.030 7-2-4 5.24.040 7-2-5 5.24.050 7-2-6 5.24.060 7-2-7 5.24.070 7-2-8 5.24.080 7-2-9 5.24.090 7-2-10 5.24.100 7-2-11 5.24.110 7-2-12 5.24.120 7-2-13 5.24.130 7-2-14 5.24.140 7-2-15 5.24.150 7-2-16 5.24.160 7-2-17 5.24.170 7-2-18 5.24.180 7-2-19 5.24.190 7-2-20 5.24.200 7-2-21 5.24.210 7-2-22 5.24.220 7-2-23 5.24.230 7-2-24 5.24.240 7-2-25 5.24.250 7-2-26 5.24.260 7-2-27 5.24.270 7-3-1 5.12.010 7-3-2 5.12.020 7-3-3 5.12.030 7-3-4 5.12.040 7-3-5 5.12.050 7-3-6 5.12.060 7-3-7 5.12.070 7-4-1 5.36.010 7-5-1 10.48.010 7-5-2 10.48.020 7-5-3 10.48.030 7-5-4 10.48.040 7-5-5 10.48.050 7-5-6 10.48.060 7-6-1 Repealed by 511 7-6-2 Repealed by 511 7-6-3 Repealed by 511 7-6-4 Repealed by 511 7-6-5 Repealed by 511 7-6-6 Repealed by 511 7-6-7 Repealed by 511 7-6-8 Repealed by 511 7-6-9 Repealed by 511 7-7-1 5.16.010 7-7-2 5.16.020 7-7-3 5.16.030 7-7-4 5.16.040 7-7-5 5.16.050 7-7-6 5.16.060 7-7-7 5.16.070 7-7-8 5.16.080 7-7-9 5.16.090 7-7-10 5.16.100 7-7-11 5.16.110 7-7-12 5.16.120 7-7-13 5.16.130 7-8-1 Repealed by 526 7-8-2 Repealed by 526 7-8-3 Repealed by 526 7-8-4 Repealed by 526 7-8-5 Repealed by 526 7-8-6 Repealed by 526 7-8-7 Repealed by 526 7-8-8 Repealed by 526 7-8-9 Repealed by 526 7-8-10 Repealed by 526 8-1-1 Repealed by 526 8-1-2 Repealed by 526 8-1-3 9.04.020 8-1-4 9.04.030 8-1-5 9.04.040 8-2-1 9.04.010 8-3-1 9.08.010 8-3-2 9.08.020 8-3-3 9.08.030 8-3-4 9.08.040 8-3-5 9.08.050 8-3-6 9.08.060 8-3-7 9.08.070 8-3-8 9.08.080 8-4-1 6.04.010 8-4-2 6.04.020 8-4-3 6.04.030 8-4-4 6.04.040 8-4-5 6.04.050 8-4-6 6.04.060 8-4-7 6.04.070 8-4-8 6.04.080 8-4-9 6.04.090 8-5-1 Ord. 536, 2002 9.20.010 8-5-2 9.04.060 8-6-1 Repealed by 526 8-6-2 Repealed by 526 8-7-1 8.20.010 9-1-1 Not codified 9-1-2 Not codified 9-1-3 Not codified 10-1-1 Repealed by 549 10-1-2 13.04.050 10-1-3 13.04.060 10-1-4 13.04.070 10-1-5 13.04.080 10-1-6 13.04.090 10-1-7 13.04.100 10-1-8 13.04.110 10-1-9 13.04.120 10-1-10 13.04.020 10-1-11 13.04.030 10-1-12 13.04.040 10-2-1 Repealed by 526 10-2-2 Repealed by 526 10-2-3 Repealed by 526 10-2-4 Repealed by 526 10-2-5 Repealed by 526 10-2-6 Repealed by 526 10-2-7 Repealed by 526 10-2-8 Repealed by 526 10-2-9 Repealed by 526 10-2-10 Repealed by 526 10-2-11 Repealed by 526 10-3-1 13.08.010 10-3-2 13.08.020 10-3-3 13.08.030 10-3-4 13.08.040 10-3-5 13.08.050 10-3-6 13.08.060 10-3-7 13.08.070 10-3-8 13.08.080 10-3-9 13.08.090 10-3-10 13.08.100 10-3-11 13.08.110 10-3-12 13.08.120 10-3-13 13.08.130 10-3-14 13.08.140 10-3-15 13.08.150 10-3-16 13.08.160 10-3-17 13.08.170 10-3-18 13.08.180 10-3-19 13.08.190 10-3-20 13.08.200 10-3-21 13.08.210 10-3-22 13.08.220 10-3-23 13.08.230 10-3-24 13.08.240 10-3-25 13.08.250 10-3-26 13.08.260 10-3-27 13.08.270 10-3-28 Not codified 10-3-29 Not codified 10-3-30 Not codified 10-3-31 13.08.280 10-3-32 13.08.290 10-3-33 13.08.300 10-3-34 13.08.310 10-3-35 13.08.320 10-3-36 13.08.330 11-1-1 12.04.010 11-1-2 12.04.020 11-1-3 12.04.030 11-2-1 12.08.010 11-2-2 12.08.020 11-2-3 12.08.030 11-2-4 12.08.040 11-2-5 12.08.050 11-3-1 12.16.010 11-3-2 12.16.020 11-3-3 12.16.040 11-3-4 12.16.050 11-3-5 12.16.060 11-4-1 Repealed by 545 11-4-2 Repealed by 545 11-4-3 Repealed by 545 11-4-4 Repealed by 545 11-4-5 Repealed by 545 11-4-6 Repealed by 545 11-4-7 Repealed by 545 11-4-8 Repealed by 545 11-5-1 12.12.010 11-5-2 12.12.020 11-5-3 12.12.030 11-5-4 12.12.040 11-5-5 12.12.050 11-5-6 12.12.060 11-5-7 12.12.070 11-5-8 12.12.080 11-5-9 12.12.090 11-6-1 12.20.010 11-6-2 12.20.020 11-6-3 12.20.030 11-6-4 12.20.040 11-6-5 12.20.050 11-6-6 12.20.060 11-6-7 12.20.070 11-6-8 12.20.080 11-6-9 12.20.090 11-7-1 15.20.010 11-7-2 15.20.020 11-7-3 15.20.030 11-7-4 15.20.040 11-7-5 15.20.050 11-7-6 15.20.060 11-7-7 15.20.070 11-7-8 15.20.080 12-1-1 10.04.010 12-1-2 10.04.020 12-1-3 10.04.030 12-1-4 10.04.040 12-1-5 10.04.050 12-1-6 10.04.060 12-2-1 Repealed by 526 12-2-2 Repealed by 526 12-2-3 Repealed by 526 12-2-4 Repealed by 526 12-2-5 Repealed by 526 12-2-6 Repealed by 526 12-2-7 Repealed by 526 12-2-8 Repealed by 526 12-2-9 Repealed by 526 12-2-10 Repealed by 526 12-2-11 Repealed by 526 12-2-12 Repealed by 526 12-2-13 Repealed by 526 12-2-14 Repealed by 526 12-2-15 Repealed by 526 12-2-16 Repealed by 526 12-2-17 Repealed by 526 12-2-18 Repealed by 526 12-2-19 Repealed by 526 12-2-20 Repealed by 526 12-2-21 Repealed by 526 12-2-22 Repealed by 526 12-2-23 Repealed by 526 12-2-24 Repealed by 526 12-2-25 Repealed by 526 12-2-26 Repealed by 526 12-2-27 Repealed by 526 12-2-28 Repealed by 526 12-2-29 Repealed by 526 12-2-30 Repealed by 526 12-2-31 Repealed by 526 12-2-32 Repealed by 526 12-2-33 Repealed by 526 12-2-34 Repealed by 526 12-2-35 Repealed by 526 12-2-36 Repealed by 526 12-2-37 Repealed by 526 12-2-38 Repealed by 526 12-2-39 Repealed by 526 12-3-1 10.32.010 12-3-2 10.32.210 12-3-3 10.32.020 12-3-4 Repealed by 492 12-3-5 10.32.030 12-3-6 10.32.050 12-3-7 10.32.190 12-3-8 Ord. 483, 1994 10.32.040 12-3-9 10.32.100 12-3-10 Repealed by 539 12-3-11 Ord. 494, 1996 10.32.080 12-3-12 10.32.160 12-3-13 10.32.120 12-3-14 10.32.130 12-3-15 10.32.140 12-3-16 10.32.150 12-3-17 10.32.060 12-3-18 10.32.170 12-3-19 10.32.110 12-4-1 10.24.010 12-4-2 10.24.020 12-4-3 10.24.030 12-4-4 10.24.040 12-4-5 10.24.050 12-5-1 10.20.010 12-5-2 10.20.020 12-6-1 10.08.010 12-6-2 10.08.020 12-6-3 10.08.030 12-6-4 10.08.040 12-6-5 10.08.050 12-7-1 10.12.010 12-7-2 Repealed by 532 12-7-3 10.12.030 12-7-4 10.12.040 12-7-5 10.12.050 12-7-6 10.36.010 12-7-7 10.32.090 12-7-8 10.36.020 12-7-9 10.36.030 12-7-10 10.28.010 12-7-11 10.28.020 12-7-12 10.28.030 12-7-13 10.36.040 12-7-14 10.36.050 12-7-15 10.28.040 12-7-16 10.28.050 12-7-17 10.28.060 12-7-18 Repealed by 538 12-7-19 10.36.060 12-7-20 10.04.070 12-7-21 10.04.080 12-7-22 10.04.090 12-7-23 10.04.100 12-7-24 10.04.110 12-8-1 Repealed by 526 12-8-2 Repealed by 526 12-8-3 Repealed by 526 12-8-4 Repealed by 526 12-8-5 Repealed by 526 12-8-6 Repealed by 526 12-8-7 Repealed by 526 12-8-8 Repealed by 526 12-8-9 Repealed by 526 12-8-10 Repealed by 526 12-8-11 Repealed by 526 12-8-12 Repealed by 526 12-8-13 Repealed by 526 13-1-1 Repealed by 530 13-1-2 Not codified 13-1-3 Not codified 13-1-4 Not codified  
    As of Supplement No. 5, this table will no longer be updated. 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 5, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance 
Number 1 Establishes city government procedures (Repealed by 526) 2 Curfew for minors (Repealed by 526) 3 Property maintenance standards (Repealed by 526) 4 Street and sidewalk obstructions (Repealed by 526) 5 Establishes offenses and penalties (Repealed by 526) 6 Dog licensing (Repealed by 526) 7 Business license requirements (Repealed by 526) 8 Licenses for billiard tables, ball alleys, ten pin alleys, pool tables, games of chance (Repealed by 526) 9 Establishes fire limits and fire prevention measures (Repealed by 526) 10 Waterworks system protection, maintenance, operation (Repealed by 526) 10(B) Establishes fire department (Repealed by 526) 11 Barber shop hours of operation (Repealed by 526) 12 Grant of easement to Fowler Electric Company (Special) 13 Requirements for streets and sidewalks (Repealed by 526) 14 (Not sent) 15 (Not sent) 16 (Not sent) 17 Work by prisoners (Repealed by 526) 18 Tax levy (Special) 19 Appropriation of funds (Special) 20 Salaries (Special) 21 Establishes fiscal procedures (Repealed by 526) 22 Permit to sell alcoholic beverage (Repealed by 526) 23 Appropriation of funds (Special) 24 Tax levy (Special) 25 Gambling regulations (Repealed by 526) 26 Requirements for businesses selling liquor (Repealed by 526) 27 Additional police duties, salaries (Repealed) 28 Salaries (Special) 29 Permit to sell liquor (Repealed by 526) 30 Appropriation of funds (Special) 31 Tax levy (Special) 32 Designation of fire limits (Special) 33 Appropriation of funds (Special) 34 Tax levy (Special) 35 Appropriation of funds (Special) 36 Tax levy (Special) 37 Vehicle regulations (Repealed by 56) 38 Business license requirements (Repealed by 130) 39 Establishes datum line (Special) 40 (Not sent) 41 Appropriation of funds (Special) 42 Tax levy (Special) 43 Bonds, warrants indebtedness (Special) 44 Liquor delivery regulations (Repealed by 526) 45 (Not sent) 46 Establishes offenses against public morals and decency (Repealed by 526) 47 (Not sent) 48 Amends Ord. 10, waterworks system (Repealed by 526) 49 (Not sent) 50 Appropriation of funds (Special) 51 Tax levy (Special) 52 Permit to sell liquor (Repealed by 526) 53 Appropriation of funds (Special) 54 Tax levy (Special) 55 Salaries (Special) 56 Establishes vehicle equipment requirements (Repealed by 526) 57 Trash sweeping or burning (Repealed by 526) 58 Establishes regulations for inspections by fire department (Repealed by 526) 59 (Not sent) 60 Establishes storage restrictions for flammable liquids (Repealed by 526) 61 Establishes building material restrictions (Repealed by 526) 62 Establishes storage restrictions for explosives (Repealed by 526) 63 Weed abatement (Repealed by 526) 64 Permit to sell liquor (Repealed by 526) 65 Establishes liquor sales restrictions (Repealed by 526) 66 Work by prisoners (Repealed by 526) 67 Sewer construction bonds (Special) 68 Appropriation of funds (Special) 69 Tax levy (Special) 70 Business license rates established (Repealed by 526) 71 Grant of easement to Otter Tail Power Company (Special) 72 Sewer system construction (Repealed by 526) 73 (Not sent) 74 Appropriation of funds (Special) 75 Tax levy (Special) 76 Appropriation of funds (Special) 77 Tax levy (Special) 78 Animal keeping restrictions (Repealed by 526) 79 Salaries (Special) 80 Water main extension (Special) 81 (Not sent) 82 Appropriation of funds (Special) 83 Tax levy (Special) 84 Appropriation of funds (Special) 85 (Not sent) 86 Traffic regulations (Title 10) 87 Amends Ord. 48, water main tapping (Repealed by 526) 88 Salaries (Special) 89 Establishes sidewalk construction requirements (Repealed by 526) 90 Appropriation of funds (Special) 91 Dance and dance hall regulations (Repealed by 526) 92 Appropriation of funds (Special) 93 Appropriation of funds (Special) 94 Depositing harmful matter in streets (Repealed by 526) 95 Snow removal from sidewalks (Repealed by 526) 96 Appropriation of funds (Special) 97 Appropriation of funds (Special) 98 Establishes regulations for water system (Repealed by 526) 99 Appropriation of funds (Special) 100 Grant of easement to Dakota Central Telephone Company (Special) 101 Establishes city dumping grounds (Repealed by 526) 102 Establishes restrictions for milk cows (Repealed by 526) 103 Appropriation of funds (Special) 104 Water main extension (Special) 105 Sewer connections (Special) 106 Appropriation of funds (Special) 107 Tax levy (Special) 108 Salaries (Special) 109 Abandoned or junked vehicle restrictions (Repealed by 526) 110 Dilapidated building abatement (Repealed by 526) 111 Appropriation of funds (Special) 112 Tax levy (Special) 113 Establishes restricted parking areas (Repealed by 526) 114 Appropriation of funds (Special) 115 Tax levy (Special) 116 License for restaurants (Repealed by 526) 117 Appropriation of funds (Special) 118 Tax levy (Special) 119 Amends § 5 of Ord. 98, water system regulations (Repealed by 147) 120 Establishes restrictions for radio broadcast interference (Repealed by 526) 121 Appropriation of funds (Special) 122 Tax levy (Special) 123 Salaries (Special) 124 Appropriation of funds (Special) 125 Tax levy (Special) 126 Amends § 2 of Ord. 8, billiard and pool rooms (Repealed by 526) 127 Appropriation of funds (Special) 128 Tax levy (Special) 129 Amends § 5 of Ord. 119, water rates (Repealed by 147) 130 License requirements for traveling shows, peddlers, special events (Repealed by 526) 131 Amends § 5, Ord. 70, business license rates (Repealed by 526) 132 Appropriation of funds (Special) 133 Tax levy (Special) 134 Appropriation of funds (Special) 135 Tax levy (Special) 136 License for dry cleaning business (Repealed by 526) 137 Appropriation of funds (Special) 138 Tax levy (Special) 139 Beer and wine sales restrictions (Repealed by 526) 140 Establishes street grade (Special) 141 Tax levy (Special) 142 (Not sent) 143 Soliciting on private property (5.28) 144 Amends § 2, Ord. 129, water rates (Repealed by 147) 145 Appropriation of funds (Special) 146 Tax levy (Special) 147 Amends §§ 4 and 5 of Ord. 98; repeals Ords. 119, 129 and 144, water regulations and rates (Repealed by 526) 148 Appropriation of funds (Special) 149 Tax levy (Special) 150 Amends Ords. 79 and 108, salaries (Special) 151 Establishes parking time limits (Repealed by 526) 152 Appropriation of funds (Special) 153 Tax levy (Special) 154 Establishes regulations for building construction, equipment and fire limits (Repealed by 526) 155 Amends § 5 of Ord. 147, water rates (Repealed by 526) 156 Artesian well regulations (Repealed by 526) 157 Residential boulevard widths (Special) 158 (Not sent) 159 Appropriation of funds (Special) 160 Tax levy (Special) 161 Amends § 3 of Ord. 139, beer and wine sales restrictions (Repealed by 526) 162 Permits for building construction and moving (Repealed by 526) 163 Appropriation of funds (Special) 164 Tax levy (Special) 165 Created municipal defense council (Repealed by 526) 166 Amends Ords. 79 and 150, salaries (Special) 167 Amends § 5 of Ord. 8, bowling alley hours of operation (Repealed by 526) 168 Appropriation of funds (Special) 169 Tax levy (Special) 170 Regulates restaurant operations (Void) 171 Garbage collection regulations (Repealed by 526) 172 Appropriation of funds (Special) 173 Tax levy (Special) 174 Amends Ord. 166, salaries (Special) 7/3/1944 Amends § 12 of Ord. 72 (Repealed by 526) 175 Police officer salaries (Special) 176 Appropriation of funds (Special) 177 Tax levy (Special) 178 Beer and wine sales restrictions (Repealed by 526) 179 Grant of easement to Northwestern Bell Telephone Company (Special) 180 Appropriation of funds (Special) 181 Tax levy (Special) 182 Salaries (Special) 183 Establishes offenses against public peace, morals and decency (Repealed by 526) 184 Licensing and regulating motor carrier vehicles (Repealed by 526) 185 Water main extensions (Special) 186 Appropriation of funds (Special) 187 Tax levy (Special) 188 Amends Ord. 98, water rates (Repealed by 526) 189 Designates through streets, stop streets, parallel parking areas (Repealed by 526) 190 Amends § 2 of Ord. 182, salaries (Special) 191 Appropriation of funds (Special) 192 Tax levy (Special) 193 Regulates firecrackers, fireworks and explosives (Repealed by 526) 194 Measures to promote health, suppress disease and eradicate rats (Repealed by 526) 195 Amends § 5 of Ord. 147, water rates (Repealed by 526) 196 Appropriation of funds (Special) 197 Tax levy (Special) 198 Creates sinking fund and tax levy (Special) 199 Grants easement to Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad Company (Special) 200 Appropriation of funds (Special) 201 Tax levy (Special) 202 Police officers salaries (Special) 203 Appropriation of funds (Special) 204 Tax levy (Special) 205 Amends § 2 of Ord. 182, salaries (Special) 206 Appropriation of funds (Special) 207 Tax levy (Special) 208 Amends § 5 of Rule 2 of Ord. 98, water rates (Repealed by 526) 209 Appropriation of funds (Special) 210 Tax levy (Special) 211 Amends Ord. 209, appropriation of funds (Special) 212 Regulates sale of milk and milk products (Repealed by 526) 213 Appropriation of funds (Special) 214 Amends § 1, Rule 1 of Ord. 98, water rates (Repealed by 526) 215 Sewage disposal rental rates (Repealed by 526) 216 Appropriation of funds (Special) 217 Amends Ord. 182, salaries (Special) 218 Tax levy (Special) 219 Appropriation of funds (Special) 220 Grant of easement to Otter Tail Power Company (Special) 221 Amends Ord. 212, milk product sales (Repealed by 526) 222 Amends § 1 of Ord. 219, appropriation of funds (Special) 223 Creates recreation board (Repealed by 526) 224 Amends § 1 of Ord. 219, appropriation of funds (Special) 225 Appropriation of funds (Special) 226 Amends § 1, Ord. 219, appropriation of funds (Special) 227 Amends Ord. 202, police officer salaries (Special) 228 Bicycle licenses and registration (Repealed by 526) 229 Appropriation of funds (Special) 230 Amends § 1 of Ord. 225, appropriation of funds (Special) 231 Appropriation of funds (Special) 232 Amends § 1 of Ord. 229, appropriation of funds (Special) 233 Water use regulations (Repealed by 526) 234 Amends § 2 of Ord. 182, salaries (Special) 235 Amends § 1, Rule 2 of Ord. 98, water rates (Repealed by 526) 236 Parking regulations (Repealed by 526) 237 Designates parking violations (Repealed by 526) 238 Appropriation of funds (Special) 239 Amends § 1 of Ord. 231, appropriation of funds (Special) 240 Improvements to waterworks system (Special) 241 Amends Ords. 208 and 215, water rates (Repealed by 526) 242 Appropriation of funds (Special) 243 Annexation (Special) 244 Amends § 1 of Ord. 239, appropriation of funds (Special) 245 Regulates dogs (Repealed by 526) 246 Amends Ords. 202, 205, and 227, salaries (Special) 247 Establishes zoning provisions (17.04-17.28) 248 Appropriation of funds (Special) 249 Participation in police retirement system (Repealed by 526) 250 Amends § 1 of Ord. 212, appropriation of funds (Special) 251 Appropriation of funds (Special) 252 Amends Ord. 248, appropriation of funds (Special) 253 (Did not pass) 254 Amends § 1 of Ord. 217 and § 2 of Ord. 243, salaries (Special) 255 Appropriation of funds (Special) 256 Amends Ord. 251, appropriation of funds (Special) 257 Regulates junk yards (Repealed by 526) 258 Sewage disposal rental rates (Repealed by 526) 258B Amends Ord. 246, salaries (Special) 259 Appropriation of funds (Special) 260 (Not sent) 261 Tax levy (Special) 262 Amends Ord. 247, zoning bulk regulations (Special) 263 Establishes plan commission (Repealed by 526) 264 Grant of easement to Northwestern Bell Telephone Company (Special) 265 Driver's licenses (Repealed by 526) 266 Appropriation of funds (Special) 267 Amends § 1 of Ord. 259, appropriation of funds (Special) 268 Jaywalking (Repealed by 526) 269 Amends § 1 of Ord. 266, appropriation of funds (Special) 270 Appropriation of funds (Special) 271 Amends Ord. 188, salaries (Special) 272 (Not sent) 273 Establishes standards for mobile homes (Repealed by 526) 274 Real estate purchase, revenue bond issuance (Special) 275 Appropriation of funds (Special) 276 Amends Ord. 188, salaries (Special) 277 Participation in employee retirement system (Repealed by 526) 278 Amends § 1 of Ord. 270, appropriation of funds (Special) 279 Adoption of construction codes (Repealed by 526) 280 Improvement to sewer system (Special) 281 Appropriation of funds (Special) 282 Amends § 1 of Ord. 275, appropriation of funds (Special) 283 Salaries (Special) 284 (Not sent) 285 (Not sent) 286 Amends Ord. 188, salaries (Special) 287 Sewer regulations (Repealed by 526) 288 Water rates (Repealed by 526) 289 Appropriation of funds (Special) 290 Amends Ord. 188, salaries (Special) 291 Appropriation of funds (Special) 292 Amends Ord. 171, garbage rates (Repealed by 526) 293 Amends Ord. 188, salaries (Special) 294 (Not sent) 295 Amends Ord. 279, adoption of construction codes (Repealed by 526) 296 Regulates liquor sales establishment (Repealed by 526) 297 Appropriation of funds (Special) 298 Regulates snowmobiles (Repealed by 526) 299 Amends §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. 293, salaries (Repealed by 526) 300 Intergovernmental planning commission (Repealed by 526) 301 Salaries (Special) 302 Appropriation of funds (Special) 303 City council meeting time (Repealed by 526) 304 Amends § 3 of Ord. 288, water use regulations (Repealed by 526) 305 Amends Ord. 302, appropriation of funds (Special) 306 Adopts personnel policy (Repealed by 571) 307 Salaries (Special) 308 Dutch elm disease (Repealed by 526) 309 Appropriation of funds (Special) 310 Establishes offices of city administrator and finance officer (Repealed by 526) 311 Adopts traffic regulations, establishes parking requirements (Repealed by 526) 312 Salaries (Special) 313 (Not sent) 314 Establishes offices of city administrator and finance officer (Repealed by 526) 315 Amends §§ 13 and 16 of Ord. 306, personnel policy (Repealed by 571) 316 Establishes health regulations (Repealed by 526) 317 Amends § 5.1 of Ord. 306, personnel policy (Repealed by 571) 318 Supplements 1974 budget (Special) 319 Appropriation of funds (Special) 320 Salaries (Special) 321 Amends § 3 of Ord. 311, parking (Repealed by 526) 322 Amends § 2 of Ord. 110, dilapidated buildings (Repealed by 526) 323 Amends § 3(C) of Ord. 287, sewer regulations (Repealed by 526) 324 Repeals and replaces Ord. 110, dilapidated buildings (Repealed by 526) 325 Appropriation of funds (Special) 326 Amends Ord. 110, dilapidated buildings (Repealed by 526) 327 Amends § 1 of Ord. 320, salaries (Special) 328 Salaries (Special) 329 Grant of easement to Valley Cable Television Company (Special) 330 Appropriation of funds (Special) 331 Regulates use of aerosol propelled liquids, glue and gasoline (Repealed by 526) 332 Amends Ord. 273, mobile home regulations (Repealed by 419) 333 Appropriation of funds (Special) 334 Amends Ord. 311, parking regulations (Repealed by 526) 335 Grant of easement to Otter Tail Power Company (Special) 336 Amends Ord. 288, water rates (Repealed by 526) 337 Supplement to 1977 budget (Special) 338 Amends Ord. 329, cable franchise grant (Special) 339 Amends Ord. 333, appropriation of funds (Special) 340 Creates office of city attorney (Repealed by 526) 341 Public consumption of alcohol (Repealed by 526) 342 Regulates exhibition driving (Repealed by 526) 343 Appropriation of funds (Special) 344 Establishes special fund (Special) 345 Salaries (Special) 346 Establishes urban and rural property within corporate limits (3.08) 347 Supplements budget for 1978 (Special) 348 Regulates alcoholic beverage establishments (Repealed by 526) 349 Amends Ord. 193, storage of fireworks and explosives (Repealed by 526) 350 Amends §§ 13 and 14 of Ord. 348, alcoholic beverage establishments (Repealed by 526) 351 Subdivision regulations (15.28) 352 Establishes sales and service tax and user tax (Repealed by 526) 353 Animal keeping restrictions (Repealed by 526) 354 Supplements 1978 budget (Special) 355 Appropriation of funds (Special) 356 Salaries (Special) 357 Amends Ord. 303, city council meetings (Repealed by 526) 358 Compensation of city officials (Repealed by 526) 359 Amends Rule 9 of Ord. 98, water rates (Repealed by 526) 360 Amends Ords. 236 and 237, parking regulations (Repealed by 526) 361 Supplements 1979 budget (Special) 362 Regulates on-sale liquor establishments (Repealed by 526) 363 Imposes tax on realty improvement contractors (Repealed by 526) 364 Supplements 1979 budget (Special) 365 Amends Ords. 287, 292, and 336, water, sewer and garbage rates (Repealed by 526) 366 Appropriation of funds (Special) 367 Salaries (Special) 368 Regulates dogs (Repealed by 526) 369 Supplements 1979 budget (Special) 370 Supplements 1979 budget (Special) 371 Amends Ord. 4, street and sidewalk obstructions (Repealed by 526) 372 Supplements 1979 budget (Special) 373 Amends Ord. 245, dog regulations (Repealed by 526) 374 Amends Ords. 348 and 350, beer and liquor establishments (Repealed by 526) 375 Amends Ords. 348, 350, and 374, beer and liquor establishments (Repealed by 526) 376 Supplements 1980 budget (Special) 377 Supplements 1980 budget (Special) 378 Appropriation of funds (Special) 379 Salaries (Special) 380 Billing for water, sewer, garbage services (Repealed by 526) 381 Supplements 1980 budget (Special) 382 Supplements 1981 budget (Special) 383 Salaries (Special) 384 Amends Ords. 4 and 371, construction requirements (Repealed by 526) 385 Display and use of firearms by police (Repealed by 526) 386 Supplements 1981 budget (Special) 387 Appropriation of funds (Special) 388 Salaries (Special) 389 Supplements 1981 budget (Special) 390 Adopts fair housing regulations (9.12) 391 Amends Ords. 329 and 338, cable television franchise (Special) 392 Amends Ord. 151, parking regulations (Repealed by 526) 393 Regulates drug paraphernalia (Repealed by 526) 394 Amends Ords. 6, 245, 353, 368 and 373, animal keeping restrictions (Repealed by 526) 395 Regulates liquefied petroleum gases (Repealed by 526) 396 Possession of open containers of alcohol in a vehicle (10.36) 397 Appropriation of funds (Special) 398 Salaries (Special) 399 Regulates pawnbroker and secondhand dealers (Repealed by 526) 400 Supplements 1983 budget (Special) 401 Amends § 22 of Ord. 399, pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers (Repealed by 526) 402 Appropriation of funds (Special) 403 Salaries (Special) 404 Amends Ords. 273 and 332, mobile homes (Repealed by 526) 405 Amends of Ord. 399, pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers (Repealed by 526) 406 Bond issuance (Special) 407 Adds § 23 of Ords. 399 and 405, pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers (Repealed by 526) 408 Amends Ords. 329, 338 and 391, cable television franchise (Special) 409 (Pending) 410 Regulates bicycles (Repealed by 526) 411 Appropriation of funds (Special) 412 Salaries (Special) 413 Amends Ord. 237, parking violations (Repealed by 526) 414 Amends § 4(4) of Ord. 352, tax exemptions (Repealed by 526) 415 Supplements 1985 budget (Special) 416 Tax levy (Special) 417 Appropriation of funds (Special) 418 Salaries (Special) 419 Amends Ord. 273; repeals Ords. 273 § 4.5 and 332, mobile homes (Repealed by 526) 420 Supplements 1985 budget (Special) 421 Amends Ords. 273 and 419, mobile homes (15.32) 422 Supplements 1986 budget (Special) 423 Amends Ords. 273, 419 and 421, mobile homes (Not codified) 424 Amends Ords. 348, 350, 374 and 375, alcoholic beverage establishments (Repealed by 526) 425 Adopts ordinance in revision of ordinances (1.01) 426 Amends Ords. 329, 338, 391 and 408, cable television franchise (Special) 427 Appropriation of funds (Special) 428 Salaries (Special) 429 Regulates sale of liquor on Sundays (Repealed by 526) 430 Supplements 1987 budget (Special) 431 Regulates throwing stars (9.20) 432 Regulates off-road vehicles (10.40) 433 Amends Ord. 184, motor carriers (5.20) 434 Amends Ord. 352, sales and service tax and user tax (Repealed by 526) 435 Amends Ords. 352, 414 and 434, sales and service tax and user tax (Repealed by 526) 436 Appropriation of funds (Special) 437 Salaries (Special) 438 Licensing of transient merchant (5.32) 439 Repeals and replaces beer and liquor license regulations (Repealed by 526) 440 Appropriation of funds (Special) 441 Establishes a curfew for minors (Repealed by 526) 442 Repeals and replaces prior code § 10-1-1, utility services (Repealed by 549) 443 Sewer regulations (13.12) 443A Charges for wastewater discharge (Repealed by 526) 444 Repeals and replaces beer and liquor license regulations (Repealed by 526) 445 Salaries (Special) 446 Curfew regulations (9.16) 447 Tax levy (Special) 447A Establishes turn on/off fee for water services (Special) 448 Floodplain regulations (15.36) 449 Appropriation of funds (Special) 450 Sales, service and use tax (Repealed by 526) 451 Salaries (Special) 452 Repeals and replaces beer and liquor license regulations (Repealed by 526) 453 Charges for wastewater discharge (13.16) 454 Amends prior code § 7-6-5, vicious dogs (Repealed by 526) 455 Amends prior code § 7-6-8, dogs (Repealed by 526) 456 Amends prior code Ch. 6-1, board of health (8.04) 457 Appropriation of funds (Special) 458 (Not adopted) 459 Appropriation of funds (Special) 460 Salaries (Special) 461 Appropriation of funds (Special) 462 Prohibits sale of soft drinks in plastic containers (Repealed by 526) 463 Appropriation of funds (Special) 464 Salaries (Special) 465 Regulating occupancy of condemned buildings (15.24) 466 Repeals and replaces beer and liquor license regulations (Repealed by 526) 467 Amends Ord. 435, additional sales, service and use tax (Rejected by referendum) 468 Permits sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday, July 19, 1992 (Special) 469 Appropriation of funds (Special) 470 Regulates weapons in liquor establishments (Repealed by 526) 471 Appropriation of funds (Special) 472 Salaries (Special) 473 Appropriation of funds (Special) 474 Amends prior code § 12-3-4, snow emergency parking (Repealed by 492) 475 Establishes fee for video lottery machines (5.36) 476 Amends Ord. 435, sales, service and use tax (Repealed by 526) 477 Establishes standards for fire calls (2.20) 478 Regulates sump pumps and drain tile use (13.12) 479 Appropriation of funds (Special) 480 Amends prior code §§ 12-3-1, 12-3-4, 12-3-6-12-3-8, 12-3-10-12-3-15, 12-3-17-12-3-19, parking violations (10.32) 481 Salaries (Special) 482 Appropriation of funds (Special) 483 Amends prior code § 12-3-8, parking of oversize vehicles (10.32) 484 Establishes hours of operation for malt beverage establishments (Repealed by 526) 485 Appropriation of funds (Special) 486 Salaries (Special) 487 Amends Ord. 453, charge for wastewater discharge (Repealed by 526) 488 Appropriation of funds (Special) 489 Appropriation of funds (Special) 490 Appropriation of funds (Special) 491 Salaries (Special) 492 Regulates snow removal (10.32, 12.16) 493 Regulates snowmobiles (10.44) 494 Amends prior code § 12-3-11, oversize vehicle parking (10.32) 495 Amends Ord. 454, vicious dogs (Repealed by 526) 496 Appropriation of funds (Special) 497 Salaries (Special) 498 Amends Ords. 454 and 495, vicious dogs and cats (Repealed by 526) 499 Repeals and replaces beer and liquor license regulations (Repealed by 527) 500 Amends Ord. 435, sales, service and use tax (3.12) 501 Compliance with waste reduction landfill ban (Special) 502 Salaries (Special) 503 Appropriation of funds (Special) 504 Appropriation of funds (Special) 505 Amends Ord. 453, charges for wastewater discharge (13.16) 506 (Not sent) 507 Salaries (Special) 508 Appropriation of funds (Special) 509 Amends prior code Ch. 7-6, dogs, cats and other animal pets (Repealed by 526) 510 City council meetings (2.04) 511 Amends prior code Ch. 7-6, dogs, cats and other animal pets (6.08) 512 Appropriation of funds (Special) 513 Salaries (Special) 514 Appropriation of funds (Special) 515 Appropriation of funds (Special) 516 Salaries (Special) 517 Appropriation of funds (Special) 518 Grants franchise to maintain cable communications system (Special) 519 Appropriation of funds (Special) 520 Salaries (Special) 521 Appropriation of funds (Special) 522 General provisions (1.04) 523 General penalties and violations (1.16) 524 Adds Ch. 4.04, right of entry (4.04) 525 Planning and zoning commission (Title 17) 526 Repeals Ordinances 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10B, 10, 11, 13, 17, 21, 22, 25, 26, 29, 44, 46, 48, 52, 56, 57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 70, 72, 78, 86, 87, 89, 91, 94, 95, 98, 101, 102, 109, 110, 113, 116, 120, 126, 130, 131, 136, 139, 147, 151, 154, 155, 156, 161, 162, 165, 167, 171, 178, 183, 184, 188, 189, 193, 194, 195, 208, 212, 214, 215, 221, 223, 228, 233, 235, 236, 237, 241, 245, 249, 257, 258, 263, 265, 268, 273, 277, 279, 287, 288, 292, 295, 296, 298, 299, 300, 303, 304, 308, 310, 311, 314, 316, 321, 322, 323, 324, 326, 331, 334, 336, 340, 341, 342, 348, 349, 350, 352, 353, 357, 358, 359, 360, 362, 363, 365, 368, 371, 373, 374, 375, 380, 384, 385, 392, 393, 394, 395, 399, 401, 404, 405, 407, 410, 413, 414, 419, 424, 429, 434, 435, 439, 441, 443A, 444, 450, 452, 454, 455, 462, 466, 470, 476, 484, 487, 495, 498, 509, unnumbered ordinance dated 7/3/44, repeals PC Chs. 12-2, 12-8, 10-2, repeals PC §§ 7-8-1-7-8-10, 8-1-2, 8-6-1, 8-6-2 (Repealer) 527 Licenses for sellers of alcohol (5.08) 528 Appropriation of funds (Special) 529 Salaries (Special) 530 Amends PC 13-1-1, penalty for violation (1.16) 531 Repeals and replaces PC Ch. 7-1, licenses (5.04) 532 Notice of accident to law enforcement officer (10.12) 533 Removal of offensive or dangerous matter or conditions (9.08) 534 Sale or discharge of fireworks (Title 8) 535 Curfews for minors (9.16) 536 Discharge of firearms (9.20) 537 Rules of the road (10.16) 538 Pneumatic tires with metal studs (10.28) 539 Parallel and diagonal parking (10.32) 540 Snowmobiles (10.44) 541 Uniform building code (15.04) 542 Uniform plumbing code (15.08) 543 Uniform electrical code (15.12) 544 Voting precincts (1.12) 545 Repeals and replaces PC Ch. 11-4, trees (12.24) 546 Offensive behavior (9.04) 547 Unsealed alcoholic beverages in vehicles (Title 10) 548 Off-road vehicles (10.40) 549 Repeals and replaces Ord. 442 and PC 10-1-1, utility service (13.04) 550 Condemned buildings (15.24) 551 Mobile homes (15.32) 552 Snow removal (10.32, 12.16) 553 Urban and rural property (Title 16) 554 Private parking lots (10.32) 555 Appropriation of funds (Special) 556 Zoning regulations (Title 17) 557 Subdivision of land (Title 16) 558 Littering or dumping garbage within city; illegal use of garbage facilities (8.16) 559 Sales and use tax (3.12) 560 (Not sent) 561 Sales and use tax (3.12) 562 Appropriation of funds (Special) 563 Salaries (Special) 564 Numbering of buildings (5.18) 565 Code adoption (1.01) 566 Elections (Special) 567 Appropriation of funds (Special) 568 Salaries (Special) 569 Appropriation of funds (Special) 570 (Did not pass) 571 Repeals and replaces Ch. 2.24, personnel policies and procedures (2.24) 572 Loitering (9.04) 573 Tax levy (Special) 574 Amends § 3.12.020, sales and use tax (3.12) 575 Appropriation of funds (Special) 576 Amends § 1.03.01 of Ord. 556, zoning ordinance (Special) 577 Establishes annual salary and wage levels for municipal employees (Special) 578 Supplemental appropriation ordinance (Special) 579 Amends § 8.16.050, garbage collection and disposal (8.16) 580 Rezone (Special) 581 Appropriation of funds (Special) 582 Domestic pets (6.12) 583 Supplemental appropriation ordinance (Special) 584 Establishes annual salary and wage levels for municipal employees (Special) 585 (Not adopted) 586 Rezone (Special)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 5, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of Sisseton, South Dakota beginning with Supplement No. 5, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 
this Code 587 10-15-2007 Ordinance amending Section 1.03.01, Zoning classifying Noble's Addition, Lot H, from multiple-family residential (R3) to highway commercial (HC) Not 
codified 588  9-24-2007 Ordinance amending the sums appropriated to meet the municipality obligations Not 
codified 589 12-10-2007 Ordinance amending the sums appropriated to meet the municipality obligations Not 
codified 590 12-10-2007 Ordinance amending Section 1.03.01, Zoning classifying Martenson Subdivision, block 5, from highway commercial (HC) to light industrial (LI) Not 
codified 591  1-14-2008 Ordinance establishing the 2008 annual salary and wage levels for principle employees and officials of the city Not 
codified 592  7-14-2008 Ordinance amending the ages to which the curfew applies 9.16.010, 9.16.020 593  8-18-2008 Ordinance regarding open burning, recreational fires and firewood within the city       Added 15.16.070 594  9-22-2008 Ordinance amending the sums appropriated to meet the municipality obligations Not 
codified 595 12- 8-2008 Ordinance amending the sums appropriated to meet the municipality obligations Not 
codified 596 12-22-2008 Ordinance establishing the 2009 annual salary and wage levels for principle employees and officials of the city Not 
codified 597 12-22-2008 Ordinance amending the employee-in-training period 2.24.310A. 598  5-11-2009 Ordinance repealing and replacing Chapter 15.36, pertaining to flooding       Rpld 
  
      Added 15.36.010- 
15.36.130 
15.36.010- 
15.36.180 599  5-11-2009 Ordinance amending the hours of business for the on-sale malt beverage license to allow for Sunday business 5.08.05A. 600  6- 8-2009 Ordinance establishing a chapter governing city parks and setting forth definitions relating to the city parks and the hours that the city parks are open to the public and prohibited activity       Added 12.28.010- 
12.28.060 601  9-14-2009 Ordinance appropriating sums to meet the obligations of the municipality Not 
codified 601.1 12-14-2009 Ordinance appropriating sums to meet the obligations of the municipality Not 
codified 602 12-14-2009 Ordinance establishing a provision in the city's personnel policy for residency requirements 2.24.280 603 12-28-2009 Ordinance amending the city's notice requirement for payment request on delinquent bills 13.04.080 604 12-28-2009 Ordinance establishing annual salary and wage levels for the principal employees and officials of the city for the 2010 budget year Not 
codified 605  9-13-2010 2011 appropriation ordinance Not 
codified 606 12-13-2010 Supplemental appropriation ordinance Not 
codified 607 12-27-2010 Ordinance establishing 2011 annual salary and wage levels for the principal employees and officials Not 
codified 608  2-28-2011 Ordinance amending 2011 annual salary and wage levels for the principal employees and officials Not 
codified 609  2-28-2011 Ordinance imposing a municipal gross receipts tax 1-6       Added 3.12.070 610 Not passed 611  9-12-2011 2012 appropriation ordinance Not 
codified 612 12-12-2011 Supplemental appropriation ordinance Not 
codified 613 12-27-2011 Ordinance establishing 2012 annual salary and wage levels for the principal employees and officials Not 
codified 614  7- 9-2012 Ordinance amending vehicles left in disrepair 10.32.190       Added 10.32.191- 
10.32.195 615  9-10-2012 Ordinance regarding Pawnbroker's and Secondhand Dealers and the information provided to the chief of police 5.24.120 616  9-10-2012 2013 appropriation ordinance Not 
codified 617 12-10-2012 Ordinance repealing and replacing provisions relating to malt beverage and liquor licenses and establishments       Rpld 5.08.010- 
5.08.070 I-VII 
      Added 5.08.010- 
5.08.070 618 12-10-2012 Supplemental appropriation ordinance Not 
codified 619 12-27-2012 Ordinance establishing 2013 annual salary and wage levels for the principal employees and officials Not 
codified 620  7- 8-2013 Ordinance relating to discretionary formula for real property       Added 3.08.080 621  7- 8-2013 Ordinance amendment relating to Type I and Type II manufactured homes consent procedures 17.96.020 622  7- 8-2013 Ordinance amendment regarding the zoning definitions 17.04.040 623  8-12-2013 Ordinance amendment regarding fire calls and the fees associated thereto 2.20.110 624  9- 9-2013 Rezoning ordinance Not 
codified 625  9- 9-2013 2014 appropriation ordinance Not 
codified 626 12-23-2013 2014 annual salary and wage levels Not 
codified 627  7-14-2014 Zoning classification of property Not 
codified 628  8-11-2014 Animals; vicious, nuisance, domestic pets, ignorance of laws 6.08.050, 6.08.060 6.08.100 6.12.010 629  9- 8-2014 2015 appropriations Not 
codified 630 11-10-2014 Monthly billings for water, garbage and sewer services 13.04.060 13.04.080 631 11-10-2014 Rate schedule for sewer use charges Ch. 13.16, App. B 632 11-10-2014 City parks; prohibited activities       Added 12.28.010(e)       Added 12.28.030(18) 633 12-29-2014 2015 annual salary and wage levels Not 
codified 634  9-14-2015 Amending Chapter 15.04 Section 15.04.010 Adoption: Adopting a Uniform Building Code.       Rpld 15.04.010 635  9-14-2015 2016 Budget Not Codified 636 12- 28-2015 2016 annual salary and wage levels Not Codified 637  2- 8-2016 Ordinance amending chapter 3.12 section 3.12.070 municipal gross receipts tax (B.) effective date, enactment of tax and duration. 3.12.070B 638  4-11-2016 Ordinance establishing zoning regulations for the City of Sisseton Not Codified 639  4-11-2016 Amending Chapter 2.04: Sections 2.04.060 Boards and Commissions. 2.04.060 640  4-11-2016 Ordinance granting a non-exclusive franchise to Venture Communications COOP. INC. Not Codified 641  9-12-2016 2017 Budget Not Codified 642 12-29-2016 2017 supplemental appropriation ordinance Not Codified 643 12-29-2016 2017 annual salary and wage levels Not Codified 644  6-12-2017 Amending Chapter 5.08: Section 5.08.050 Hours of Business - Sales restricted to premises. 5.08.050 645  8-28-2017 Amending Chapter 5.20 Motor Carriers of Passengers: Section 5.20.01 License Required. 5.20.010 646  9-11-2017 2018 Budget Not Codified 647 12-28-2017 Amending Chapter 2.24 Personnel Policies and Procedures 2.24.150 2.24.280 2.24.310 2.24.380 2.24.470 2.24.600 648 12-28-2017 2018 supplemental appropriation ordinance Not Codified 649 12-28-2017 2018 annual salary and wage levels Not Codified 650 12-28-2017 Ordinance amending section 17.64.020 Building Permits 17.64.020 651  4- 9-2018 Ordinance passing section 10.28.080 Dynamic Braking or Air-Braking Devices Prohibited       Added 10.28.080  
