
Revised Ordinances of Spearfish, SD


REVISED ORDINANCES
OF THE CITY OF SPEARFISH, SOUTH DAKOTA




Adopted March 19, 1990





Effective April 16, 1990









Published by Order of the Common Council
Contains local legislation current through 2-4-19









Published by:





American Legal Publishing Corporation





One West Fourth Street, Third Floor





Cincinnati, Ohio  45202





Tel: (800) 445-5588





Fax: (513) 763-3562





Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




OFFICIALS




OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF SPEARFISH, SOUTH DAKOTA
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION





_________________





Dana Boke
Mayor





_________________









Dan Hodgs, Ward One
Marty Clark, Ward One
Larry Klarenbeek, Ward Two
George Martin, Ward Two
Darick Eisenbraun, Ward Three
Pam Jacobs, Ward Three
Common Council



 



_________________



 



Michael Harmon
City Administrator



_________________



 




Ashley McDonald
City Attorney





PREFACE



   This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of
the City of Spearfish, South Dakota of a general and permanent nature.



   Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982
Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the common
council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing
in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that
the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of
the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this
Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as supplemented,
and any subsequent ordinance included herein.



   The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in
alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been
catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code
together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table
listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the
Code is included at the back of this Code.



Numbering System



   The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many
state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts
separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number
and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within
the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the
third section of Chapter 3 is 3-3. Under this system, each section is
identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole
chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system
for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that
would logically come between sections 4-1 and 4-2 is desired to be added,
such new section would be numbered 4-1.5. New chapters may be included in the
same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 5 and 6,
it will be designated as Chapter 5.5. Care should be taken that the
alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new
chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or,
in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing
the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the
article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned
to the new article or division.



Index



   The index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each
particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are
couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in
language generally used by local government officials and employees. There
are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as
guide-posts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is
interested.



Looseleaf Supplements



   A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of
binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the
publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will
be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be
reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the
publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and
deleting the obsolete pages.



   Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend
largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received,
it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments
inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended
by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon
receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be
saved and filed for historical reference purposes.



Acknowledgments



   This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson,
Supervising Editor, and Ron McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code
Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other
members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able
assistance throughout the project.



   The publisher is most grateful to Elizabeth Benning, Finance Officer,
E. James Hood, City Attorney, Richard E. Mowell, Chief of Police and Ted
Vore, Public Works Administrator, for their cooperation and assistance during
the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts
and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will
make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which
will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's
affairs.



MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION



Tallahassee, Florida



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 672



An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Spearfish,
South Dakota; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included
Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof, Providing for the
Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance
Shall Become Effective.



Be It Ordained By the Common Council of the City of Spearfish:



   Section 1.    The Code entitled "Revised Ordinances of the City of
Spearfish, South Dakota" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting
of Chapters 1 through 19, each inclusive, is adopted.



   Section 2.    All ordinances of a general and permanent nature
enacted on or before June 19, 1989, and not included in the Code or
recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.



   Section 3.    The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not
be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed
by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.



   Section 4.    Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every
person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any
ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each
act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall
constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless
another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any
Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and
revocation of licenses or permits.



   Section 5.    Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the
form as to indicate the intention of the common council to make the same a
part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that
reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.



   Section 6.    Ordinances adopted after June 19, 1989, that amend or
refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed
as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.



   Dated this 5th day of March, 1990.



CITY OF SPEARFISH



By: /s/ ____________



Mayor



ATTEST:



By: /s/    _____________



Finance Officer



FIRST READING: 3-5-90



SECOND READING: 3-19-90



ADOPTED: 3-19-90



PUBLISHED: 3-27-90



EFFECTIVE: 4-16-90



CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 1-1.  How Code designated and cited.



The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the "Revised Ordinances of the City of
Spearfish, South Dakota" and may be so cited. It may also be cited as the
"Code of Ordinances, City of Spearfish."



(Code 1982, § 1-100)



   State law reference—Revision of ordinances, SDCL, §§ 9-19-16,
9-19-17.



Sec. 1-2.  Rules of construction and definitions.



The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the
purpose expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. In case of
doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the general shall yield
to the particular. Reference for interpretation and construction shall tend
to further the accomplishment of the elimination of the particular mischiefs
for which the provisions were enacted. Words shall be construed in their
common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. In
the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed and the
following definitions shall apply, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council:



   Boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, etc. Whenever
reference is made in this Code to a board, committee, commission, officer or
employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the
words "of the City of Spearfish" and shall be taken to mean the board,
committee, commission, officer or employee of this city having the title
mentioned or performing the duties indicated.



   City or municipality. The words "city" or "municipality" shall mean the
City of Spearfish in the County of Lawrence and the State of South Dakota.



   Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Revised Ordinances of the City of
Spearfish, South Dakota.



   Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in the
provisions of this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the
designated period of time begins to run is not to be included, and the last
day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Sunday or a
legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day
which is neither a Sunday nor a holiday.



   State law reference—Computation of time, SDCL § 15-6-6(a).



   Council. The words "council," "common council," or "city council,"
shall mean the Common Council of the City of Spearfish, constituting the
governing body of the city.



   County. The term "county" shall mean the County of Lawrence, South
Dakota.



   Duties performed by agents. Wherever in this Code any act is required
to be done by an officer in the line of his general duties, or by a
department head or inspector, it shall be construed to permit the doing of
such act by the agent or subordinate of such person; provided that the agent
or subordinate is duly authorized and duly qualified to perform such act.
Such rules shall apply also to license-holders, where such act is not
otherwise required to be performed personally by such person, either by
specific law or by the nature of such act.



   Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations,
as well as to males.



   Health department and health officer. The term "health department"
shall mean the county health department, and the term "health officer" shall
mean the administrator of the county health department.



   Heretofore and hereafter. Whenever the word "heretofore" occurs, it
shall be construed to mean any time previous to the day when such ordinance
shall take effect and whenever the word "hereafter" occurs, it shall be
construed to mean the time after the ordinance containing such word shall
take effect.



   Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to
three (3) or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it
shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.



   Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.



   Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural
and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.



   Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in
all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath,
and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the
words "affirm" and "affirmed."



   Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or,"
if the sense requires it.



   Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations,
corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as
to individuals.



   SDCL. The abbreviation SDCL shall mean the latest edition or supplement
of the South Dakota Codified Laws.



   Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall
include a mark when a person cannot write.



   State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of South
Dakota.



   Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.



   Wholesaler or wholesale dealer. In all cases where the words
"wholesaler" or "wholesale dealer" are used in this Code, unless otherwise
specifically defined, such terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of
goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase
for the purpose of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in
smaller quantities direct to the consumer.



   Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be
construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether
by printing or otherwise.



(Code 1982, §-1-200)



   State law reference—Definition of terms used in the state codified
laws, SDCL § 9-1-1.



Sec. 1-3.  Catchlines of sections.



   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface
type are intended as mere catchlines to indicate the contents of the section
and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any
part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.



(Code 1982, § 1-700)



Sec. 1-4.  History notes.



   The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code
are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to
indicate the source of matter contained in the section.



Sec. 1-5.  References and editor's notes.



   References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted
as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have
any legal effect.



Sec. 1-6.  Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.



   Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect
any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred,
or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of
this Code.



Sec. 1-7.  Repeal.



   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions
of this Code or relating to the subject matter of this Code and not reenacted
as a part of this Code are hereby repealed, except as otherwise specifically
provided.



(Code 1982, § 1-800)



Sec. 1-8.  Effect of repeal of ordinance.



   (a)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceedings pending at the time of the repeal, or any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.



   (b)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in
force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.



(Code 1982, § 1-900)



Sec. 1-9.  Ordinances saved from repeal.



   Nothing contained in this Code of Ordinances, nor in the ordinance
adopting this Code, shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any
manner:



   (1)   Any ordinance or act committed or done or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or occurring before
the effective date of this Code.



   (2)   Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
for the city authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any
evidence of the city's indebtedness.



   (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the city.



   (4)   Any right or franchise granted by the city.



   (5)   Any budget or appropriation ordinance.



   (6)   Any ordinance establishing or relating to the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city.



   (7)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a
stated or limited term.



   (8)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing
taxes.



   (9)   Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not
in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code.



   (10)   Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc.,
any street or public way in the city.



   (11)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes.



   (12)   Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and
traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of
vehicles, or loading zones.



   (13)   Any land use, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to
the zoning map.



   (14)   Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades
of any street in the city.



   (15)   Any ordinance providing for street maintenance.



   (16)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision
in the city.



   (17)   Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or
any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city.



   (18)   Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions,
setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations.



   (19)   Any ordinance regarding elections.



All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and
effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein and are on file in
the finance officer's office.



(Code 1982, § 1-1000)



Sec. 1-10.  Effect of amendments to Code.



   (a)   Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed
in such form as to indicate the intention of the common council to make the
same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that
reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such
additions and amendments.



   (b)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When
subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division, section or
subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded
from the Code by omission from reprinted pages.



   (c)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made
by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of
this Code in substantially the following language: "That section of the
Revised Ordinances of the City of Spearfish, South Dakota, is hereby amended
to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as
desired.



   (d)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be
added, the following language may be used: "That the Revised Ordinances of
the City of Spearfish, South Dakota, is hereby amended by adding a section to
be numbered _____, which section reads as follows: ...." The new section may
then be set out in full as desired.



   (e)   All sections, divisions, articles, chapters, or provisions
desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division,
article or chapter number, as the case may be.



Sec. 1-11.  Supplementation of Code.



   (a)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code
shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A
supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances passed by the common council or adopted by initiative and
referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made
thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter
during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they
will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages
which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be
so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current
through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the
supplement.



   (b)   In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the
Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.



   (c)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier,
meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts
of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:



   (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.



   (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and
make changes in catchlines, headings and titles.



   (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions
to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material,
change existing section or other subdivision numbers.



   (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning
to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be,
or to "sections _____ through _____ " The inserted section numbers will
indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of
the ordinance incorporated into the Code.



   (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.



Sec. 1-12.  Publication and effect.



   This Code shall be printed and published in book form and shall take
effect as provided by law.



(Code 1982, § 1-1100)



   State law reference—Authority to publish revised ordinances in book
form, SDCL § 9-19-17.



Sec. 1-13.  Powers and authorities are cumulative; separability of parts of
Code.



   Except as otherwise expressly provided, all powers and authorities
conferred by any provision of this Code shall be cumulative and additional
to, and not in derogation of, any powers and authorities otherwise existing.
Notwithstanding any other evidence of intent, it is hereby declared to be the
controlling intent of the common council that, if any provision of this Code
or the application thereof to any persons or circumstances, shall be adjudged
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder of this Code or its application
to other persons and circumstances, but such judgment shall be confined in
its operation to the provisions involved or the application thereof to the
persons and circumstances directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment is rendered.



(Code 1982, § 1-1200)



Sec. 1-14.  General penalty; continuing violations.



   Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared unlawful and no specific
penalty is provided therefor, any person who shall be convicted of any such
violation shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each
day any violation of this Code or other ordinance continues shall constitute
a separate offense.



(Code 1982, § 1-400; Ord. No. 899, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 1060, 7-2-07)



   State law reference—Penalty for violation of ordinances, SDCL §
9-19-3.



Sec. 1-15.  Liability of corporations for violations.



   For a violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, which,
by nature, does not require intent exercisable only by natural persons, a
corporation may be fined or punished by appropriate penalties in addition to
any punishment provided for its agents who violate this Code or other
ordinance while acting as such agents.



(Code 1982, § 1-500)



Sec. 1-16.  Prosecution's election when offense created by more than one
section.



   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecution officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one (1) recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation
of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to
bar any other penalty being enforced.



(Code 1982, § 1-600)



CHAPTER 2 ADMINISTRATION*



   Art. I.   In General, §§ 2-1—2-20



   Art. II.   Common Council, §§ 2-21—2-70



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 2-21—2-40



      Div. 2.   Meetings, §§ 2-41—2-70



   Art. III.    Boards, Committees, Commissions, §§ 2-71—2-115



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 2-71—2-95



      Div. 2.   Council on the Arts and Humanities, §§ 2-96—2-115



      Div. 3.   Black Hills Airport Board, §§ 2-99—2-106



      Div. 4.   Board of Adjustment, §§ 2-107—2-111



      Div. 5.   Planning Commission, §§ 2-112—2-115.20



      Div. 6.   Spearfish Parks, Recreation, and Forestry Advisory
Board, §§ 2-115.21—2-115.99



   Art. IV.    Officers and Employees, §§ 2-116—2-140



   Art. V.    Elections, §§ 2-141—2-160



   Art. VI.    Finance, §§ 2-161—2-207



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 2-161—2-175



      Div. 2.   Spearfish Economic Revolving Fund, §§ 2-176—2-199



      Div. 3.   Reserved, §§ 2-200—2-49



      Div. 4.   Loans to Private Property Owners, §§ 2-250—2- 270



   *Editor's note—The City of Spearfish is a city of the first class
pursuant to SDCL § 9-1-2.



   Cross references—Advertising, Ch. 3; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4;
animals, Ch. 5; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; licenses, permits
and business regulations, Ch. 10; solid waste, Ch. 13; taxation, Ch. 16;
utilities, Ch. 18.



   State law references—Municipal government, SDCL § 9-1-1 et seq.;
city of the first class, SDCL § 9-1-2; aldermanic form of government, SDCL
Ch. 9-8.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 2-1.  Corporate limits.



   The corporate limits of the city are hereby declared to be such as have
heretofore and hereafter been legally established and amended by law and
ordinances of the city as shown on the official map thereof on file in the
office of the city finance officer which such map is incorporated in this
Code by reference and adopted as the official map showing the boundaries and
limits of the city.



(Code 1982, § 1-300)



   Cross references—Subdivisions, Ch. 15A; zoning, App. A.



Sec. 2-2.  Seal.



   (a)   The seal of the city shall have engraved thereon the words
"City of Spearfish, South Dakota, Seal, Incorporated." The city seal shall be
and remain in the custody of the city finance officer.



   (b)   The seal of the city shall be affixed by the city finance
officer to all ordinances passed by the council, warrants ordered drawn for
the payment of money from the city finance officer, bonds and any and all
other instruments to which the seal shall be attached as required by the
statute. The city finance officer shall pay no warrant or order for money
unless the seal shall be affixed thereto.



(Code 1982, §§ 2-400—2-402)



   State law reference—City seal, SDCL § 9-1-4.



Secs. 2-3—2-20.   Reserved.



ARTICLE II. COMMON COUNCIL*



   *Cross references—Elections, § 2-141 et seq.; appeals regarding
permits under the fire prevention and protection chapter shall be to the
common council, § 7-54.



   State law reference—Aldermanic form of government, SDCL § 9-8-1 et
seq.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 2-21.  Elective officers.



   The elective officers of the city shall consist of the mayor who is
elected at large for a term of three (3) years and two (2) aldermen elected
from each ward for a term of three (3) years. They shall be elected, qualify,
and their duties shall be as defined and provided by the state law and
ordinances of this city.



(Code 1982, § 2-200; Ord. No. 946, 1-21-03)



   State law references—Mayor, SDCL §§ 9-8-1—9-8-4; common council,
SDCL §§ 9-8-4—9-8-11; term of mayor established by ordinance, SDCL §
9-8-1.



Sec. 2-22.  Mayor's duties generally.



   The mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of
the city government, shall enforce the laws of the city and require the
faithful performances of all administrative duties.



(Code 1982, § 2-300)



   Cross reference—The mayor shall be presiding officer at all common
council meetings, § 2-47. State law reference—Duties of the mayor, SDCL §
9-8-3.



Sec. 2-23.  Mayor to appoint committees.



   The mayor shall appoint such committees of the common council as may be
necessary for the transaction of business and the administration of the
affairs of the city.



(Code 1982, § 2-216)



Secs. 2-24—2-40.   Reserved.



DIVISION 2. MEETINGS*



   *State law reference—Meetings of council, SDCL § 9-8-8.



Sec. 2-41.   Regular meetings.



   (a)   The common council shall hold regular meetings on the first
and third Monday of each and every month of the year at the hour of 5:30 p.m.
Whenever the day fixed for any regular meeting of the council falls upon a
day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, then such meetings
shall be held on the first workday following that holiday at 5:30 p.m.



   (b)   All regular meetings of the council shall be held in the
council chambers of the city located in city hall.



(Code 1982, § 2-201) (Ord. No. 1125, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1213, 7-6-15)



Sec. 2-42.  Special meetings.



   The mayor shall call special meetings of the council whenever in his
opinion the public business may require it, or at the express written consent
of any two (2) aldermen. Notice of such special meeting shall be given to
each alderman at least twenty-four (24) hours before such special meeting is
held either personally or by notice by facsimile, electronic mail or
telephone unless a waiver of such notice is obtained either before or at such
special meeting. The notice required under this section shall state the date
and hour of the meeting and the purpose for which such meeting is called. No
such business shall be transacted except as stated in the notice.



(Code 1982, § 2-202; Ord. No. 935, 10-7-02)



Sec. 2-43.  Adjourned meetings.



   The common council may adjourn a meeting to a later date, in which
event the adjourned meeting shall be considered as a part of the first
meeting.



(Code 1982, § 2-203)



Sec. 2-44.  Meetings open to public.



   The meetings of the common council shall be open to the public. It
shall be unlawful for any not a member of the council to make any disturbance
or interfere in any way with the deliberations of the council at such
meetings. No person, not a member of the council, shall address or deliver
any remarks to the council at such meetings without first asking for the
privilege of so doing.



(Code 1982, § 2-204)



   State law reference—Open meetings, SDCL § 9-8-8.



Sec. 2-45.  Agenda.



   All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract
documents or other matters to be submitted to the common council shall be
delivered to the finance office by the Friday preceding the council meeting.
The city finance officer shall arrange a list of such matters according to
the order of business and furnish each member of the council, the mayor and
the city attorney with a copy of the agenda prior to the council meeting and
as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit.



(Code 1982, § 2-205)



Sec. 2-46.  Executive sessions.



   The common council, by motion, may close meetings for executive
sessions for those purposes permitted by law. Thereafter, the council shall
reconvene in open meeting to take such actions as may be appropriate.



(Code 1982, § 2-207)



Sec. 2-47.  Presiding officer and organization of council.



   The presiding officer at all meetings of the common council shall be
the mayor. The city council, at its first regular meeting after the annual
election shall organize by electing one (1) of its members as president and
one (1) as vice-president. They shall hold their respective office for the
ensuing year. The president of the council shall in the absence of the mayor
be the presiding officer of the council. During any absence or temporary
disability of the mayor, the president of the council shall be acting mayor
and shall possess all the power of the mayor. In the absence of the mayor and
the president of the council, the vice-president shall perform such duties.



(Code 1982, § 2-206)



   Cross reference—Duties of the mayor, § 2-22.



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL §§ 9-8-3, 9-8-7.



Sec. 2-48.  Call to order.



   The mayor, or in his absence, the president or vice-president shall
take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall call
the common council to order. In the absence of the mayor, president and
vice-president, the finance officer shall call the council to order,
whereupon a temporary chairman shall be elected by the members of the council
present. Upon the arrival of the mayor, president or vice-president, the
temporary chairman shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion
of the business immediately before the council.



(Code 1982, § 2-208)



Sec. 2-49.  Roll call.



   Before proceeding with the business of the common council, the finance
officer shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present
shall be entered in the minutes.



(Code 1982, § 2-209)



Sec. 2-50.  Quorum.



   A majority of all the members elected to the common council shall
constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the council. In the
absence of a quorum, the presiding officer shall at the instance of any two
(2) members present compel the attendance of absent members.



(Code 1982, § 2-210)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 9-8-8.



Sec. 2-51.  Compel attendance.



   The common council may compel the presence of absent members by sending
the chief of police or any police officer to require their attendance. If any
member refuses to attend after being notified, he shall state his reasons
therefor to the council at its next meeting, and if the council, excluding
the member whose refusal to attend is under consideration, unanimously deems
such reasons insufficient in light of all circumstances, the council may
impose such penalty which in their discretion the case warrants.



(Code 1982, § 2-211)



Sec. 2-52.  Reading of minutes.



   Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a
member of the council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the
finance officer has previously furnished each member with a copy of the
minutes.



(Code 1982, § 2-213)



Sec. 2-53.  Mayor's vote.



   The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council, but shall be
entitled to vote only on any questions when there is a tie vote thereon. He
shall preserve order and decide all questions of order subject to an appeal
from the council.



(Code 1982, § 2-214)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 9-8-3.



Sec. 2-54.  Silence as affirmative vote.



   Unless a member of the council states that he is not voting, his
silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.



(Code 1982, § 2-215)



Sec. 2-55.  Rules of order.



   Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, as published by Scott, Foresman
and Company, shall govern the council in its deliberation in cases not
otherwise provided for by ordinance, rule or regulation.



(Code 1982, § 2-218)



Secs. 2-56—2-70.    Reserved.



ARTICLE III. BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS*



   *Cross references—Flood prevention and protection appeal board, §
8-34 et seq.; urban forestry board, § 19-51 et seq.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Secs. 2-71—2-95.    Reserved.



DIVISION 2. COUNCIL ON THE ARTS AND HUMANITIES



Sec. 2-96.  Purpose.



   The artists and artistic institutions of the city contribute to and
provide cultural, educational, entertainment and recreational benefits
available to and used by the citizens of the city. The establishment of the
Spearfish Area Council on the Arts and Humanities has promoted and encouraged
public programs to further the development and public awareness of and
interest in the arts which is essential to the public welfare. Therefore, the
common council does hereby designate the Spearfish Area Council on the Arts
and Humanities as the organization to assist the city in promoting and
encouraging public programs to further the development and awareness of and
interest in the arts and to act in an advisory capacity to the council in
connection with the artistic and cultural development of the city.



(Ord. No. 628, §§ 1—3, 11-16-87)



Sec. 2-97.  Duty generally; receipt, distribution of funds.



   In furtherance of the objectives of this division, the Spearfish Area
Council on the Arts and Humanities is to initiate, sponsor and conduct public
programs to further the development and awareness of and interest in the
arts. The common council does hereby authorize the Spearfish Area Council on
the Arts and Humanities to receive and distribute funds on behalf of the city.



(Ord. No. 628, §§ 4, 5, 11-16-87)



Sec. 2-98.  Advisory capacity.



   The Spearfish Area Council on the Arts and Humanities is to advise and
assist the city in connection with such other artistic activities as may be
referred to it by the council.



(Ord. No. 628, § 6, 11-16-87)



DIVISION 3.  BLACK HILLS AIRPORT BOARD



Sec. 2-99.  Created. 



   Pursuant to SDCL §§ 50-7-2 and 50-7-13, there is hereby created an
airport board to be known as the Black Hills Airport Board.



(Ord. No. 1232, 1-19-16)



Sec. 2-100.  Purpose.



   The Black Hills Airport Board shall advise and give recommendations to
the Common Council on all matters concerning the ownership and operation of
the Black Hills Airport - Clyde Ice Field.



(Ord. No. 1232, 1-19-16)



Sec. 2-101.   Composition, membership, qualifications, and removal.



   (a)   The Board shall be composed of seven (7) members appointed by
the Mayor and subject to approval by the Common Council. At least one (1)
member shall be a member of the Common Council. Each member shall be a
resident of Lawrence County. Members shall serve without compensation for
their duties. Members will be appointed for a three (3) year term, with the
terms of the initial members being staggered. Vacancies shall be filled in
the same manner as appointments.



   (b)   The Board shall, at its first meeting, elect from among its
members a President, Vice President, and Secretary, each of whom shall serve
for a term of one (1) year or until a successor is elected and qualified.
Subsequent officers will be selected in a manner consistent with the bylaws.



   (c)   Subject to the approval by the Common Council and after notice
and public hearing, the Mayor may remove any member for cause, which cause
shall be identified in writing and made part of the record at the public
hearing.



(Ord. No. 1232, 1-19-16)



Sec 2-102.  Bylaws.



   The Board shall establish bylaws to govern its affairs. The bylaws
shall designate:



   (a)   Officers of the Board, the time and manner of their election,
the term of office, and the powers and duties of each officer;



   (b)   The time, place, and manner of notice of all regular and
special meetings;



   (c)   The manner of adoption, amendment, and repeal of bylaws; and



   (d)   Such other provisions as may be deemed necessary or desirable
to aid the Board in conducting its affairs.



(Ord. No. 1232, 1-19-16)



Sec. 2-103.  Recordkeeping.



   Minutes of meetings, financial statements, and other records shall be
submitted by the Board to the Finance Officer every month. 



(Ord. No. 1232, 1-19-16)



Sec. 2-104.  Legal advisor.



   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Board.



(Ord. No. 1232, 1-19-16)



Sec. 2-105.  Budget preparations.



   The Board, on or before June 1 of each year, shall submit to the
Finance Officer an estimate of the amount of money necessary to improve,
regulate, equip, maintain, and supervise the operation and management of the
Black Hills Airport - Clyde Ice Field for the ensuing year.



(Ord. No. 1232, 1-19-16)



Sec. 2-106.  Adopted by reference.



   The following publications, on file with the Finance Officer, are
hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth at length in this
chapter:



   (a)   "Black Hills Airport - Clyde Ice Field Rules and Regulations"
and any amendments thereto as may be approved from time to time.



   (b)   "Black Hills Airport - Clyde Ice Field Minimum Operating
Standards" and any amendments thereto as may be approved from time to time.



   (c)   "Black Hills Airport - Clyde Ice Field Fee and Rate Schedule"
and any amendments thereto as may be approved from time to time.



(Ord. No. 1232, 1-19-16)



DIVISION 4.  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



Sec. 2-107.  Created or continued.



   There is hereby created or continued the Board of Adjustment.



(Ord. No. 1233, 2-19-16)



Sec. 2-108.  Composition, membership, qualifications, and removal.



   The members of the Board of Adjustment shall be the Mayor and the
Common Council. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the
Common Council, a first and second alternate. If a member of the Board of
Adjustment is unable to consider an issue due to absence or conflict of
interest, the first alternate, or second alternate, in turn, shall serve in
the absent member's place. The first and second alternates shall each be
appointed for a term of three (3) years. The alternates may serve two (2)
consecutive terms. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any
alternates whose term becomes vacant. Each alternate shall be a resident of
the City of Spearfish. Members shall serve without compensation for their
duties.



(Ord. No. 1233, 2-19-16)



Sec. 2-109.  Powers.



   The Board of Adjustment shall have jurisdiction over all matters
specifically authorized by law or ordinance and shall exercise all powers
conferred to it by law or ordinance.



(Ord. No. 1233, 2-19-16)



Sec. 2-110.  Rules.



   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt and be governed by rules and
procedures kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. No. 1233, 2-19-16)



Sec. 2-111.  Legal advisor.



   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Board of Adjustment.



(Ord. No. 1233, 2-19-16)



DIVISION 5.  PLANNING COMMISSION.



Sec. 2-112.  Created or continued.



   There is hereby created or continued the Planning Commission.



(Ord. No. 1233, 2-19-16)



Sec. 2-113.  Composition, membership, qualifications, and removal.



   The members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor
and subject to the approval of the Common Council.  Every decision upon
which the Planning Commission is to make a recommendation or a decision
accordingly to law or ordinance shall be decided by majority vote of the
present and voting members.  Each member of the Planning Commission shall be
a resident of the City of Spearfish. Members shall serve without compensation
for their duties.



(Ord. No. 1233, 2-19-16)



Sec. 2-114.  Powers.



   The Planning Commission shall have jurisdiction over all matters
specifically authorized by law or ordinance and shall exercise all powers
conferred to it by law or ordinance. 



(Ord. No. 1233, 2-19-16)



Sec. 2-115.  Rules.



   The Planning Commission shall adopt and be governed by rules and
procedures kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. No. 1233, 2-19-16)



Sec. 2-115.01.  Legal advisor.



   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Planning Commission.



(Ord. No. 1233, 2-19-16)



Secs. 2-115.02—2-115.20.  Reserved.



DIVISION 6.  SPEARFISH PARKS, RECREATION, AND FORESTRY ADVISORY BOARD.



Sec. 2-115.21.  Created or continued.



   There is hereby created or continued the Spearfish Parks, Recreation,
and Forestry Advisory Board (SPRFAB).



(Ord. No. 1244, 7-5-16)



Sec. 2-115.22.  Composition, appointment, and removal.



   The members of the SPRFAB shall be appointed and removed by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Common Council. Members shall serve without
compensation for their duties.



(Ord. No. 1244, 7-5-16)



Sec. 2-115.23.  Powers.



   The SPRFAB is an advisory body and shall make recommendations to the
Common Council concerning recreation, physical fitness, sports, and cultural
programs, activities, opportunities, and services; the acquisition,
operation, supervision, use, maintenance, and development of recreation and
park areas and facilities; and regulations for tree planting, removal, and
maintenance of trees, bushes, shrubs, and other woody vegetation on public
and private property. 



(Ord. No. 1244, 7-5-16)



Sec. 2-115.24.  Bylaws.



   The SPRFAB shall adopt and be governed by bylaws, which shall be
subject to the approval of the Common Council and kept on file in the Finance
Office.



(Ord. No. 1244, 7-5-16)



Sec. 2-115.25.  Urban Forestry Board.



   The SPRFAB shall act as the Urban Forestry Board and exercise any
duties delegated to such Board.



(Ord. No. 1244, 7-5-16)



Secs. 2-115.26—2-115.99.  Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*



   *Cross references—Fire department, § 7-21 et seq.; designation of
building inspector as administrator of the flood regulations, § 8-32; zoning
administrator, App. A, Art. VI, § 1.



Sec. 2-116.  Officers.



   The officers of the city shall be an attorney, public works
administrator, finance officer, chief of police, and such other officers as
may be necessary for the administration of city business and affairs. Such
officers shall be hired by the mayor and common council and shall hold office
until their successors are duly hired and qualified.



(Code 1982, § 2-301; Ord. No. 938, 11-4-02)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 9-14-1.



Sec. 2-117.  Oath of officer.



   Each officer and such other officers as may be required shall take an
oath of office before entering upon the discharge of duties. The oath shall
be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the
office of the finance officer.



(Code 1982, § 2-302; Ord. No. 938, 11-4-02)



   State law reference—Oath, SDCL § 9-14-6.



Sec. 2-118.  Bonds.



   Bonds of city officials, unless otherwise provided for by state law,
shall be as fixed annually at the May meeting by the council.



(Code 1982, § 2-303)



   State law reference—Bond, SDCL § 9-14-6.



Sec. 2-119.  Personnel policy and procedures.



   (a)   All personnel policies and procedures governing conditions of
employment by the city, except as otherwise provided in the Code shall be
contained in a manual, entitled "Personnel Policies and Procedures" adopted
by the common council in the same manner as all other ordinances, which is on
file in the office of the finance officer.



   (b)   The city shall adopt a Safety Manual with procedures and
practices designed to keep city employees and facilities safe. The Safety
Manual may be amended from time to time by the safety committee or the city
administrator. A copy of the current Safety Manual shall be kept on file in
the finance office and on the employee portal.



(Code 1982, § 2-305; Ord. No. 741, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 1175, 4-1-13; Ord. No.
1255, 11-21-16)



Sec. 2-120.  Removal of officials.



   The mayor shall have the power to remove any official whenever he shall
be of the opinion that the interest of the city demands a removal. The mayor
shall report the reasons for such removal to the common council at a regular
or special meeting to be held not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen
(15) days after such removal. If the mayor shall fail or refuse to file with
the finance officer a statement of the reason for the removal or if the
council by two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members as authorized by law,
disapproves the removal, the official shall thereupon become restored to said
office. No official shall be removed a second time for the same incident.



(Code 1982, § 2-306; Ord. No. 938, 11-4-02)



   State law reference—Removal of appointed officers, SDCL § 9-14-13.



Sec. 2-121.  Finance officer's report.



   The finance officer shall report the financial condition of the several
funds and such other information relating thereto as may be in his possession
to the common council every month. The monthly report shall be made to the
council on a regular meeting night.



(Code 1982, § 2-307)



Sec. 2-122.  Retirement system.



   The city shall become a participating municipality in the South Dakota
Municipal Retirement System, as provided by law, for the purpose of including
all employees in its employ under the retirement system. The effective date
of the city's participation in the retirement system shall be January 1, 1966.



(Code 1972, §§ 2-75, 2-76)



   State law references—South Dakota Municipal Retirement System, SDCL
Ch. 9-15; retirement systems and pensions, SDCL § 9-16-1 et seq.



Sec. 2-123.  Physical examination.



   (a)   Sworn personnel of the police department shall be required to
undergo annual physical examinations (see appendix thirteen). All other
employees may undergo voluntary physical exams annually as part of the city's
wellness program; sample physical forms may be provided by the city. The cost
of all such physical examinations shall be borne by the employee's health
insurance plan to the maximum amount allowed. All additional costs for police
department personnel physicals shall be borne by the city; all or a portion
of the remaining costs of all other employee physicals may be borne by the
city at the discretion of the city council. This decision will be made on a
calendar year basis.



   (b)   All results of exams will be filed so as to conform with the
confidentiality requirements of the American with Disabilities Act. The
information from the medical exams and inquiries may be used for Worker's
Compensation purposes in accordance with state law and for the employer's
medical insurance plan that is consistent with the provisions of the American
with Disabilities Act. The information from the medical exams and inquiries
may also be used for first-aid or emergency medical treatment and providing
necessary reasonable accommodation.



(Ord. No. 734, § 2.30, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 751, § 2.10, 12-6-93)



Sec. 2-124.  Appointment; qualifications; compensation; removal.



   The common council may appoint a city administrator for an indefinite
term and fix the administrator’s compensation. The city administrator shall
be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative
qualifications. The city administrator need not be a resident of the city or
state at the time of appointment but may reside outside the city while in
office in conjunction with his or her employment agreement. The city
administrator, as an officer of the city, may be removed by the mayor.



(Ord. No. 1280, 5-7-18)



Sec. 2-125.  Powers and duties of the city administrator.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 2-22, the city administrator
shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, responsible to the
common council and mayor for the administration of all city affairs placed in
the administrator's charge by this Code, or other ordinances and resolutions
of the city. The city administrator shall:



   (a)   See that all provisions of this Code and all acts of the
common council subject to enforcement by the city administrator or by
officers subject to the administrator's direction and supervision, are
faithfully executed;



   (b)   Oversee and direct the administration of all departments,
offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Code,
or by state law;



   (c)   Make recommendations to the common council concerning the
affairs of the city;



   (d)   Prepare and submit to the common council an annual budget not
later than September first of each year;



   (e)   Ensure all terms and conditions in any contract or franchise
to which the city is a party are faithfully kept and performed;



   (f)   Recommend appointment and promotion of all city employees and
officers to the common council;



   (g)   When necessary, suspend or remove all city employees except as
otherwise provided by law, this Code, or adopted personnel policies;



   (h)   Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or
units under his/her jurisdiction;



   (i)   Serve as the liaison between city staff, the mayor and the
common council;



   (j)   Attend all meetings of the common council, except as excused
by the mayor;



   (k)   Keep the common council fully advised as to the future needs
of the city;



   (l)   Provide for staff support services for the mayor and
councilmembers;



   (m)   Submit updates and reports to the common council as requested;



   (n)   Sign and approve expenditures and/or contracts for the payment
of money less than $50,000.00, and the same shall be countersigned by the
finance officer, but no claim shall be paid until approved by the common
council, except as may be otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution;



   (o)   Delegate authority as deemed appropriate; and



   (p)   Perform such other duties as are specified in the position
description, in this Code, by resolution or as may be required from time to
time by the common council.



(Ord. No. 1280, 5-7-18)



Sec. 2-126.  Acting city administrator; revocation and alternative
appointment.



   By letter filed with the finance officer, the city administrator shall
designate a city officer or employee to exercise the powers and perform the
duties of city administrator during the administrator’s temporary absence
or disability. The common council may revoke such designation at any time and
appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city administrator
returns.



(Ord. No. 1280, 5-7-18)



Secs. 2-127—2-140.    Reserved.



ARTICLE V. ELECTIONS*



   *Cross reference—Common council, § 2-21 et seq.



   State law reference—Municipal elections, SDCL Ch. 9-13.



Sec. 2-141.  Division into wards.



   The city is hereby divided into three (3) wards.



(Code 1982, § 27-100; Ord. No. 730, 7-20-92)



   State law reference—Determination of wards, SDCL § 9-2-7.



Sec. 2-142.  Ward one.



   All that portion of the city lying west of Spearfish Creek starting
from the municipal boundary on Winterville Road to the intersection of
Hillsview Road and Spearfish Creek, then all portions lying north of
Hillsview Road, and west of North Avenue/Highway 85 and south of Highway 14,
shall constitute the first ward.



(Code 1982, §§ 27-101—27-103; Ord. No. 730, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 1114,
12-21-09; Ord. No. 1149, 12-5-11)



Sec. 2-143.  Ward two.



   All that portion of the city not located in the first ward, lying east
of Spearfish Creek and south of Interstate 90 between Maitland Road to
Sandstone Hills Drive, then all portions lying south of Colorado Boulevard at
Sandstone Hills Drive to the intersection of 7th Street and Colorado
Boulevard, then all portions lying between 7th Street and Spearfish Creek to
Michigan Street, then on Michigan Street from 7th Street to Main Street, all
portions lying south and west of the intersections of Michigan Street and 7th
Street and Michigan Street and Main Street, then at the intersection of
Michigan Street and Main Street, all portions lying west of Main Street and
south of Hillsview Road, shall constitute the second ward.



(Ord. No. 324, 9-17-73; Code 1982, §§ 27-104, 27-105; Ord. No. 730,
7-20-92; Ord. No. 943, 12-16-02; Ord. No. 1114, 12-21-09; Ord. 1149, 12-5-11)



Sec. 2-144.   Ward three.



   All that portion of the city, not located in the first or second wards,
lying east of Spearfish Creek, shall constitute the third ward.



(Code 1982, §§ 27-107—27-109; Ord. No. 730, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 1114,
12-21-09; Ord. 1149, 12-5-11)



Sec. 2-145.  Runoff election.



   (a)   In the case of a tie vote for mayor or a city council position
in any City of Spearfish municipal election, wherein those receiving tie
votes and are the candidates receiving the highest number of votes cast
regardless whether that election is conducted by the city or held as a joint
election with the county, the tie vote will be resolved by a runoff election
to be held two weeks following the regular city election, or at the
conclusion of any recount, whichever occurs later. Only the persons who
received the tie votes in the regular election will be on the ballot of the
runoff election. The person receiving the highest number of votes in the
runoff election will be considered elected.



   (b)   This section is being passed pursuant to the provisions of
SDCL § 9-13-25, and any runoff election shall be held pursuant to the
provisions of SDCL §§ 9-13-27 and 9-13-27.1.



(Ord. No. 1094, 6-15-09)



Sec. 2-146.  Election to fill vacancy.



   (a)   Any vacancy in the governing body of the City of Spearfish or
the office of mayor shall be filled by a special election called for that
purpose as provided by SDCL §§ 9-13-14 and 9-13-14.2. No special election
may be held less than six (6) months before the annual municipal election.



   (b)   If there is a vacancy from any cause in the office of the
mayor less than six (6) months before the annual municipal election, the
vacancy shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the
members-elect of the common council, as soon as practicable after the vacancy
occurs, to serve until the office is filled by election for the unexpired
term at the next annual municipal election.



   (c)   If there is a vacancy from any cause on the common council
less than six (6) months before the annual municipal election, the vacancy
shall be filled by appointment of a majority vote of the members-elect of the
common council, as soon as practicable after the vacancy occurs, to serve
until the office is filled by election for the unexpired term at the next
annual municipal election. The appointment must be a person from the same
ward in which the vacancy exists.



   (d)   Any special election shall be held according to the procedures
required by SDCL §§ 9-13-14 and 9-13-14.2.



(Ord. No. 1095, 6-15-09)



Sec. 2-147.  Election date.



   The regular municipal election of the City of Spearfish is hereby
scheduled on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in April. The Common
Council may elect to hold a municipal election in conjunction with a primary
election or school district election. Elections shall be conducted in
accordance with SDCL Chapter 9-13.



(Ord. No. 1115, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 1169, 1-22-13; Ord. No. 1234, 2-16-16)



Secs. 2-148—2-160.    Reserved.



ARTICLE VI. FINANCE*



   *Cross references—Building permit fees, § 6-29; licenses, permits
and business regulations, Ch. 10; permits for mobile homes in mobile home
parks, § 12-6 et seq.; rates, charges and billing procedure for solid waste
collection, § 13-51 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 18; rates, charges and billing
procedure for water and sewer service, § 18-216 et seq.; permit and other
fees for the filing of appeals, etc., for zoning, App. A, Art. VI, § 7.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 2-161.  Bad checks given to city or its agents.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make and deliver for draw and
deliver or utter or give to the city, or to any officer, employee, agent,
agency, board, bureau or commission thereof, in payment of any license, fee,
fine, penalty, assessment, tax, debt, obligation or other exaction, payment,
or amount of money which the city or such officer, employee, agent, agency,
board, bureau or commission is lawfully authorized to receive or collect, any
check or draft upon any bank or banking association with knowledge that the
maker or drawer thereof does not have an account in or with such bank or
banking association subject to such check or draft. The fact that payment of
such check or draft, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be
refused by such bank or banking association for lack of sufficient funds to
the credit of the drawer or maker with which to pay the same, or because such
drawer or maker has no account subject to such check or draft, shall be prima
facie evidence that the same was made and delivered or drawn and delivered or
uttered or given with the knowledge hereinabove mentioned. Bad check fee to
be set by resolution may be assessed against returned checks as allowed by
state law.



(Code 1982, § 22-208; Ord. No. 801, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 1102, 9-8-09)



Secs. 2-162—2-175.    Reserved.



DIVISION 2. SPEARFISH ECONOMIC REVOLVING FUND



Sec. 2-176.  Established.



   There is established in the city treasury a special revenue fund to be
known as the Spearfish Economic Revolving Fund for the purpose of making
loans for the promotion of the city.



(Ord. No. 717, § 2-162, 1-6-92)



Sec. 2-177.  Designation of surplus revenue.



   The common council hereby determines that there exists a surplus of
sales tax revenues of at least one hundred fifty thousand dollars
($150,000.00) into the Spearfish Economic Revolving Fund.



(Ord. No. 717, § 2-163, 1-6-92)



Sec. 2-178.  Use of funds.



   Funds used from the Spearfish Economic Revolving Fund shall be
available for loans according to the criteria hereafter established by the
common council by resolution for the qualification, application, payment and
repayment of funds. Any repayment of loans made and any interest thereon
shall be receipted into the Spearfish Economic Revolving Fund and all money
in the fund is hereby appropriated for the purposes of making loans as
provided in this division.



(Ord. No. 717, § 2-164, 1-6-92)



Sec. 2-179.  Standing committee—Established.



   There is established a standing committee to be known as the Spearfish
Economic Revolving Fund (SERF) Committee for the purpose of:



   (1)   Providing technical assistance in the completion of
application documents to applicants for a SERF loan;



   (2)   Providing consultation and recommendations to the common
council regarding individual SERF loan applications and requests for loan
servicing for use by the common council in the review, evaluation, and
decision-making thereon; and



   (3)   To monitor outstanding SERF loans.



(Ord. No. 718, § 2-165, 2-18-92)



Sec. 2-180.  Same—Appointment of members; meetings.



   (a)   Appointment of members. Appointment of members of the SERF
committee and establishment of the terms of service of members of the SERF
committee shall be made by the mayor and ratified by the common council. The
committee shall consist of five (5) members, as follows:



   (1)   The mayor or a designee of the mayor;



   (2)   One (1) representative from the common council;



   (3)   Two (2) representatives from the Spearfish Economic
Development Corporation;



   (4)   One (1) representative who is a financial or accounting
professional.



   (b)   Meetings. The SERF committee shall meet on an as needed basis.
Following each meeting a written record of said meeting shall be prepared and
forwarded to the common council for review and comment.



(Ord. No. 718, §§ 2-166, 2-167, 2-18-92)



Sec. 2-181.  Transfers authorized.



   Notwithstanding any provision of Division 2 to the contrary, the
council by an affirmative vote of at least four members, may authorize the
transfer of funds, principal and interest, to the West River Foundation for
Economic and Community Development, Inc. to be used as matching grant funds
by the foundation in its promotion of the city pursuant to foundation
guidelines.



(Ord. No. 885, 7-17-00)



Secs. 2-182—2-199.  Reserved.



DIVISION 3. RESERVED



Secs. 2-200—2-249. Reserved.



DIVISION 4. LOANS TO PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS



Sec. 2-250.  Purpose and authority.



   Occasionally, an owner of private property may be required to
unexpectedly remove, repair, or replace private infrastructure or
appurtenances to private property, such as a private water service line, or
to remove a large tree rendered unsafe by storm or disease. Often, such a
large and unexpected expense can create a financial hardship on a private
property owner. To reduce the effects of that hardship while still protecting
public health and safety, the City of Spearfish has created a short-term loan
program to aid private property owners with completing certain projects. The
Finance Officer is authorized to disburse loans to private property owners
within the corporate limits of the City of Spearfish in accordance with this
Division for the purposes of:



   (a)   Repairing or replacing a curb stop,



   (b)   Repairing or replacing a private water service line,



   (c)   Repairing or replacing a private sewer service line,



   (d)   Replacing or removing trees located within or affecting the
public right of way, and



   (e)   Other corrective action the City may require of an owner of
private property for the purposes of maintaining public health and safety.



(Ord. No. 1243, 5-2-16)



Sec. 2-251.  Amounts.



   No loans shall be made for less than $500.00. Loans shall only exceed
$3,500.00 with the prior approval of the Common Council.



(Ord. No. 1243, 5-2-16)



Sec. 2-252.  Terms.



   The Finance Officer shall develop and maintain a policy, consistent
with the provisions of this Division, which sets forth:



   (a)   The payback period in months,



   (b)   The interest rate of loans,



   (c)   A loan origination fee,



   (d)   Payment due date,



   (e)   Method of payment, and



   (f)   Any other terms the Finance Officer determines are reasonable
and necessary.



The Finance Officer may establish categories of loans based on the amount of
the loan, and the terms of the loan (such as the payback period in months)
may vary between categories.  However, the terms of all loans within a
single category shall be uniform regardless of the borrower.



(Ord. No. 1243, 5-2-16)



Sec. 2-253  Security.



   Loan amounts less than $1,250.00 shall be unsecured. Loan amounts in
excess of $1,250.00 shall be secured by a mortgage on the real property where
the work is performed, which mortgage shall be recorded in the Office of the
Lawrence County Register of Deeds. When the loan is paid in full, a
satisfaction of mortgage shall be recorded in the Office of the Lawrence
County Register of Deeds. The City shall prepare and record any such
documents and will pay the costs of recording.



(Ord. No. 1243, 5-2-16)



Sec. 2-254.  Record and delegation of authority.



   Loans issued shall be documented by a loan agreement signed by the
borrower and the Finance Officer. The Finance Officer is hereby authorized to
execute loan agreements that comply with the provisions of this Division on
behalf of and in the name of the City of Spearfish. The Finance Officer is
hereby authorized to execute mortgages and satisfactions of mortgage pursuant
to the provisions of this Division.



(Ord. No. 1243, 5-2-16)



Secs. 2-255—2-270.  Reserved.



CHAPTER 3 ADVERTISING*




   Art. I.    In General, §§ 3-1—3-25





   Art. II.    Distribution of Handbills, §§ 3-26—3-32




   *Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4;
buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; health, sanitation and nuisances,
Ch. 9; licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10; streets, sidewalks
and other public places, Ch. 14; zoning, App. A; sign regulations, App. A,
Art. V, § 6.



   State law reference—Signs and advertising in public places, SDCL §
9-30-3.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 3-1.  Painting on sidewalks, public property.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to paint any sign or other
advertising matter on the sidewalks or public property of the city.



(Code 1982, § 3-100)



   Cross reference—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14.



Secs. 3-2—3-25.    Reserved.



ARTICLE II. DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS*



   *Cross references—Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10;
streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; zoning, App. A.



Sec. 3-26.  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Handbill shall mean any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature.



   Newspaper shall mean any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of
the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law; and in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues
per year, and sold to the public, and shall mean and include any other
copyrighted material.



   Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



(Code 1982, § 3-200)



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



Sec. 3-27.  Exemption for mail and newspapers.



   The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of
mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be
placed on private property in such manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.



(Code 1982, § 3-201)



Sec. 3-28.  Restricted in public places.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hand or distribute or sell any
handbill in any public place except that a handbill may be personally
delivered to any person willing to accept the same.



(Code 1982, § 3-202)



Sec. 3-29.  Placing on vehicles.



   No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 3-203)



Sec. 3-30.  Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in
or upon any private premises which is uninhabited or vacant.



(Code 1982, § 3-204)



Sec. 3-31.  Prohibited where properly posted.



   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any
private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is
placed on such premises a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No
Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertising," or any similar notice, indicating in
any manner that the occupants of such premises do not wish to have their
right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left upon such premises.



(Code 1982, § 3-205)



   Cross reference—Peddlers, § 10-196 et seq.



Sec. 3-32.  Inhabited private premises.



   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon
private premises which are inhabited, except by handling or transmitting any
such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in
or upon such private premises. In the case of inhabited private premises
which are not posted, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such
premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such
premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent
such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks,
streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be used
when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulation.



(Code 1982, § 3-206)



CHAPTER 4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*



   Art. I.   Licenses and General Provisions, §§ 4-1—4-15



   *Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; advertising, Ch. 3;
buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; health, sanitation and nuisances,
Ch. 9; licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10; streets, sidewalks
and other public places, Ch. 14; taxation, Ch. 16; traffic and vehicles, Ch.
17; zoning, App. A.



   State law references—Alcoholic beverages, SDCL Title 35; retailing of
alcoholic beverages, SDCL § 9-29-6; power to regulate sale and use, SDCL §
9-29-7.



ARTICLE I.  LICENSES AND GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 4-1.  Definitions.



   A term that is defined in a specific section of this chapter is to be
first given the meaning therein defined.  If a term is not defined in a
specific section, the term is to be defined using the definitions below in
this section. If a term is not defined in this section, the term is to be
given the meaning as defined in Title 35 of the South Dakota Codified Laws
(SDCL).  If a term is not provided for in SDCL, the term is to be given its
plain and ordinary meaning.



   Alcoholic beverage.  Any distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages
as defined in this chapter.



   Bulk container.  Any package, or any container within which container
are one or more packages.



   Cider. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the juice
of apples or pears that contains not less than one-half percent (0.5%) of
alcohol by volume and not more than ten percent (10%) of alcohol by weight,
including flavored, sparkling, or carbonated cider.



   Distilled spirits.  Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of
wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all
dilutions and mixtures thereof, for nonindustrial use, containing not less
than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by weight.



   Malt beverage.  A beverage made by the alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion or decoction, or combination of both, in potable brewing water, of
malted barley with hops, or their parts, or their products, and with or
without other malted cereals, and with or without the addition of unmalted or
prepared cereals, other carbohydrates or products prepared therefrom, and
with or without the addition of carbon dioxide, and with or without other
wholesome products suitable for human consumption containing not less than
one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by weight.



   Off-sale.  The sale of any alcoholic beverage for consumption off the
premises where sold.



   On-sale.  The sale of any alcoholic beverage for consumption only upon
the premises where sold.



   On-sale dealer.  Any person who sells, or keeps for sale, any
alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises where sold.



   Package.  The bottle or immediate container of any alcoholic beverage.



   Package dealer.  Any person other than a distiller, manufacturer, or
wholesaler, who sells, or keeps for sale, any alcoholic beverage for
consumption off the premises where sold.



   Public place.  Any place, whether in or out of a public building,
commonly or customarily open to or used by the general public and any street
or highway.



   Retail license.  Any on-sale or off-sale license issued under the
provisions of this chapter.



   Retailer or retail dealer.  Any person who sells alcoholic beverages
for other than resale.



   Sale.  The transfer, for a consideration, of title to any alcoholic
beverage.



   Wine.  Any liquid either commonly used, or reasonably adapted to use,
for beverage purposes, and obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar
content of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar and
containing not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by weight
but not more than twenty- four percent (24%) of alcohol by weight.



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord.
No. 1157, 7-2-12; Ord. No. 1283, 8-6-18)



   Cross reference and State law references– Definitions and rules of
construction generally, § 1-2; statutory definitions, SDCL § 35-1-1;
classes of licenses enumerated; fees, SDCL § 35-4-2.



Sec. 4-2.  Traffic in alcoholic beverages prohibited.



   It is a violation of this chapter for any person or entity to sell,
produce, transport, or store any alcoholic beverage without first obtaining a
license pursuant to this chapter and SDCL Title 35.



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord.
No. 1157, 7-2-12)



   State law reference– Traffic in alcoholic beverages prohibited except
as authorized by title, SDCL § 35-1-4.



Sec. 4-3.  Application for license to conduct business pursuant to this
chapter.



   Any application for a new retail license or the transfer of an existing
retail license under this chapter and SDCL Title 35 shall be submitted to the
city Finance Officer with the required fee.



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord.
No. 1157, 7-2-12)



   State law reference– Applications submitted to city; fee; approval or
disapproval, SDCL § 35-2-1.2.



Sec. 4-4.  Action by Council.



   The Common Council may approve or deny an application for a license
depending on whether the Council deems the applicant a suitable person to
hold the license and whether the Council considers the proposed location
suitable.  The Council may, in its discretion, require the applicant to
appear personally at any meeting of the Council and to answer any question
which may be asked pertaining to the applicant or the place of business which
may in any way pertain to the carrying on of the business for which the
license is sought.



(Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord. No. 1157, 7-2-12)



   State law reference– Applications submitted to city; fee; approval or
disapproval, SDCL § 35-2-1.2.



Sec. 4-5.  Character requirements for licensees.



   Any licensee under this chapter and SDCL Title 35 must be a person of
good moral character who has never been convicted of a felony.  If the
licensee is a corporation, the managing officers thereof must have like
qualifications.



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord. No.
1157, 7-2-12)



   State law reference– Character requirements for licensees, SDCL §
35-2-6.2.



Sec. 4-6.  Area limited.



   The Common Council shall not approve any application for a retail
license issued pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(1 - 5) unless the licensed premises is
located in an area described as a commercial area on the city's zoning use
and district map.  This zoning limitation does not apply to those licenses
issued under Sec. 4-8(D)(6).



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord. No.
1157, 7-2-12; Ord. No. 1215, 8-3-15; Ord. No. 1283, 8-6-18)



   Cross reference– Zoning, App. A.



Sec. 4-7.  Violation as ground for revocation or suspension of license–
Multiple licenses.



   The Common Council may revoke or suspend any license issued under this
chapter and SDCL Title 35 upon proof of violation by the licensee or by the
licensee’s agents or employees of any of the following:



   (A)   Any provision of SDCL Title 35;



   (B)   Any rule promulgated pursuant to SDCL Title 35; or



   (C)   Any ordinance or regulation relevant to alcoholic beverage
control that has been adopted by the city.



   For any licensee with multiple alcoholic beverage licenses for the same
premises, upon suspension or revocation of any license issued pursuant to
this chapter or SDCL Title 35, such licensee shall cease operation under all
alcoholic beverage licenses held by such licensee for the same premises for
the same period as the suspension or revocation.



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord. No.
1157, 7-2-12)



   State law reference– Violations as grounds for revocation of
suspension of license; multiple licenses, SDCL § 35-2-10.



Sec. 4-8.  Classification, information, limitations, and cost of alcoholic
beverage licenses.



   A.   Each license application shall be accompanied by the required
fee at the time of submission to the city.



   B.   Special licenses issued pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(6) may be
issued for a period of time established by the Common Council not exceeding
fifteen (15) consecutive days.



   C.   No person or entity may be issued more than twenty (20) special
licenses per calendar year.



   D.   The following retail licenses and fees are established for any
person or entity desiring to sell, produce, transport, or store any alcoholic
beverages in the city:



   1.   Package (off-sale liquor) license:



      a.   The initial fee for this license shall be set by the
Common Council but may not be less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).



      b.   The renewal fee for this license is five hundred dollars
($500.00) per year.



   2.   Retail (on-off) sale malt beverage and South Dakota farm wine
license:



      a.   The initial fee and renewal fee for this license is three
hundred dollars ($300.00) per year.



      b.   Retail (one-off) sale malt beverage license:



      c.   The initial fee and renewal fee for this license is three
hundred dollars ($300.00) per year.



   3.   Retail (on-off) sale wine license:



      a.   The initial fee for this license is five hundred dollars
($500.00) per year.



   4.   Retail (on-sale) liquor license:



      a.   The fee for this license shall be set by the Common
Council but may not be less than one dollar ($1.00) for each person residing
within the city as measured by the last preceding federal census.



      b.   The renewal fee for this license is one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year.



   5.   Retail (on-sale) full-service restaurant license:



      a.   The fee for this license shall be set by the Common
Council by resolution, and may not be less than one dollar ($1.00) for each
person residing within the city as measured by the last preceding federal
census.



      b.   The renewal fee for this license is one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year.



      c.   An applicant for this license shall provide documentation
to the Finance Officer that the applicant meets all requirements of state law.



      d.   In its initial application, an applicant for this license
must provide documentation to the Finance Officer to provide that the primary
source of revenue of the restaurant will be derived from the sale of prepared
food and nonalcoholic beverages and not from the sale of alcoholic beverage.
This supporting documentation is confidential.



      e.   Before this license will be renewed, the licensee must
submit a report to the Finance Officer verifying under oath that at least
sixty percent of gross operating revenue generated over the preceding
twelve-month period was derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic
beverages.  The report shall contain the annual gross revenue of food and
nonalcoholic beverages and total gross revenues. This report will be
confidential.



   6.   Special alcoholic beverage retail licenses:



      a.   Special alcoholic beverage licensees may not permit the
consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises
unless issued a permit pursuant to Sec. 4-13(B).



      b.   The following special alcoholic beverage retail licenses
are established:



         1.   Special malt beverage retailers license:



            a.   May be issued to any civic, charitable,
educational, fraternal, or veterans organization in conjunction with a
special event within the city.



            b.   May be issued to any licensee licensed
pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(2), Sec. 4-8(D)(4), Sec. 4-8(D)(5) or SDCL §
35-4-2(6) in conjunction with a special event within the city.



            c.   The fee for each special malt beverage
retailers license is fifty dollars ($50.00) per day.



         2.   Special on-sale wine retailers license:



            a.   May be issued to any civic, charitable,
educational, fraternal, or veterans organization in conjunction with a
special event within the city.



            b.   May be issued to any licensee licensed
pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(2), Sec. 4-8(D)(4), or Sec. 4-8(D)(5) in conjunction
with a special event within the city.



            c.   The fee for each special wine retailer’s
license is fifty dollars ($50.00) per day.



         3.   Special on-sale liquor license:



            a.   May be issued to any civic, charitable,
educational, fraternal, or veterans organization in conjunction with a
special event within the city.



            b.   May be issued to any licensee licensed
pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(4) or Sec. 4-8(D)(5) in conjunction with a special
event within the city.



            c.   The fee for each special on-sale liquor
license is one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day.



         4.   Special off-sale package South Dakota farm wine
dealers license:



            a.   May be issued to any civic, charitable,
educational, fraternal, or veterans organization in conjunction with a
special event within the  city.



            b.   May be issued to any licensee licensed
pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(1), Sec. 4-8(D)(3), or Sec. 4-8(D)(5) in conjunction
with a special event within the city.



            c.   A special off-sale package South Dakota farm
wine dealers licensee may only sell wine manufactured by a farm winery that
is licensed pursuant to SDCL § 35-12.



            d.   The fee for each special off-sale package
South Dakota farm wine dealers license is fifty dollars ($50.00) per day.



         5.   Special off-sale package wine dealers license:



            a.   May be issued to any civic, charitable,
educational, fraternal, or veterans organization in conjunction with a
special event within the city where alcoholic beverages donated by members of
the public where the donor purchased the same from a licensed South Dakota
retailer will be sold at a special event.



            b.   The fee for each special off-sale package
wine dealer’s license is five dollars ($5.00) per day.



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1096, 7-6-09; Ord. No. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord.
No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord. 1157,  7-2-12; Ord. No. 1192, 6-16-14; Ord. No.
1215, 8-3-15; Ord. No. 1283, 8-6-18)



   State law references – City may permit consumption of alcoholic
beverages on property owned by public or nonprofit corporation, SDCL §
35-1-5.3; applications submitted to local governing board; fee; approval or
disapproval, SDCL § 35-2-1.2; classes of licenses enumerated; fees, SDCL §
35-4-2; local approval of Sunday sales, SDCL § 35-4-2.1; hours of sale, SDCL
§§ 35-4-81 and 35-4-81.2; special alcoholic beverage licenses issued in
conjunction with special events, SDCL §§ 35-4-124 and 35-4-125.



Sec. 4-9.  Annual additional license fee for video lottery machines on
licensed premises.



   Any licensee licensed pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(2); Sec. 4-8(D)(4) and
issued a video lottery establishment license pursuant to SDCL § 42-7A-41,
must pay an additional annual fee for locating video lottery machines  on
the licensed premises. The fee is established at fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each video lottery machine, and the fee shall be paid at the same time and in
the same manner as the fees paid on licenses issued pursuant to SDCL §
35-4-2.  All fees received under this section shall be deposited into the
general fund of the city.



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord.
No. 1157, 7-2-12; Ord. No. 1283, 8-6-18)



   State law reference – Annual additional license fee for video lottery
machines on licensed premises, SDCL § 35-4-103.



Sec. 4-10.  On-sale and off-sale service restricted and consumption
restricted.



   A.   No licensee may sell, serve, or allow to be consumed on the
licensed premises, alcoholic beverages, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m.



   B.   Licensees are permitted to sell, serve, and allow to be
consumed alcoholic beverages on Sunday, Memorial Day, and Christmas Day,
except between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   C.   A violation of this section will be a Class 2 misdemeanor.



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1096, 7-6-09; Ord. No. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord.
No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord. No. 1157, 7-2-12; Ord. No. 1215, 8-3-15; Ord. No.
1283, 8-6-18)



   State law references – Local approval of Sunday sales under certain
circumstances, SDCL § 35-4-2.1; hours of sale, SDCL §§ 35-4-81 and
35-4-81.2.



Sec. 4-11.  Kegs of malt beverage – Retail sale – Records.



   No keg of malt beverage may be sold at retail unless the licensee who
sold the keg records the name and address of the person to whom the keg is
sold and has provided for the identification of the keg.  Each licensee
shall maintain such sales records for one year and shall make the sales
records available to any law enforcement agency upon request.



   The identification provided for in this section may not be permanent or
damaging to the structure of the keg.  The licensee must register his or her
unique symbol, notation, or mark with the Spearfish Police Department or its
designee.



   For the purposes of this section, the term, keg, means an eight or
sixteen gallon reusable plastic or metal container.



(Ord. No. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord. No. 1157, 7-2-12)



   State law reference – Kegs of malt beverage; retail sale; records,
SDCL § 35-1-12.



Sec. 4-12.  Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in public
places restricted.



   Subject to the exceptions in Sec. 4-13:



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
upon the premises of an on- sale licensee if the alcoholic beverage was not
purchased from the on-sale licensee.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
in any public place, other than upon the licensed premises of an on-sale
licensee.



   C.   Any person violating the provisions of this Section is guilty
of a Class 2 misdemeanor.



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 1133, 3-21-11; Ord.
No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord. No. 1157, 7-2-12)



   Cross references – Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; health,
sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; licenses, permits and business regulations,
Ch. 10; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and
other public places, Ch. 14; streets and public rights-of-way, §§ 14-26 et
seq.; sidewalks, §§ 14-76 et seq.; assemblies, parades and processions,
§§ 14-101 et seq.; cemeteries, §§ 14-156 et seq.; parks and recreation
areas, §§ 14-251 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 15; traffic and vehicles, Ch.
17; zoning, App. A.



   State law reference – Similar provisions, SDCL § 35-1-5.3.



Sec. 4-13.  Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in public
places permitted.



   Notwithstanding Sec. 4-12,



   A.   The Common Council may permit a licensee to sell and allow to
be consumed alcoholic beverages on a sidewalk or walkway subject to a public
right-of-way abutting and immediately adjacent to a licensed premises. Such a
permit may be issued by the Common Council provided:



      1.   A licensee that derives more than fifty percent (50%) of
its gross receipts from the sale of prepared food for consumption on the
licensed premises may serve and allow to be consumed alcoholic beverages
between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. All other licensees may serve
and allow to be consumed alcoholic beverages between the hours of 11:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m.



      2.   With the permit application, and subject to approval by
the city:



         a.   The licensee shall propose a specific service area
that clearly delineates the boundaries where alcoholic beverages may be
served and consumed.  The service area cannot impede pedestrian usage of the
sidewalk the width of less than 36 inches. The service area shall include a
seating area, which shall meet occupancy requirements of building regulations;



         b.   The licensee shall propose a seating configuration
that maintains accessible walkways and employs commercial grade tables,
chairs, umbrellas, benches, or other furniture, the design and construction
of which shall be subject to approval by the city; and



      3.   The licensee shall propose a plan to address any garbage
and waste that may be generated by the proposed use.



      4.   The licensee may install a physical barrier or other
visual delineation to designate the service area, and such shall be designed
and constructed with materials approved by the city and in accordance with
all building regulations.



      5.   If a special event or open container permit is issued for
an area that includes the licensed premises, then in that event, such special
event shall have priority in the use of the sidewalk and right-of-way
adjacent to the licensed premises, and private use of the sidewalk and
right-of way will be suspended for the duration of the special event permit.



      6.   The licensee will enter into a standard encroachment
agreement, which shall provide for insurance and indemnification and any
other conditions or restrictions the Common Council may deem appropriate
based on the location or other characteristics of the licensed premises.



      7.   Notwithstanding any other remedy or penalty provided by
state law, any licensee violating the provisions of this section (first
offense) is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor and subject to a $300 fine. Any
licensee violating the provisions of this section (second offense) is guilty
of a Class 2 misdemeanor and subject to a $500 fine. Any licensee violating
the provisions of this section (third offense) is guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor, subject to a $500 fine, and shall have its permit revoked.



      This section does not apply to any federal-aid eligible highway
unless approved in accordance with the applicable requirements for the
receipt of federal aid.



   B.   The Common Council may permit, subject to conditions or
restrictions that it may deem appropriate, the consumption and sale of
alcoholic beverages on publicly owned property or property owned by a
nonprofit corporation in conjunction with a special event where a special
alcoholic beverage license has been issued pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(6).



      1.   Open container permit:



         a.   This permit may be issued to suspend the
restrictions of Sec. 4-12(B) for a designated area.



         b.   The permit may not exceed twenty- four (24) hours.



         c.   The hours of authorized consumption may not exceed
those permitted for on-sale licenses.



         d.   The consumption and possession of alcoholic
beverages allowed under this subsection is strictly limited to those
alcoholic beverages purchased from an on-sale licensee.



   C.   The Common Council may permit, subject to conditions or
restrictions that it may deem appropriate, the consumption but not the sale
of any alcoholic beverage on city-owned property.



      1.   Brown bag permit:



         a.   The fee for this permit is set by resolution.



         b.   This permit allows the applicant to provide
alcoholic beverages free of charge while on property.



         c.   The hours of authorized consumption may not exceed
those permitted for on-sale licenses.



         d.   The applicant must be at least twenty-one (21)
years of age and provide an acceptable form of identification.



(Ord. No. 1035, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1096, 7-6-09; Ord. No. 1108, 9-21-09; Ord.
No. 1124, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord. No. 1157, 7-2-12; Ord. No.
1215, 8-3-15; Ord. No. 1245, passed 11-21-16; Ord. No. 1263, passed 8-21-17;
Ord. No. 1283, 8-6-18)



   State law references – City may permit consumption of alcoholic
beverages on property owned by public or nonprofit corporation, SDCL §
35-1-5.3; sales or consumption of alcoholic beverages on sidewalk abutting
licensed premises permitted by ordinance, SDCL § 35-4-77.1.



Sec. 4-14.  Public hearing required.



   A.   A public hearing is required before approval and issuance of
any new license or the transfer of an existing license issued pursuant to
Sec. 4-8(D)(1) - (8).



   B.   A public hearing is required before the issuance of a license
issued pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(9), except that no public hearing is required
for the issuance of a license pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(9) if the applicant
already holds a license issued pursuant to Sec. 4-8(D)(1) - (8).



   C.   The Common Council may approve the reissuance of a retail
license without a public hearing, unless in the past year the licensee or one
or more of the licensee’s employees have been subjected to criminal penalty
for violation of the alcoholic beverage control law or the license has been
suspended.



(Ord. No. 1138, 8-25-11; Ord. No. 1157, 7-2-12; Ord. No. 1215, 8-3-15; Ord.
No. 1283, 8-6-18)



   State law reference – Applications submitted to local governing
board; fee; approval or disapproval, SDCL § 35-2-1.2; hearing and notice
required for issuance of retail license, SDCL § 35-2-3.



Sec. 4-15.  Reserved.



CHAPTER 5 ANIMALS*




   Art. I.   In General, §§ 5-1—5-30





   Art. II.   Dogs and Cats, §§ 5-31—5-100





      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 5-31—5-50





      Div. 2.   License, §§ 5-51—5-75





      Div. 3.   Impoundment, §§ 5-76—5-100





   Art. III.   Rabies Control, §§ 5-101—5-106




   *Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building
regulations, Ch. 6; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; solid waste, Ch.
13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; subdivisions, Ch. 15;
traffic and vehicles, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A.



   State law references—Regulation of animals, SDCL § 9-29-12; animals
and livestock, SDCL Title 40.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 5-1.  Running at large prohibited-exceptions.



   No owner of any animal shall permit such animal to run at large in the
city and no animal shall be off the premises of its owner unless restrained
upon a leash and accompanied by its owner or a member of the owner's
immediate family, except when complying with all rules posted in a designated
off-leash area.



(Code 1982, §§ 5-110, 5-210; Ord. No. 955, 5-5-03)



   Cross references—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14;
streets and public rights-of-way, § 14-26; sidewalks, § 14-76; cemeteries,
§ 14-156 et seq.; parks and recreation areas, § 14-251 et seq.



Sec. 5-2.  Abandonment of animals prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal upon a public
right-of-way or upon the property of another.



Sec. 5-3.  Cruelty to animals.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to immoderately beat or wantonly or
maliciously torture or injure any animal in any manner, or to neglect to care
for or feed any animal in his care or under his control.



(Code 1982, § 5-100)



   State law references—Cruelty to animals generally, SDCL Ch. 40-1;
municipal authority to prevent, SDCL § 9-29-11.



Sec. 5-4.  Poisoning animals.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully administer poison to
any animal, the property of another, or to expose any poisonous substance
with intent that the same shall be taken by such animal.



(Code 1982, § 5-120)



   State law reference—Poisoninganimals, SDCL § 40-120.



Sec. 5-5.  Sanitary condition required.



   A building, enclosure or property where any animal is kept shall be
maintained and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



(Code 1982, § 5-130)



   Cross references—Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; nuisances,
§ 9-26 et seq.



Sec. 5-6.  Keeping of fowl, rabbits restricted.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens, ducks, geese or
other domestic fowl, livestock or rabbits, in any house, pen, coop or
enclosure situated within one hundred (100) feet of any dwelling house or
store or other building used or occupied as the residence of any person or
within one hundred (100) feet of any church, school or public building. This
section does not permit the raising or keeping of the animals described where
they are prohibited by zoning or other restrictive ordinances.



(Code 1982, § 5-140; Ord. No. 579, 9-3-85)



   Cross references—Subdivisions, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A.



Sec. 5-7.  Exotic or native wildlife.



   (a)   A person may keep any exotic or native wildlife provided they
are kept in compliance with state game, fish and parks laws, this section and
city ordinances.



   (b)   The owner shall register with the animal control officer his
name, address and type of animal kept who shall notify the state game, fish
and parks department.



   (c)   The animal shall be kept separate from all domestic animals to
prevent breeding and transmission of disease and shall be confined to insure
minimum contact with human beings. The animal control officer shall inspect
the enclosure to ensure that these terms are met.



   (d)   If any such animal attacks or bites any person, the animal
shall be tested pursuant to SDCL § 40-12-5.



   (e)   The animal control officer or any police officer may
confiscate, impound or destroy any such animal found in violation of this
section. The owner shall pay any impoundment costs and fines.



Sec. 5-8.  Animal attacks.



   Any animal that has committed a severe or fatal attack upon any human
being shall be permanently and securely confined or humanely euthanized after
complying with section 5-101 et seq. This section will also apply to any
severe or fatal attack on any animal while the offending animal is at large.
Severe injury shall mean any shall mean any physical injury that results in
broken bones, or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or
cosmetic surgery. "Securely confined" shall mean confined in a locked pen or
enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to
prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen must have minimum dimensions of
five (5) feet by eight (8) feet and must have secure sides and a secure top.
The sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two (2) feet if the
floor is not concrete. The enclosure shall provide protection from the
elements. Anytime the animal is out of the pen it will be with a responsible
adult and on a leash at all times. Failure to comply with these guidelines
will result in the animal being impounded and euthanized.



   Cross reference—Destructionof dangerous and vicious cats and dogs, §
5-33.



Sec. 5-9.  Destruction of animals.



   The animal control officer may destroy any sick or injured animal which
has been impounded without holding it for seventy-two (72) hours if its
condition is such that immediate destruction is necessary or desirable. All
animals shall be destroyed in a humane manner.



Sec. 5-10.  Right of entry of animal control officer.



   (a)   The animal control officer may enter upon the premises where
any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to
examine such animal and to take possession of such animal if there is
probable cause to believe the same has been treated inhumanely.



   (b)   The animal control officer is hereby authorized and empowered
to enter upon any enclosure or lot within the city limits, in quest of any
animal suspected of being affected by rabies and to apprehend any animal
which has been observed to be running at large.



Sec. 5-11.  Liability for fines, costs, etc.



   All fees, fines or costs levied or incurred by the city in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be paid by the owner of the animal.



Sec. 5-12.  Domesticated pets prohibited in the city park (Centennial Park)
during festival in the park.



   Domesticated pets shall not be permitted in the city park (Centennial
Park) from 6:00 a.m. Friday until 6:00 p.m. Sunday during the festival in the
park. For purposes of this section, City Park (Centennial Park) includes the
recreation path through the park, Canyon Street, sidewalks to the east and
west of Canyon Street, and the parking lots. This section shall not apply to
dogs used by law enforcement, the disabled or the visually handicapped.



(Ord. No. 809, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 992, 9-24-04; Ord. No. 1186, 1-6-14)



Sec. 5-13. Unattended animal.



   (a)   A person may not leave any animal unattended in a standing or
parked motor vehicle in a manner that endangers the animal's health or safety.



   (b)   A violation of this section is a class 2 misdemeanor carrying
a $200 fine.



   (c)   A person found to be in violation of this section shall bear
the costs and fees associated with any required care, treatment, impounding,
or kenneling of the animal.



(Ord. No. 1249, 8-1-16)



Secs. 5-14-5-30.    Reserved.



ARTICLE II. DOGS AND CATS



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 5-31.  Definitions.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:



   At large shall mean off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of the owner or a member of his immediate family either by leash,
cord or chain.



   Cat shall mean both male and female members of the feline family.



   Dog shall mean male and female members of the canine family.



   Leash shall mean a cord, thong, or chain not more than ten (10) feet in
length, by which a dog or cat is controlled by the person accompanying it.



   Owner shall mean any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat.



(Code 1982, § 5-200)



   Cross reference—Definitionsand rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



Sec. 5-32.  Dangerous or vicious dogs or cats at large prohibited.



   (a)   No dog or cat of dangerous, vicious or fiercepropensities or
tendencies may be at large atanytime within the limits of the city. It shall
be unlawful for the owner or other person having any such dog or cat in his
possession or under his control or in any manner keeping or harboring any
such dog or cat within the limits of the city, to cause or permit any such
dog or cat to be at large in the city.



   (b)   If any dog bites or attempts to bite any person while such dog
or cat is at large, then such dog or cat shall be conclusively presumed to be
a dangerous dog or cat and dog or cat of dangerous propensities and
tendencies.



   (c)   If any dog or cat attacks or attempts to attack any animal or
chases or otherwise attempts to catch a person, such dog or cat shall be
conclusively presumed to be vicious and to have vicious propensities and
tendencies.



(Code 1982, § 5-220)



Sec. 5-33.  Destruction of dangerous, vicious dogs and cats.



   Any dangerous or vicious dog or cat or a dog or cat having dangerous or
vicious propensities and tendencies found at large after the owner has
previous knowledge or notice that such dog or cat is dangerous or vicious or
has dangerous or vicious propensities and tendencies may be killed by any
police officer of the city without such officer having to catch or impound
such dog or cat.



(Code 1982, § 5-230)



   Cross reference—Destruction of animals which attack human beings, §
5-8.



Sec. 5.34. Nuisances.



   Any dog or cat within the city which habitually barks or howls or
chases or annoys animals, vehicles or persons or which damages or destroys
property is hereby declared a nuisance. The chief of police or other police
officer may proceed to abate such nuisance.



(Code 1982, § 5-240)



Sec. 5-35.  Destruction of biting, scratching dogs.



   Any dog or cat having bitten, scratched or attacked two (2) or more
persons off the premises of the owner shall be destroyed by the police
department.



(Code 1982, § 5-250)



   Cross references—Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; nuisances,
§ 9-26 et seq.



Sec. 5-36.  Cleaning up after pets required.



   The owner, keeper, caretaker or attendant of any animal, canine or
feline, shall immediately and thoroughly clean up any fecal matter deposited
by said animal on any property not owned by the owner, keeper, caretaker or
attendant.



(Ord. No. 778, 8-7-95)



Secs. 5-37—5-50.    Reserved.



DIVISION 2. LICENSE*



   *State law references—Authority to license dogs, SDCL § 9-29-12; dog
licenses generally, SDCL Ch. 40-34.



Sec. 5-51.  Required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep, maintain
or have in his custody or under his control any dog or cat without first
having obtained a license from the city.



(Code 1982, § 5-300)



Sec. 5-52.  Application.



   Any person desiring to keep, maintain or have in his custody or control
any dog or cat shall on or before the first day of January in each year make
application to the animal control officer for a license to keep such dog or
cat. Such application shall be in writing stating the name, sex, color and
other distinguishing characteristics of such dog or cat and the name and
address of' the applicant.



(Code 1982, § 5-310)



Sec. 5-53.  Rabies vaccination required.



   Before any license shall be issued under this division, the applicant
shall furnish a certificate of rabies vaccination issued by a veterinarian
licensed to practice within this state evidencing vaccination of the dog or
cat for which the license is desired has been vaccinated against rabies and
that such vaccination will be good for the license year.



(Code 1982, § 5-320)



Sec. 5-54.  Fee.



   Before any license shall be issued under the provision of this
division, the applicant shall pay a license fee as follows:



   (1)   Each neutered male or spayed female dog or cat.    $ 5.00



   (2)   Each unspayed female or not neutered male dog or
cat.   10.00



(Code 1982, § 5-330; Ord. No. 854, 12-21-98)



Sec. 5-55.  Duration.



   Every license issued under this division shall be valid from the first
day of January until the December 31 next following.



(Code 1982, § 5-340)



Sec. 5-56.  Issuance of tag.



   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer at the time of the
issuance of a license under this division to furnish and deliver to the
applicant for such license, a tag for each dog or cat for which such license
is issued. The number of the license and the year for which such license is
issued shall be stamped or engraved on the tag.



(Code 1982, § 5-350)



Sec. 5-57.  Replacement of tag.



   In the event of the loss of any tag issued under the provision of this
division, the animal control officer is hereby authorized to issue another
tag upon payment of the actual cost of the tag upon application being made
and upon satisfactory proof that such tag has been lost.



(Code 1982, § 5-351)



Sec. 5-58.  Dog or cat to wear tag.



   It shall be the duty of the owner of the dog or cat licensed under this
division to place a collar around the neck of such dog or cat, on which
collar shall be securely fastened the tag furnished by the animal control
officer.



(Code 1982, § 5-360)



Secs. 5-59—5-75.    Reserved.



DIVISION 3. IMPOUNDMENT



Sec. 5-76.  Authorized.



   Any dog or cat found in violation of the provisions of this article may
be seized and impounded by any police officer or animal control officer or
any other person at their direction. Impoundment may be in any animal shelter
designated by the council.



(Code 1982, § 5-400)



Sec. 5-77.  Notice to owner.



   The owner of any dog or cat impounded under the provisions of this
division if his identity and location can be obtained by reasonable means,
shall be notified within twenty-four (24) hours that his dog or cat has been
impounded.



(Code 1982, § 5-410)



Sec. 5-78.  Fines and fees.



   (a)   The fine charged for the impoundment of any dog or cat under
the provision of this division shall be:



   (1)   Thirty dollars ($30.00) for the first impoundment.



   (2)   Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second and any subsequent
impoundment.



   (b)   A twenty-dollar ($20.00) per day boarding fee shall also be
added to the impoundment fine for the first and each subsequent day that the
animal is housed by the city.



(Code 1982, § 5-420; Ord. No. 611, § 5-420, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 937, 10-21-02)



Sec. 5-79.  Holding, redemption of unvaccinated, unlicensed dogs and cats.



   (a)   Any dog or cat impounded under this division shall be held in
the animal shelter designated by the city for a period of one hundred twenty
(120) hours. The owner of any dog or cat impounded may redeem such animal by
paying the impoundment fee within one hundred twenty (120) hours of the
impoundment. The owner of any impounded dog or cat which has been vaccinated
or licensed under this article upon satisfactory proof of ownership and after
paying the impoundment fee may redeem his dog or cat. The owner of an
unvaccinated or unlicensed dog or cat shall be required to secure a
certificate of vaccination and city license within one hundred twenty (120)
hours before being released after paying all fees.



   (b)   In no event shall any impounded animal be returned to the
owner until the owner has produced a current license or receipt therefor and
evidence of current vaccination and paid the fee for impoundment.



(Code 1982, § 5-430; Ord. No. 785, 11-6-95)



Sec. 5-80.  Redemption by person other than owner.



   If the owner of any dog or cat impounded under this division shall fail
to redeem such dog or cat within one hundred twenty (120) hours after such
impoundment, the city's liability for such dog or cat shall cease. Any other
person may upon complying with the provisions of this division, redeem such
dog or cat from the shelter and be the lawful owner of such dog or cat
thereafter.



(Code 1982, § 5-440; Ord. No. 785, 11-6-95)



Sec. 5-81.  Disposition of unredeemed dogs and cats.



   All dogs and cats impounded under this division and which have not been
redeemed or purchased as authorized by this division within one hundred
twenty (120) hours of such impoundment may be adopted by any person or
disposed of in a humane manner by any police officer or animal control
officer of the city or by any veterinarian.



(Code 1982, § 5-450; Ord. No. 785, 11-6-95)



Secs. 5-82—5-100.    Reserved.



ARTICLE III. RABIES CONTROL*



   *Cross reference—Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9.



   State law reference—Rabies, SDCL Ch. 40-12.



Sec. 5-101.  Report of bites.



   Every person having knowledge that an animal has bitten or is suspected
of biting a human being, shall forthwith report the same to the animal
control officer for disposition of such animal under the provisions of this
article. Every person bitten by an animal shall promptly report it to the
animal control officer. The animal shall thereupon be securely quarantined at
the discretion of the animal control officer for a period of not less than
ten (10) days.



Sec. 5-102.  Quarantine of animal.



   (a)   The animal ordered to be quarantined shall not be released
from such quarantine except by written permission of the animal control
officer. Such quarantine may be at the city animal shelter or at the owner's
option, in a veterinary hospital of his choice located in the city. The
expenses of quarantine shall be paid by the owner. In the case of stray
animals or in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known, such
quarantine shall be at the shelter designated as the city animal shelter.



   (b)   The owner, upon demand made by the animal control officer
shall forthwith place in the custody of a licensed veterinarian, any animal
which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to
rabies, for supervised quarantine. The expense of such quarantine shall be
borne by the owner. The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if found to be
free of rabies.



Sec. 5-103.  Diagnoses.



   When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid or
suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid and dies while under such
observation, the animal control officer shall immediately send the head of
such animal to a competent laboratory for pathological examination. The
animal control officer shall notify the proper public health officers of
reports of human contacts with such animal and the diagnosis made on the
animal.



Sec. 5-104.  Area quarantine.



   (a)   When one (1) or both reports give a positive diagnosis of
rabies, the animal control officer may recommend the animal be area
quarantined for a period of thirty (30) days. Upon the invocation of such
quarantine, no animal shall be taken into such area during such period of
quarantine.



   (b)   Every unvaccinated animal bitten by an animal showing positive
symptoms of rabies shall be forthwith destroyed or shall be held under
quarantine not less than six (6) weeks at the owner's option and expense.



Sec. 5-105.  Extension.



   If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the
period of the quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an
additional six (6) months.



Sec. 5-106.  Destruction of animals.



   No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal
biting a human, except as herein provided, or remove such animal from the
city limits without written permission from the animal control officer. The
carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be
surrendered to the animal control officer. The animal control officer shall
direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. No
person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal quarantined or fail or
refuse to destroy an animal as required herein when such demand is made by
the animal control officer.



CHAPTER 6 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*




   Art. I.   In General, §§ 6-1—6-25





   Art. II.   Construction Standards, §§ 6-26—6-50





   Art. III.   Mechanical Standards, §§ 6-51—6-75





   Art. IV.   Numbering, §§ 6-76—6-100





   Art. V.   Grading and Erosion Controls, §§ 6-101—6-125




   *Cross references—Advertising, Ch. 3; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4;
consuming, blending, possessing, alcoholic beverages in public places
prohibited and the disposal of containers containing alcoholic beverages
restricted, § 4-6; animals, Ch. 5; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7;
burning of trash, leaves and any other material or product prohibited, §
7-1; fire prevention code adopted, § 7-46; storage of explosives, blasting
agents, etc., restricted, § 7-49; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8;
development permit required, § 8-31; designation of building inspector as
administrator of the flood regulations, § 8-32; health, sanitation and
nuisances, Ch. 9; nuisances, § 9-26 et seq.; licenses, permits and business
regulations, Ch. 10; building contractor's license required, § 10-121 et
seq.; electrician or electrical contractor's license required, § 10-146 et
seq.; plumbers license required, § 10-231 et seq.; mobile homes and mobile
home parks, Ch. 12; solid waste, Ch. 13; disposal of heavy accumulations of
garbage and refuse, § 13-29; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch.
14; building permit required for construction of sidewalks and driveways, §
14-1; subdivisions, Ch. 15; utilities, Ch. 18; building sewers and sanitary
sewer system connection requirements, § 18-131 et seq.; trees on private
property, § 19-73 et seq.; zoning, App. A; sign regulations, App. A, Art. V,
§ 6; certificate of occupancy, App. A, Art. VI, § 3.



   State law reference—State plumbing standards, SDCL §§ 36-25-15,
36-25-15.1.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 6-1.  Barbed wire or electrified fences.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use barbed wire or electrified
fences for the purpose of enclosing, in whole or part, any lots or parts of
lots or parcels of ground in any residential district. In commercial and
industrial districts the use of barbed wire security fences is permitted
provided that the barbed wire is located a minimum of eight (8) feet from the
ground. In the AG (agricultural conservation) zoning district, barbed wire
fencing may be permitted upon request and administrative review by the zoning
administrator after consideration of its location with respect to adjacent
land uses. If, in the judgment of the zoning administrator, a public safety
hazard is at issue or if the fence is proposed to be placed adjacent to a
residential district, the request shall be acted upon by the common council.



(Code 1982, § 22-204; Ord. No. 725, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 1126, 10-10-4-10; Ord.
No. 1298, 2-4-19)



   Cross references— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; nuisances,
§ 9-26 et seq.; licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10; mobile
homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; subdivisions, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A.
Secs. 6-2-6-25.



ARTICLE II. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS*



           *Cross references—Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7;
flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; residential construction standards,
§ 8-77; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; building contractor's
license required, § 10-121 et seq.; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch.
12; disposal of wastes from lumber yards, building material suppliers,
building contractors, and certain other businesses, § 13-30; utilities, Ch.
18.



Sec. 6-26.  Building code adopted.



    The common council hereby adopts the 2018 International Residential
Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, Chapters 1-24 and 44 and the 2018
International Building Code as published by the International Code Council. A
copy of the code shall be on file in the office of the City Building Official.



(Code 1982, § 12-100; Ord. No. 522, 12-20-82; Ord. No. 528, 3-7-83; Ord. No.
581, 10-21-85; Ord. No. 639, 8-15-88; Ord. No. 838, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 989,
8-20-04; Ord. No. 1064, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1170,
1-22-13; Ord. No. 1230, 2-1-16; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



   State law reference—Authority to adopt technical codes, SDCL §
11-10-5.



Sec. 6-27.  Amendments to building code.



   The following amendments to the International Residential Code for One-
and Two-Family Dwellings adopted by section 6-26 are made and incorporated
into the code:



CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA



City of Spearfish, SD



 



Ground Snow Load
 
43


Wind Speed (mph)
 
115


Seismic Design Category
 
A


Subject to Damage From:
 
 


Weathering
 
Moderate


Frost Line Depth
 
42"


Termite
 
None to Slight


Decay
 
None to Slight


Winter Design Temperature (f)
 
- 7


Ice Shield Under-underlayment Required
 
Yes


Flood Hazards
 
NFIP


Air Freezing Index
 
500


Mean Annual Temperature
 
42


 
 
 




 



         (1)   IRC Chapter 1, Section R105.2 Work exempt from
building permit is hereby amended to read as follows: Building Permits shall
not be required for the following. Exemption from the permit requirements of
this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done
in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws
or ordinances of this jurisdiction.



      1.   One-story detached accessory structures provided the
floor area does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.



      2.   Fences not over seven (7) feet high.



      3.   Retaining walls that are not over four (4) feet in height
measured from grade on the exposed side to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge.



      4.   Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity
does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width
does not exceed 2 to one 1.



      5.   Sidewalks and driveways.



      6.   Painting, papering, tiling carpeting, cabinets, counter
tops and similar finish work.



      7.   Above ground prefabricated swimming pools.



      8.   Swings and other playground equipment.



      9.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not
project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support.



      10.   Replacement of similar siding materials.



      11.   Replacement of similar roofing materials.



      12.   Gutters, downspouts, and storm windows.



      13.   Window replacement where the rough opening is not
altered.



      14.   Structures or work performed on properties of the
government of the United States of America or the State of South Dakota.



      15.   Decks that are not more than 30 inches above grade at
any point.



   (2)   IRC Chapter 3, Section R302.5.1 Opening protection.  Openings
from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall
not be permitted.  Other openings between the garage and residence shall be
equipped with solid wood doors not less than 1 3/8 inches in thickness, solid
or honeycomb-core steel doors not less than 1 3/8 inches thick, or 20-minute
fire-rated doors.



   (3)   IRC Chapter 3, Section 313 Automatic fire sprinkler systems is
hereby deleted.  IRC Chapter 3, Section R313.2.1 Design and installation is
hereby amended.  When installed an Automatic residential fire sprinkler
systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section P2904 or
NFPA 13D.



   (4)   IRC Chapter 3, Section 315 Carbon Monoxide alarms is hereby
deleted.



   (5)   IRC Chapter 4, Section 403.1.4.1 exception 1.  Frost
Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an area of 1,024 square
feet or less, of light-framed construction, with an eve height of ten (10)
feet or less shall not be required.



   (6)   IRC Chapter 3, Section R302.13 Fire protection of floors is
hereby deleted.



   (7)   2015 International Residential Code



   Chapter 11 Energy Efficiency



   AMENDMENTS



TABLE N1102.1



INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENTa



 

Climate Zone
 
Fenestration U-Factor [Btu/hr- ft 2-degree s F]
 
Skylightb U-Fac tor
 
Glazed Fenestration SHGC
 
Ceiling R-Valuel
 
Wood Frame Wall R-Value
 
Mass Wall R-Valuek
 
Floor R-Value
 
Basementc Wall R-Value
 
Slabd R-Value and Depth
 
Crawl Space c Wall R-Value


6A
 
0.32
 
0.55
 
NR
 
49
 
19 or 13 + 5h
 
15/19
 
30g
 
10/13
 
10, 42 inches
 
10/13



 



a.   R-values are minimums. U-factors and solar heat gain coefficient
(SHGC) are maximums.



b.   The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column
applies to all glazed fenestration.



c.   The first R-value applies to continuous insulation which is allowed
to be applied at the time of finishing the basement, the second to framing
cavity insulation; either insulation meets the requirement.



d.   R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for heated
slabs.



g.   Or insulation sufficient to fill the framing cavity, R-19 minimum.



h.   "13+5" means R-13 cavity insulation plus R-5 insulated sheathing. If
structural sheathing covers 25% or less of the exterior, R-5 sheathing is not
required where structural sheathing is used. If structural sheathing covers
more than 25% of exterior, structural sheathing shall be supplemented with
insulated sheathing of at least R-2.



k.   The second R-value applies when more than half the insulation is on
the interior.



l.   The minimum R-value for ceilings is further based on a minimum 6-inch
(152 mm) heel height to allow the ceiling insulation to extend over the top
plate.



   (8)   IRC Chapter 11, Section N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) Testing is
hereby deleted.



   (9)   IRC Chapter 11, Section N1104.1 (R404.1) Lighting equipment
(Mandatory).  Not adopted by the City.



   The following amendments to the International Building Code adopted by
section 6-26 are made and incorporated into the code:



   (1)   IBC Chapter 1, Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit is
hereby amended to read as follows:  Permits shall not be required for the
following.  Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of
this jurisdiction.



      a.   One-story detached accessory structures provided the
floor area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet.



      b.   Fences not over seven (7) feet high.



      c.   Retaining walls that are not over four (4) feet in height
measured from grade on the exposed side to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge.



      d.   Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity
does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width
does not exceed 2 to one 1.



      e.   Sidewalks and driveways.



      f.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter
tops and similar finish work.



      g.   Above ground prefabricated swimming pools.



      h.   Swings and other playground equipment.



      i.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not
project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support.



      j.   Gutters, downspouts, and storm windows.



      k.   Window replacement where the rough opening is not altered.



      l.   Structures or work performed on properties of the
government of the United States of America or the State of South Dakota.



   (2)   IBC Chapter 1, Section 113 Board of Appeals is hereby amended
to read as follows:  The Board of Adjustment shall be the Board of Appeals.



(Ord. No. 838, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 989, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 1064, 7-2-07; Ord. No.
1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1170, 1-22-13; Ord. No. 1230, 2-1-16; Ord. No. 1298,
2-4-19)



Sec. 6-28.  Definitions in code.



   (a)   Whenever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the code adopted
by section 6-26, it shall be held to mean the City of Spearfish, South Dakota.



   (b) Whenever the term "corporate counsel" is used in the code adopted
by section 6-26, it shall be held to mean the city attorney.



(Code 1982, § 12-102; Ord. No. 838, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No.
1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-29.  Schedule of permit fees.



Building Permit Fees



   The fees for various residential, commercial, plumbing, and mechanical
building permits are based on the estimated value of work in accordance with
the schedule set by resolution and on file with the City Finance Office.



   Refunds for building permits may be given upon request to the City of
Spearfish Finance Officer. Refunds for building permits will be based off of
80% of the cost of the permit fee.



(Ord. No. 1198, 10-20-14; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



   Cross references—Finance, § 2-161 et seq.; licenses, permits and
business regulations, Ch. 10; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12;
zoning, App. A.



Sec. 6-30.  Conflicts.



   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted
in section 6-26 and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state
law or city ordinance, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law,
or city ordinance shall prevail and be controlling.



(Code 1982, § 12-101; Ord. No. 838, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No.
1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-31.  International property maintenance code.



    The common council hereby adopts the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code to provide standards to safeguard life or limb, health,
property, and public welfare by regulating, governing, and controlling the
use, occupancy, conditions, and site maintenance of all property, buildings,
and structures within this jurisdiction and to provide for a just, equitable,
and practicable method whereby buildings or structures, which from any cause
endanger the life, limb, morals, property, safety, or welfare of the general
public or their occupants, may be repaired, vacated, or demolished.  A copy
of the code shall be on file in the office of the city building official.



   Sec. 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Spearfish, hereinafter referred to
as "this code".



   Sec. [A] 111.1 Means of Appeal is hereby amended to read as follows:
Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice
or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the Board
of Adjustment, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within
ten (10) days after the day the decision, notice, or order was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.



   Sec. [A] 111.2 Membership of board is hereby amended to read as
follows:  The Common Council shall be the Board of Appeals.



   Sec. 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be subject to administrative citations through the code enforcement
process.



   Sec. 302.4 Weeds.  All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 8 inches. 



   Sec. 303 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS:  Sec. 303.2 Enclosures are
not required for above ground prefabricated swimming pools.



   Sec. 304.14 Insect screens. The period of time to require insect
screens is hereby amended to be April 1 to September 30, inclusive.



   Sec. 602.3 Heat supply. The period of time to require the heating
supply to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°F is hereby amended to be
September 1 to April 30, inclusive.



   Sec. 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. The period of time to require the
heating supply to maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F is hereby amended
to be September 1 to April 30, inclusive.



(Ord. No. 639, 8-15-88; Ord. No. 838, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 1064, 7-2-07; Ord. No.
1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1170, 1-22-13; Ord. No. 1230, 2-1-16; Ord. No. 1298,
2-4-19)



   Cross references—Destruction of building damaged by fire, § 7-25;
fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7; flood prevention and protection, Ch.
8; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; nuisance, § 9-26 et seq.;
subdivisions, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A.



Sec. 6-32.  Pole buildings prohibited in certain areas.



   The construction of a pole building, which is defined as a building
employing posts or poles as columns embedded in earth or axial embedded in
concrete footings in the earth used to resist both axial and lateral loads,
is hereby prohibited in those areas zoned as Central Commercial Core (CC),
Central Commercial (C-1) and Office Commercial (C-3).



(Code 1982, § 12-400; Ord. No. 838, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 893, 12-4-00; Ord. No.
1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



   Cross references—Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10;
mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; subdivisions, Ch. 15; zoning,
App. A; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7; mobile homes and mobile home
parks, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14;
subdivisions, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A.



Secs. 6-33—6-50.    Reserved.



ARTICLE III. MECHANICAL STANDARDS



Sec. 6-51.  International Mechanical Code adopted.



   The common council hereby adopts the 2018 International Mechanical Code
published by the International Code Council.



   Sec. 508.1.1 Makeup Air Temperature.  The temperature of makeup air
shall not be more than 10 degrees Fahrenheit below the temperature of the air
in the conditioned space.



      Exceptions:



      1.   Makeup air that is part of the air-conditioning system.



      2.   Makeup air that does not decrease the comfort conditions
of the occupied space.



(Code 1982, § 12-104; Ord. No. 520,11-15-82; Ord. No. 581, 10-21-85; Ord.
No. 878, 4-3-00; Ord. No. 989, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 1064, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 1126,
10-4-10; Ord. No. 1170, 1-22-13; Ord. No. 1230, 2-1-16 ; Ord. No. 1298,
2-4-19)



Sec. 6-52.  International Existing Building Code adopted. 



   The common council hereby adopts the 2018 International Existing
Building Code published by the International Code Council. 



(Ord. No. 1230, 2-1-16 ; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Secs. 6-53—6-75.  Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. NUMBERING



Sec. 6-76.  Premises identification.



   It shall be the duty of every person owning or occupying any new or
existing house or other building constructed in the city fronting any public
or private street or avenue to place and maintain premise identification in
accordance with section 6-76.1.



(Code 1982, § 12-300; Ord. No. 838, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No.
1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-76.1. Address location and size.



   The following standards for addressing shall be complied with when
installing new or replacing existing numbers on houses or other buildings:



   (1)   All addresses shall be numbers containing no script.



   (2)   Numbers shall be plain painted, printed, or metallic numbers.



   (3)   Numbers shall be of a contrasting color to the background they
are attached to.



   (4)   Approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all new and
existing houses and other buildings in such a position as to be plainly
visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. The
height, size, and location of address numbers shall comply with the following:



      a.   Numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height
if the structure is thirty (30) feet or less from the roadway.



      b.   Numbers shall be a minimum of five (5) inches in height
if the structure is from thirty-one (31) feet to fifty (50) feet from the
roadway.



      c.   Numbers shall be a minimum of seven (7) inches in height
if the structure is from fifty-one (51) feet to two hundred (200) feet from
the roadway.



      d.   Numbers shall be a minimum of ten (10) inches in height
if the structure is from two hundred one (201) feet to three hundred (300)
feet from the roadway.



         Exception: Numbers can be reduced to six (6) inches on
buildings and structures when complying with section 6-76.1.4(f).



      e.   Numbers shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches in
height if the structure is from three hundred one (301) feet to four hundred
(400) feet from the roadway.



         Exception: Numbers can be reduced to six (6) inches on
buildings and structures when complying with section 6-76.1.4(f).



      f.   If the structure is not visible from the roadway because
of terrain, trees, or other obstructions, or if the structure is more than
four hundred (400) feet from the roadway, the address numbers shall be posted
on a post at the entrance of the driveway to the structure. The numbers on
the post shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height and shall be visible
from both sides of the approach to the entrance (the address on the post is
in addition to the address required on the house or other building). The post
with the numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height above the
ground in a visible location within twenty (20) feet of the roadway.



(Ord. No. 838, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-77.  Base lines.



   Colorado Boulevard is the base line for numbering of buildings on
streets running north and south and Main Street is the base line for number
of buildings on streets running east and west.



(Code 1982, § 12-301; Ord. No. 1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-78.  Determination of numbers.



   (a)   Buildings on the easterly and the northerly side of all
streets and avenues shall bear even numbers in their last digit.



   (b)   Buildings on the southerly and westerly side of all streets
and avenues shall bear odd numbers in their last digit.



   (c)   The unit for determining the final figure shall be twelve and
one-half (12-1/2) feet, thus the first twenty-five (25) feet shall be
entitled to use the numbers 01 and 03 and on the opposite side of the street
or avenue the numbers 02 and 04.



   (d)   The numbering of buildings shall commence at the 100 block
designated as Colorado Boulevard and Main Street.



(Code 1982, § 12-302; Ord. No. 1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-79.  Assignment of numbers.



   All numbers required by this article shall be assigned to the building
by the building official.



(Code 1982, § 12-303; Ord. No. 838, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No.
1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-80.  Duty to affix number.



   If the owner or lessee of any building shall fail, refuse, or neglect
to place the number, or replace it when necessary, the building official may
serve on such owner or lessee by personal service or registered mail to
his/her last known address, ordering him/her to place or replace the number.
The owner or lessee shall comply with this notice within ten (10) days from
the date of service.



(Code 1982, § 12-304; Ord. No. 838, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No.
1298, 2-4-19)



Secs. 6-81—6-100.    Reserved.



ARTICLE V. GRADING AND EROSION CONTROLS



Sec. 6-101.  Introduction; purpose; applicability.



   During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion
by wind and water.  Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water
quality and adversely affects aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable
species.  Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers, ditches, and the
dredging of lakes, ponds, and streams.  In addition, clearing and grading
during construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for
terrestrial and aquatic habitat.



   The purpose of this article is to safeguard persons, protect property,
and prevent damage to the environment in the City of Spearfish.  This
article will also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and
controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development
or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the
movement of earth on land in the City of Spearfish.



   Unless specifically exempted, these regulations apply to all lands
within the City of Spearfish in which the vegetative cover is removed;
disturbed or fill material has been brought onto the site requiring
stabilization.



(Ord. No. 1049, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-102.  Definitions.



   ARSD.  Administrative Rules of South Dakota.



   Best Management Practices (BMPs).Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state. BMPs
also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to
control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage.



   Clearing.  Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   Drainage way.  Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the
site.



   Grading and Erosion Control Plan (GECP).  A set of plans indicating
the specific measures and sequencing used to control sediment and erosion on
a construction site. (Required for all sites ½ acre or greater.)



   Grading permit.  A permit issued by the City of Spearfish for
construction, excavating, clearing, and/or any land disturbing activity.



   Land disturbance/disturbing activity.  Any type of activity that
involves grading, clearing, and/or moving topsoil, rock, or any other natural
surface from property. This also includes bringing fill material onto the
site.



   Notice of Stabilization/Re-Vegetation Agreement. A signed agreement
between a property buyer and property seller or a building contractor and
property buyer where landscaping and re-vegetation will be required. This
agreement determines responsibilities between the two parties for sediment
and erosion control on the site.



   Perimeter controls.  Erosion control measures which protect
neighboring properties from non-storm water discharges.



   SD DENR.  South Dakota Department of Environment and Natural Resources.



   Stabilization.  The use of permanent or temporary landscape practices
that prevent exposed soils from eroding including, but not limited to, grass,
trees, sod, mulch, or other materials which prevent erosion and retain
moisture.



   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).  Required by SD DENR
for Storm Water permit for construction areas disturbing more than one (1)
acre or industrial activities having a Standard Industrial Code (SIC) between
20-39.



   Watercourse.  Any body of water including, but not limited to, lakes,
ponds, streams and other bodies of water delineated by the City of Spearfish.



   Waterway.  A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or
to a public storm drain.



   Waters of the state.  All waters within the jurisdiction of this
state, including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, situated wholly or
partly within or bordering upon the state, but not waste treatment systems,
including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the
CWA (Clean Water Act) other than cooling ponds as defined by the Code of
Federal Regulations.



(Ord. No. 1049, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1148, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-103.  Grading permit(s).



   (1)   Unless otherwise exempt, a grading permit will be required
prior to persons engaging in a land disturbing activity exceeding one
thousand (1,000) square feet. The following requirements must be met before
the permit will be granted:



      a.   General permit for storm water discharges associated with
construction activities through SD DENR as required by state regulations for
land disturbing activity of one (1) acre or more.   



      b.   General permit for Storm Water Discharges associated with
Industrial Activities through SD DENR as required by state regulations.  The
requirements for this permit are governed by the Standard Industrial Code
(SIC). There are no size requirements for this permit.



      c.   Approval of the SWPPP by the City of Spearfish Public
Works Department.  The SWPPP is a requirement for both (1)a. and (1)b.
above. 



   (2)   A grading permit with a Grading and Erosion Control Plan
(GECP) will be required for persons wishing to engage in land disturbing
activity of one-half (½) acre up to one (1) acre upon obtaining approval of
a GECP by the City of Spearfish Public Works Department.



   (3)   The grading permit shall designate the name, address, and
phone number for person(s) (including emergency contact information)
responsible for erosion control measure implementation and maintenance.



   (4)   Exemptions. No grading permit will be required for the
following activities:



      a.   Any emergency activity that is immediately needed for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources.



      b.   Any nursery and agricultural operations that is permitted
by zoning regulations as a main or accessory use.



      c.   Land disturbing activity of less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet.



   (5)   All permits will remain active until permanent landscaping
measures have been met on the site. Permanent stabilization/re- vegetation
must be met by October 31st of the year following completion of the project
or occupancy of the project. Example: if the project is completed in July of
2011, then permanent landscaping/re-vegetation must be complete by October
31, 2012. Projects larger than one-half (½) acre may be required to be
stabilized, landscaped, or re-vegetated in phases to prevent long term
exposure of soils.



   (6)   Persons not subject to a grading permit but who are engaging
in a land disturbing activity are responsible for applying effective BMPs and
will be subject to the penalties set forth in section 6-107.



(Ord. No. 1049, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1148, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-104.  Grading and Erosion Control Plan.



   For sites of one-half (½) acre or larger, the Grading and Erosion
Control Plan must include:



   (1)   A legible map identifying area to be disturbed, slopes, and
resources to be protected and also must include nearest downstream storm
water inlets, drainage ways, and neighboring property lines. This plan must
be approved and BMPs must be in place before any grading begins. The minimum
map size for sites one-half (½) to one (1) acre is 8½ inches x 11inches;
for construction sites disturbing more than one (1) acre and industrial
sites, minimum map size is 11 inches x 17 inches.



   (2)   The SWPPP for items (1)a and (1)b in section 6-103 above is
required for submittal as the ESCP for this section.



   (3)   All BMPs necessary to achieve soil stabilization on the site
itself and including stock piles of any soil, rock, or any additional
landscaping materials on the site.  The plan will also include a designated
entry/exit point, a concrete washout area on the site, measures to protect
nearest downstream storm water inlet(s), and explain measures to prevent
mud-tracking from vehicles and equipment into the street. 



   (4)   Sites up to one-half (½) acre which are not subject to a GECP
will be required to apply all BMPs necessary to accomplish soil stabilization
based upon the soil conditions and topography of the particular site. A GECP
may be required in these areas when sites are consistently noncompliant with
this code. Final stabilization requirements set forth in section 6-105 are
required for these sites.



(Ord. No. 1049, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1148, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-105.  Final stabilization.



   (1)   All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed
and either of the two following criteria are met:



      a.   Uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare
areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy percent (70%) of
the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on
all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or



      b.   Equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the
use of riprap, retaining walls, or geotextiles) have been employed.



   (2)   When background native vegetation naturally covers less than
one hundred percent (100%) of the ground, the seventy percent (70%) coverage
criteria is adjusted as follows: seventy percent (70%) of the total area
covered by native vegetation must have total cover for final stabilization.
For example, if native vegetation covers fifty percent (50%) of the ground,
thirty-five percent (35%)  would require total cover for final
stabilization. In an area where limited vegetation is naturally found, less
stabilization will be required.



   (3)   For individual lots in residential construction, final
stabilization means that either:



      a.   The property owner/contractor has completed final
stabilization as specified in this section under item 1, or



      b.   The property owner/contractor has established adequate
temporary stabilization including perimeter controls for an individual lot
prior to occupation of the property by the new property owner(s) and has
informed the property owner(s) of the need for, and benefits of, final
stabilization. A signed “Notice of Stablization/Re-Vegetation Agreement”
form will acknowledge the landscaping requirements of the new owner.



   (4)   For construction projects on land used for agricultural
purposes (e.g., pipelines across crop or range land, staging areas for road
construction, etc.), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the
disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that
were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips
immediately adjacent to a watercourse, and areas which are not being returned
to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization
criteria (1) or (2)  above.



   (5)   Final stabilization must be completed on or before October
31st of the year following the Certificate of Occupancy, final inspection, or
project completion, whichever occurs sooner.



(Ord. No. 1049, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1148, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-106.  Additional requirements.



   (1)   It will be the responsibility of the grading permit holder to
obtain approval of all required agencies for any waterway crossings to be
installed if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction.
(i.e., DENR, Corps of Engineers, FEMA, etc.)



   (2)   SWPPP's must be maintained on the site during the progress of
the work.



   (3)   If control measures do not achieve stabilization, the permit
holder may be required to submit an updated SWPPP or may be required to
submit a GECP prepared by a professional engineer.



   (4)   Any on-site debris with potential to be wind-blown onto
neighboring properties must be controlled and refuse containers must be
covered with a cover intended for the container. Tarpaulins used to cover
open dumpsters must be intact and in good repair during use.



   (5)   The City of Spearfish Public Works Department may enter the
site to make inspections as needed.



(Ord. No. 1049, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1148, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-107.     Stop work order.



   (1)   Authority. Whenever the Public Works Administrator or designee
finds a site maintained contrary to the provisions of this article, the
Public Works Administrator or designee is authorized to issue a stop work
order for the site.



   (2)   Issuance.  The stop work order shall be in writing and issued
to the permittee or assigned contractor. Upon issuance the cited work shall
immediately cease.  The stop work order shall state the reasons for the
order and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to
resume.



   (3)   Unlawful continuance.  Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served a stop work order, with exception to work required
by the order, shall be subject to penalties set forth in section 1-14 of the
Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. No. 1049, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 6-108.  Penalties.



   The penalties for violation of this article shall be as set forth in
section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances. In addition, to protect public
property and the public interest, the City of Spearfish shall have the
authority to clean, stabilize or re-vegetate its own rights-of-way due to
non-compliant permit holders. The City shall also have the authority to
assess the permit holder for the work performed, in addition to all other
remedies.



(Ord. No. 1049, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1148, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Secs. 6-109—6-125. Reserved.



Sec. 6-109—6-125. Reserved.



CHAPTER 7 FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION*




   Art. I.   In General, §§ 7-1—7-20





   Art. II.   Fire Department, §§ 7-21—7-45





   Art. III.   Fire Prevention Code, §§ 7-46—7-54




   *Cross references—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; health,
sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; licenses, permits and business regulations,
Ch. 10; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; solid waste, Ch. 13;
sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; subdivisions, Ch. 15A; vegetation,
Ch. 19; zoning, App. A.



   State law reference—Authority to adopt technical codes, SDCL §
9-19-7.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 7-1.  Burning prohibited.



   Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke or
odor emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make
such fires hazardous shall be prohibited.



(Code 1982, § 16-120; Ord. No. 1067, 8-20-07)



   Cross references—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; ; § 7-46
(adoption of International Fire code); health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch.
9; nuisances, § 9-26 et seq.; licenses, permits and business regulations,
Ch. 10; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; solid waste, Ch. 13;
streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; streets and public
rights-of-way, § 14-26 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 15; vegetation, Ch. 19;
zoning, App. A.



Sec. 7-2.  False fire alarms.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false alarm or false
report of a fire.



(Code 1972, § 14-3)



   State law reference—Falsefire alarms, SDCL § 22-34-25.



Sec. 7-3.  Sale or discharge of fireworks.



   No person may sell or caused to be sold, discharge or caused to be
discharged, any pyrotechnics or fireworks of any description whatsoever
within the city. Exception: the discharge of fireworks as part of a
professional display operated by a licensed pyrotechnic operator under the
procedure set forth in the International Fire Code, as adopted from time to
time.



(Code 1982, § 22-600; Ord. No. 545, 8-15-83; Ord. No. 1273, 3-19-18)



   Cross references—Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; licenses,
permits and business regulations, Ch. 10; mobile homes and mobile home parks,
Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; zoning, App. A.



Sec. 7-4.  Burn permit required.



   Notwithstanding section 7-1, the burning of slash may be permitted in
rural service districts upon the issuance of a burn permit by the public
works administrator, subject to the terms and conditions contained in the
permit.  No permit shall be issued except upon proper application in a form
prescribed by the city.  Any permit issued under this section shall require
an inspection of the proposed burn site and the surrounding area, and
notification to the fire chief of the date, time and location of the proposed
burn.



(Ord. No. 919, 4-1-02; Ord. No. 1061, 7-16-07)



Sec. 7-5.  Burning of building or structure for training purposes.



   The chief of the fire department may permit the burning of any suitable
building or structure for fire department training purposes with the
permission of the owner provided that the burning of any building or
structure pursuant to this section shall be conducted in a manner approved by
the fire chief.



(Ord. No. 979, 3-19-04)



Sec. 7-6.  Open burning.



   A.   Definitions.



      (1)   Open fire. Means any outdoor fire, Open fire shall not
include charcoal grills, outdoor fireplaces, liquid fuel grills, or branding
iron burners as defined herein.



      (2)   Charcoal grill.  Means a metal or stone device not
resting on the ground with a metal grate designed to cook food using charcoal
briquettes.



      (3)   Liquid fuel grill.  Means a metal or stone device
designed to cook food using gaseous combustible fuel.



      (4)   Outdoor fireplace.  Means a manufactured appliance
constructed of non-combustible materials, with a maximum fuel area of three
(3) feet, constructed to include a screen, chimney or other device placed
above the fuel area so that the heat source is contained in such a manner
that sparks or embers are not allowed to freely escape into the open
atmosphere.  An outdoor fireplace may be fueled by cut or split wood or
liquid fuel and must be located not closer than fifteen (15) feet from any
combustible surface and continually attended.



      (5)   Campfire. Means a campground or backyard type fire that
has a maximum fuel area of three (3) feet, without screening. A campfire may
be fueled by cut or split wood or liquid fuel and must be located not closer
than fifteen (15) feet from any combustible surface and continually attended.



      (6)   Branding iron burner. Means a stove, furnace or device
constructed of non-combustible materials used to heat irons for the purpose
of branding livestock, fueled by cut or split wood, or liquid fuel and
constructed so that the heat source is contained in such a manner that sparks
or embers are not allowed to freely escape into the open atmosphere and
located not closer than fifteen (15) feet from any combustible surface and
continually attended.



      (7)   Campground. Means any commercial campground that is
permitted by the City of Spearfish, the State of South Dakota, or the United
States Forest Service that is operated by said agency, or private individuals
or corporations.



   B.   Regulations.



      (1)   Open fire.



         (a)   No person shall set an open fire within the City
of Spearfish, when the National Weather Service has declared the Grassland
Fire Danger Index to be in the “HIGH”, “VERY HIGH” or “EXTREME”
category within the City of Spearfish.  Use of an open fire is allowed only
when the Grassland Fire Index falls in the “MODERATE” category or below.



         (b)   The prohibition against open fire, as provided
herein, shall automatically be suspended during any time period the Grassland
Fire Danger Index falls below the “HIGH” category within the City of
Spearfish.



      (2)   Campgrounds. The ban on open burning (open fire) does
not apply to those designated areas of any commercial, city, state or federal
campground that is permitted by the City of Spearfish except when the
National Weather Service has declared the Grassland Fire Danger Index to be
in the “EXTREME” category within the City of Spearfish or unless
otherwise specifically banned by a resolution of the Spearfish City Council.



      (3)   Burn permits.  A permit is required for any open
burning which includes the purpose of land clearing.



   C.   Penalty.



      (1)   Violation of this section will be punished by a fine of
one hundred dollars ($100.00).  Any violator of this section shall also be
subject to the suppression costs of extinguishing a fire.



      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or
supersede any civil remedy otherwise available to any person or entity.



      (3)   The permissibility of the ignition of any fire as
specified herein shall not operate to relieve the igniter of any duty of care
otherwise imposed by law; nor shall this section operate to absolve any
person of any liability for damages to persons or property which may occur as
a result of the fire.



(Ord. No. 1159, 7-16-12)



Secs. 7-7—7-20.  Reserved.



ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT*



   *Cross reference-Officers and employees, § 2-116 et seq.



Sec. 7-21.  Fire Department; composition; policy.



   There is hereby continued the Spearfish Fire Department, which shall
consist of a career fire chief,  career assistant chief and career
administrative assistant; with other emergency response and support personnel
serving in volunteer positions. Officer positions below the rank of fire
chief shall be determined, and selected, by the fire chief; and the common
council from time to time, by resolution, may hire additional personnel, and
may approve volunteers upon recommendation by the fire chief.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-22.  Office of fire chief; duties generally.



   The fire chief shall be hired by the City in the same manner as other
department heads employed by the City. The fire chief shall be responsible
for all matters pertaining to the administration and operations of the
Spearfish Fire Department. The fire chief shall develop and implement
policies and procedures to govern administration and operation of the
department, and shall be responsible for the discipline, training, records,
and conduct of all fire department personnel, to include career and
volunteer. Under the general direction of the Mayor and/or the city
administrator, the fire chief shall be responsible for the enforcement of all
laws, ordinances, and regulations pertaining to fire protection; and for the
care and maintenance of all property of the fire department. The fire chief,
or his/her designated officer, shall respond to all calls for service and
emergency incidents, shall direct all activities at said incidents and shall
prepare reports that document response activities, to the degree necessary,
to meet and comply with City, State and National reporting requirements.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20- 18)



Sec. 7-23.  Volunteer personnel; application and eligibility.



   To be considered for service with the fire department, individuals must
complete a fire department application and all applicants shall be considered
in a manner consistent with the City standards for selecting volunteers. Upon
approval by the common council, the applicant shall be placed on the
volunteer roster for liability and workers compensation purposes.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-24.  Volunteer personnel; duties generally; qualifications.



   Volunteer personnel shall perform official department duties as
directed by the ranking command officer and in  compliance with City and
fire department policies and procedures. All volunteer personnel shall be
physically able to perform the duties for the position in which they serve.



   Failure to maintain compliance with department policies, procedures and
standards shall be cause for discipline or removal.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-25.  Volunteer incentive and reimbursement.



   Volunteer personnel may receive incentives and reimbursements as
established from time to time, by resolution of the common council, in
accordance with the current adopted fiscal year budget. Fire department
personnel, who are career employees, shall be compensated under the city's
pay plan and shall not receive the compensation detailed in this section.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-26.  Volunteer recruitment.



   The City is responsible for recruitment of volunteers.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-27.  Extra-territorial fire protection.



   The City may provide fire protection services to other political
subdivisions, rural areas adjoining the corporate limits, or other
governmental agencies, by contract or written agreement. The common council
shall determine the extent of such coverage and shall approve any contract or
agreement by resolution.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-28.  Joint service.



   The common council may, by contract or other agreement, provide joint
services with other local, county, state, or federal governmental entities,
or quasi-governmental entities; during major fires or other incident.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-29.  Deferred compensation plan.



   There shall be a deferred compensation plan for volunteer personnel.
The contribution rates and governing policy of the deferred compensation plan
shall be established by resolution of the common council.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-30.  Deferred compensation plan funded.



   The deferred compensation plan shall be funded initially by an
appropriation from the City, and thereafter, by appropriation as may be
budgeted and such other funds as may be available.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-31.  Deferred compensation plan committee; membership.



   The deferred compensation plan shall be managed by a deferred
compensation plan committee in accordance with all applicable state and
federal laws and regulations. The deferred compensation plan committee shall
be appointed by the mayor and ratified by the common council.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-32.  Deferred compensation plan termination.



   Should the deferred compensation plan terminate, all unpaid and
unobligated funds shall revert to the City.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-33.  Authority at emergency incidents.



   Within the corporate limits of the City of Spearfish and within
response areas under contractual authority of the City of Spearfish, the fire
chief, or in his or her absence, a designee, while operating at the scene of
an emergency incident, or call for service under command of the Spearfish
Fire Department; shall have the sole control over all fire department
personnel at said incident.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-34.  Destruction of buildings.



   The fire chief, or in his or her absence, a designee, may, in his or
her best professional judgment and training, order the destruction of any
building or structure for the purpose of extinguishing and checking any fire
and preserving life, health, safety, or property.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Sec. 7-35.  Apparatus generally.



   All fire trucks, together with all other fire-fighting equipment,
vehicles and apparatus, shall be housed in buildings to be furnished by the
common council and shall be used only under the supervision of the Spearfish
Fire Department and under such orders and regulations as the common council
may from time to time prescribe.



(Ord. No. 1227, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 1290, 8-20-18)



Secs. 7-36—7-45.  Reserved.



ARTICLE III. FIRE PREVENTION CODE*



   *Cross references—Buildingsand building regulations, Ch. 6; health,
sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; licenses, permits and business regulations,
Ch. 10; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; solid waste, Ch. 13;
streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; subdivisions, Ch. 15A;
vegetation, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A.



   State law reference—Authorityto adopt technical codes, SDCL § 9-19-7.



Sec. 7-46.  Adopted.



    The Common Council hereby adopts the 2018 International Fire Code as
published by the International Code Council including appendix B, C & D.  A
copy of the code shall be on file in the office of the city building
official. 



(Code 1972, § 14-33; Ord. No. 878, 4-3-00; Ord. No. 989, 8-20-04; Ord. No.
1064, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 1126, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1170, 1-22-13; Ord. No. 1230,
2-1-16; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 7-47.  Conflicts.



   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted
in section 7-46 and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state
law, or city ordinance, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law,
or city ordinance shall prevail and be controlling.



(Code 1972, § 14-34; Ord. No. 1298, 2-4-19)



Sec. 7-48.  Definition of municipality.     



   Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the code adopted by this
article it shall be held to mean the City of Spearfish.



(Code 1972, § 14-35)



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally,§
1-2.



Sec. 7-49.  Storage of explosives, blasting agents.



   The limits referred to in the fire prevention code adopted in section
7-46 in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, shall
be as established by the common council.



(Code 1972, § 14-36)



   Cross reference—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; licenses,
permits and business regulations, Ch. 10; mobile homes and mobile home parks,
Ch. 12; zoning, App. A.



Sec. 7-50.  Routes for vehicles transporting explosives.



   The routes referred to in the fire prevention code adopted in section
7-46 for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents shall be as
established by the fire chief and the chief of police.



(Code 1972, § 14-40)



   Cross reference—Streets,sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14;
streets and public rights-of-way, § 14-26 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, Ch.
17; trucks, § 17-400; zoning, App. A.



Sec. 7-51.  Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals.



   The routes referred to in the fire prevention code adopted in section
7-46 for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous
articles shall be as established by the fire chief and chief of police.



(Code 1972, § 14-41)



   Cross reference—Licenses,permits and business regulations, Ch. 10;
streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; streets, § 14-26 et
seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 15A; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 17; trucks, § 17-406
et seq.; zoning, App. A.



Sec. 7-52.  Fire lanes.



   The fire lanes referred to in the fire prevention code adopted in
section 7-46 shall be as established by the fire chief and chief of police.



(Code 1972, § 14-42)



   Cross reference—Licenses,permits and business regulations, Ch. 10;
mobile home parks, § 12-26 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public
places, Ch. 14; streets and public rights-of-way, § 14-26 et seq.;
subdivisions, Ch. 15A; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 17; specific street
regulations, § 17-186 et seq.; stopping, standing and parking, § 17-281 et
seq.; zoning, App. A.



Sec. 7-53.  Modifications.



   The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in section 7-46 upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent,
when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed,
public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the
fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department
and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.



(Code 1972, § 14-43)



Sec. 7-54.  Appeals.



   Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the code adopted in section 7-46 do not apply or that
the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the
fire department to the common council within thirty (30) days from the date
of the decision appealed.



(Code 1972, § 14-44)



   Cross reference—Commoncouncil, § 2-21 et seq.



CHAPTER 8 FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



   Art. I.      Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose
and Methods, §§ 8-1—8-5



   Art. II.      Definitions, § 8-6



   Art. III.      General Provisions, §§ 8-7—8-14



   Art. IV.      Administration, §§ 8-31—8-38



   Art. V.      Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction, §§
8-51—8-81



         Div. 1.  Generally, §§ 8-51—8-56



         Div. 2.  Specific Standards, §§ 8-76—8-81



   Art. VI.      Enforcement, §§ 8-82—8-83



ARTICLE I. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS



Sec. 8-1.  Statutory authorization.



   The Legislature of the State of South Dakota has in (statutes) SDCL §
9-29-1 and SDCL Chapter 9-36 delegated the responsibility of local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the Common Council of the City of Spearfish, South Dakota, does
ordain as follows:



   The City of Spearfish, South Dakota, elects to comply with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as
amended). The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid
act, provides that areas of the town having a special flood hazard be
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that floodplain
management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. The National Flood
Insurance Program was broadened and modified with the passage of the Flood
Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and other legislative measures. It was
further modified by the National Flood Insurance Reform Act of 1994. The
National Flood Insurance Program is administered by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, a component of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-2.  Findings of fact.



   (a)   The flood hazard areas of the City of Spearfish, South Dakota,
and that area of Lawrence County administered by the city pursuant to the
terms of a Joint Powers Agreement between the city and Lawrence County, South
Dakota, pursuant to Resolution No. 2011-25, are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (b)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-3.  Statement of purpose.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions to specific areas by the following provisions designed:



   (1)   To protect human life and health.



   (2)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects.



   (3)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.



   (4)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions.



   (5)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains.



   (6)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of flood- prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
future flood blight areas.



   (7)   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is
in a flood area.



   (8)   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of a floodplain for
their actions. 



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-4.  Methods of reducing flood losses.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:



   (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety
or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in erosion or in
flood heights or velocities.



   (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction.



   (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters.



   (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage.



   (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other lands.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-5.  Intent.



   (a)   The national flood insurance program (NFIP) was created by
Congress to reduce annual flood losses through careful planning by
communities and to provide property owners with affordable flood insurance.
In 1976, the Common Council requested voluntary participation in the national
flood insurance program and adopted the "permanent" program in 1981.



   (b)   The city recognizes the inherent flood risk of Spearfish Creek
and other potential flood tributaries which flow through the city. It
recognizes the beneficial attributes of a national flood insurance program,
which protects existing and future structures within the flood area, and
insures against potential financial loss and bodily harm. The city also
recognizes the inherent constraints imposed by the flood insurance program
which prohibit certain uses of property by its owners.



   (c)   The city, therefore, is adopting the new changes to the
"permanent program" with the following management objectives in mind as
permitted by the federal emergency management agency:



   (1)   Manage with a "minimum" intent of flood control regulations.



   (2)   Apply minimum regulations to variance authority; i.e., allow
construction within the floodplain fringe as long as it meets minimum
regulations of the federal emergency management agency, and does not increase
the flood density or flood course.



   (3)   By legal authority elects not to control the 500-year flood
area.



   (4)   Recognizes all architectural and engineering techniques
approved by FEMA, which provide for "nondensity" construction and
floodproofing protection.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS



Sec. 8-6.  Definitions.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   Appeal means a request for a review of the Common Council's
interpretation of any provisions of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would
be inundated by the one (1)- percent-annual-chance (100-year) flood based on
future-conditions hydrology.



   Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood
insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30,
AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE, or V. For
purposes of these regulations, the term "special flood hazard area" is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard". 



   Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent change of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   Base flood elevation (BFE) is the water surface elevation of the one
(1) percent annual chance flood.  The height in relation to mean sea level
expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in
the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.



   Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.



   Building.  See Structure.



   Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is FEMA's comment on a
proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or
hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the
modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood
elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). The letter does
not revise an effective NFIP map, it indicates whether the project, if built
as proposed, would be recognized by FEMA.  FEMA charges a fee for processing
a CLOMR to recover the costs associated with the review. Building permits
cannot be issued based on a CLOMR, because a CLOMR does not change the NFIP
map.



   Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   Erosion means the process of the gradual wearing a way of land masses.
This peril is not per se covered under the Program.



   Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as
"existing structures."



   Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by the city.



   Existing structures. See Existing construction.



   Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



   (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal water.



   (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.



   Flood elevation determination means a determination by the
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one (1) percent or greater chance of occurrence in any
given year.



   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which FEMA
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.



   Flood insurance study means the official report provided by FEMA that
includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.



   Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").



   Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.



   Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.



   Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   Historic structure means any structure that is:



   (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



   (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



   (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic reservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



   (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:



      (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



      (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states
without approved programs.



   Improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or alteration of a structure, the cost of which does not equal or exceed
fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure.



   LOMA requests involving one (1) or more structures: For a LOMA to be
issued by FEMA to remove one (1) or more structures from the SFHA, the NFIP
regulations require that the lowest adjacent grade (the lowest ground
touching the structure) be at or above the BFE.



   LOMA requests involving one (1) or more lots: For a LOMA to be issued
by FEMA to remove one (1) or more entire lots from the SFHA, the NFIP
regulations require that the lowest point on the lot(s) must be at or above
the BFE.



   LOMR-F requests involving one (1) or more structures: For a LOMR-F to
be issued by FEMA to remove the structure from the SFHA, the NFIP regulations
require that the lowest adjacent grade of the structure be at or above the
BFE. The participating community must also determine that the land and any
existing or proposed structures to be removed from the SFHA are "reasonably
safe from flooding."



   LOMR-F requests involving one (1) or more lots: For a LOMR-F to be
issued by FEMA to remove the entire lot and structure, both the lowest point
on the lot and the lowest floor of the structure must be at or above the one
(1)-percent-annual-chance flood elevation.



   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is FEMA's modification to an effective
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM),
or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures
that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source
and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the
effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area
(SFHA). The LOMR officially revises the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), and sometimes the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) report, and when appropriate, includes a description of the
modifications. The LOMR is generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the
affected portions of the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.



   Levee means a man-made structure usually an earthen embankment,
designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to
contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection
from temporary flooding.



   Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee,
or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



   Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other
than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation
of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Section 60.3 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.



   Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."



   Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.



   Map means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Agency.



   Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.



   New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance
rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after
the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever
is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.



   New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the
city.



   Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:



   (a)   Built on a single chassis;



   (b)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



   (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and



   (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.



   Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), streams, brooks, etc.



   Special hazard area means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow), or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as
Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, A99, AH, VO,
V1-30, VE, V, M, or E.



   Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading or filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



   Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and
roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally
above ground, as well as a manufactured home.  Anything constructed or
placed on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but without
limitations, buildings, factories, sheds, walls, fences, culverts, conduits
or any other manmade objects.



   Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.



   Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure
either:



   (1)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or



   (2)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.



   The term does not however include either:



   (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications,
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



   (2)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.



   Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of
this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this chapter.  (For full requirements, see Section
60.0 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.)



   Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



   Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



ARTICLE III. STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



Sec. 8-7.  Lands to which this chapter applies.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within
the jurisdiction of the City of Spearfish, South Dakota, and that area of
Lawrence County administered by the city pursuant to the terms of a Joint
Powers Agreement between the city and Lawrence County, South Dakota, pursuant
to Resolution No. 2011-25.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-8.  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled,
"The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Spearfish, Lawrence County, South
Dakota and Incorporated Areas" dated April 17, 2012, with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, dated April 17, 2012 and any revisions thereto are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
Flood Insurance Study and FIRM's are on file at the Municipal Services
Centre, 625 Fifth Street, Spearfish, South Dakota.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-9.  Compliance.



   No structure or land shall be constructed, located, extended,
converted, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-10.  Abrogation and greater restrictions.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-11.  Interpretation.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (1)   Considered as minimum requirements.



   (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the Common Council.



   (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-12.  Warning and disclaimer of liability.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.  On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and
flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural cause. 



   This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-13.  Severability.



   If any section, provision, or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the chapter shall
not be affected.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-14  Establishment of development permit and certificates.



   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (a)   Required. Any person, owner, or authorized agent who intends
to conduct any development in a special flood hazard area shall first make
application to the floodplain administrator and shall obtain the required
flood plain development permit prior to the start of development.



   (b)   Application for flood plain development permit. The applicant
shall file an application in writing on a form furnished by the floodplain
administrator. Such application shall:



   (1)   Identify and describe the development to be covered by the
permit;



   (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be
conducted by legal description, street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the site;



   (3)   Include a site plan showing the delineation of special flood
hazard areas, floodway boundaries, flood zones, base flood elevations, ground
elevations, proposed fill and excavation, and drainage patterns and
facilities;



   (4)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed
development is intended;



   (5)   Be accompanied by construction documents, grading and filling
plans, and other information deemed appropriate by the floodplain
administrator;



   (6)   State the valuation of the proposed work when required;



   (7)   Be signed by the owner or the owner's authorized agent.



   (c)   Validity of permit. The issuance of a floodplain development
permit under this chapter shall not be construed to be a permit for, or
approval of, any violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
jurisdiction. The issuance of a permit based on submitted documents and
information shall not prevent the flood plain administrator from requiring
the correction of errors. The floodplain administrator is authorized to
prevent occupancy or use of a structure or site which is in violation of this
chapter.



   (d)   Expiration. A floodplain development permit shall become
invalid if the proposed development is not commenced within one (1) year
after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a
period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the work commences. Extensions
shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. The
floodplain administrator is authorized to grant, in writing, extensions of up
to two (2) years.



   (e)   Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is
authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under this chapter wherever
the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, or
incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or code of this
jurisdiction.



   (f)   Flood hazard certificates. The following certificates shall be
submitted to the floodplain administrator:



   (1)   Elevation certificate upon the placement of the lowest floor,
including basement, prepared by a registered professional engineer or land
surveyor, of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement. The
floodplain administrator may require submission upon the placement of the
lowest floor, including basement, prior to further vertical construction;



   (2)   Designed opening certificate prepared by a registered
professional engineer for fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation
where provisions to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters do
not meet the minimum requirements in section 8-79;



   (3)   "One Foot Rise" certificate along with supporting hydraulic
computations, prepared by a registered professional engineer, that
development in a designated floodway fringe will result in less than a one
(1) foot increase in the base flood heights during the occurrence of a base
flood (100-year) discharge;



   (4)   "No-Rise" certificate along with supporting hydraulic
computations, prepared by a registered professional engineer, that
development in a designated floodway will result in no increase in the base
flood heights during the occurrence of a base flood (100-year) discharge;



   (5)   Floodproofing certificate documentation of certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction of a nonresidential building are in accordance with accepted
practices for meeting the floodproofing requirements in the community's
floodplain management ordinance. This documentation is required for both
floodplain management requirements and insurance rating purposes;



   (6)   Fill placement certification prepared by a registered
professional engineer when required by the floodplain administrator to ensure
proper compaction and slope protection for fill placed in the floodplain;



   (7)   Manufactured home foundation design certification by a
registered professional engineer to meet the requirements in section 8-80;



   (8)   Improvement floodplain development form shall require:



      a.   Detailed improvement list; and



      b.   A market value assessment of the structure. If the total
improvements of the current project, and the total improvements made over the
period of the last twenty (20) years equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of
the current fair market value of the structure, the property must be brought
to current floodplain management standards and requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



ARTICLE IV.  ADMINISTRATION



Sec. 8-31.  Designation of floodplain administrator.



   The floodplain administrator is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44
CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management. 



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-32.  Duties And responsibilities of floodplain administrator.



   The duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:



   (1)   Permit review.



      a.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development
permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied.



      b.   Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is
required.



      c.   Review all development permits to determine if the
proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of section 8-56(1) are met.



      d.   Review permit application to determine whether proposed
building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding.



   (2)   Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data
has been provided in accordance with section 8-8, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from any federal, state or other source
as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or
other development in Zone A are administered in accordance with section 8-76
et seq.



   (3)   Information to be obtained and maintained.



      a.   Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains
a basement.



      b.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed
structures:



         1.   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation
to mean sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed;



         2.   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required
in section 8-33(3).



      c.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 



   (4)   Alteration of watercourses.



      a.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities,
South Dakota Office of Emergency Management and the State Coordinating Agency
which is the Water Management Board SDCL § 46-1-6, prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



      b.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.



   (5)   Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal
the interpretation as provided in section 8-37 et seq.



   (6)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the
floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point
within the community.



   (7)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve
certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which
increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1)
foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM
revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision).



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-33.  Permit procedures.



   A floodplain development permit shall be obtained before construction
or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in
section 8-8. Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but
not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimension, and elevations of proposed landscape alternations;
existing or proposed structures, including the placement if manufactured
homes, fill, storage or materials, drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing in relations to areas of special flood hazard.



   Additionally, the following information is required:



   (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;



   (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be  floodproofed;



   (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of section 8-78;



   (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;



   (5)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
section 8-32(3)c.



   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:



   (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;



   (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;



   (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



   (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;



   (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;



   (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;



   (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



   (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan for that area.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-34.  Reserved.



Sec. 8-35.  Submittal requirements for lots in the 100-year floodplain and
in the floodway.



   (a)   Lots within the 100-year floodplain.  An elevation
certificate must be submitted to the city floodplain administrator for each
structure on the lot. The certificate shall display verification that the
lowest floor level of the proposed structure is above the base flood
elevation as shown on the designated Floodplain Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
Each certificate shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a licensed
professional engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall display the
following as a minimum: designated lot boundary, location of the structure,
location of the floodplain limits and the FIRM number. A floodplain
development permit shall be issued once all requirements are satisfied.



   (b)   Property within floodways. Proposed structures within any
property inside a floodway, as shown on the designated Floodplain Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) shall require a licensed professional engineer to prepare,
sign, stamp, submit a No-Rise Certification Analysis directly to the City of
Spearfish.  The analysis shall include as a minimum: hydraulic and
hydrologic data, design and methods of construction certified by the
professional engineer or architect, topographic data certified by a licensed
professional engineer or licensed land surveyor. It shall be the
responsibility of the professional who prepares the Analysis to provide any
additional information required by the City of Spearfish. Upon verification
the city floodplain administrator shall issue a floodplain development permit.



   (c)   Notice requirements for lots and property within the 100-year
floodplain and floodway.  Notice shall be given by certified mail to the
owners of property immediately adjacent to, or that share a boundary with,
the parcel where the requested map revision or map change is being sought. 
Such notice shall contain information regarding any changes in:



   (1)   Width or shifting of the special flood hazard area;



   (2)   The area that would be inundated by the base flood; or



   (3)   Increases in the base flood elevation of the property or
surrounding areas in question.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-36.  Schedule of floodplain development permit fee.



   The following rates shall be charged for any construction or
development within any special flood hazard area (SFHA), man-made change to
improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings
and other structures, mining, dredging, filing, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations or storage of equipment of materials:



   (a)   A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for floodplain
development pertaining to individual lots (five (5) acres or less) when no
subdivision is involved.



   (b)   A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for floodplain
development pertaining to subdivisions.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-37.  Appeal board.



   (a)   The Common Council shall hear and decide appeals and request
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



   (b)   The Common Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made
by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.



   (c)   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Common Council, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decisions to the Eighth Judicial Circuit Court, as
provided in SDCL § 9-36-8.



   (d)   In passing upon such applications, the appeal board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and:



   (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;



   (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners;



   (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;



   (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



   (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with the existing and
anticipated development;



   (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;



   (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;



   (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets and
bridges.



   (e)   Upon consideration of the factors of (d) above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Common Council may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.



   (f)   The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the federal emergency management agency and the State Office of Emergency
Management.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-38.  Conditions For variances.



   (a)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base level, providing items (1) through (11) in section
8-37(d) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the
one-half (½) acre, the technical justifications required for issuing the
variance increases.



   (b)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the state inventory of historic places without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.



   (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   (d)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   (e)   Variances shall be issued upon:



   (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.



   (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.



   (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in section 8-37(d) or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.



   (f)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



ARTICLE V.  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 8-51.  General standards.



   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are
required for all new construction and substantial improvements.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-52.  Anchoring.



   (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads.



   (b)   All manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement and capable of resisting the
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. Methods of anchoring may include, but are
not limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces. Specific requirements may be:



   (1)   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners
of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at
intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet
long requiring one (1) additional tie per side.



   (2)   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five
(5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes
less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side.



   (3)   All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying
a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds.



   (4)   Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-53.  Construction materials and methods.



   (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



   (b)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   (c)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning



equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-54.  Utilities.



   (a)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   (b)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltrations of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.



   (c)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-55.  Standards For subdivision proposals.



   (a)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (b)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (c)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including
the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet
development permit requirements of this chapter.



   (d)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50)
lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser.



   (e)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.



   (f)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all
subdivision proposals where a flood hazard exists as illustrated on a
floodplain map (FIRM map). The property owner(s) or designated
representatives of any subdivision which proposes changes to the 100-year
floodplain limits shall have a licensed professional engineer or licensed
land surveyor prepare and submit a Letter of Map Change directly to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).  The final plat for the
subdivision shall not be approved by the city prior to acceptance of the
Letter of Map Change by FEMA.  Upon verification of the FEMA acceptance the
city floodplain administrator shall issue a floodplain development permit.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-56.  Floodways.



   Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in
section 8-8, are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of flood
waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the
following provisions shall apply:



   (1)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development within the
adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.



   (2)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of
the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies
for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.



   (3)   If (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this article.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



DIVISION 2. SPECIFIC STANDARDS



Sec. 8-76.  Application of division.



   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
has been provided as set forth in section 8-8 or section 8-32(2), the
provisions of this division are required.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-77.  Residential construction.



   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or
above the base flood elevation.  A registered professional engineer,
architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this chapter are satisfied.  Properties
that have received a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill must still have the
lowest floor elevated to the base flood elevation.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-78.  Nonresidential construction.



   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to the level of the base flood elevation;
or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:



   (1)   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood elevation the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;



   (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;



   (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this section or exceed the following minimum
criteria from Technical Bulletin 3-93.  Such certifications shall be
provided to the official as set forth in section 8-32(3)(b).



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-79.  Enclosures.



   New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria from Technical Bulletins 7-93 and 3-93:



   (a)   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding shall be provided.



   (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1)
foot above grade.



   (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-80.  Manufactured homes.



   (a)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
section 8-52(b).



   (b)   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM  on sites (i)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred
"substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement.



   (c)   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved on sites in existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions within
Zones A1-30, AH and AE that are not subject to the provisions of the previous
paragraph shall be elevated so that either the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or the
manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height
above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-81.  Recreational vehicles.



   Require that recreational vehicles places on sites within Zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:



   (1)   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days;



   (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or



   (3)   Meet the permit requirements of section 8-33 and the elevation
and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in section 8-52(b).  A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



ARTICLE VI.  ENFORCEMENT



Sec. 8-82.  Stop work order.



   (a)   Authority. Whenever the floodplain administrator finds any
work or activity regulated by this chapter being performed in a manner
contrary to the  provisions of this chapter, the floodplain administrator is
authorized to issue a stop work order.



   (b)   Issuance.  The stop work order shall be in writing and shall
be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or
to the person doing the work.  Upon issuance of a stop work order, the
citied work shall immediately cease.  The stop work order shall state the
reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be
permitted to resume.



   (c)   Unlawful continuance.  Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



Sec. 8-83.  Penalties for noncompliance.



   In accordance with Section 59.2(b) of CFR 44, Chapter 1, of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulation, to qualify for the sale
of Federally-subsidized flood insurance, a community must adopt floodplain
management regulations that meet or exceed the minimum standards of Section
60. "These regulations must include effective enforcement provisions." In
accordance with Section 60.1(b) of CFR 44, Chapter 1, of the NFIP
regulations, "These regulations must be legally-enforceable, applied
uniformly throughout the community to all privately and publicly owned land
within flood-prone (i.e. mudflow) or flood-related erosion areas, and the
community must provide that the regulations take precedence over less
restrictive conflicting local laws, ordinances or codes."



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1153, 3-19-12)



   Cross reference—General penalty, Ch. 1, Sec. 1-14.



   State law reference—Penalty for violation of ordinances, SDCL §
9-19-3.



CHAPTER 9 HEALTH, SANITATION AND NUISANCES*




   Art. I.    In General, §§ 9-1—9-25





   Art. II.    Nuisances, §§ 9-26—9-32




   *Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; advertising, Ch. 3;
alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; consuming, blending, possessing, alcoholic
beverages in public places prohibited and the disposal of containers
containing alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17; animals, Ch. 5; sanitary
conditions required for the keeping of animals, § 5-5; nuisance created by
dogs and cats, § 5-34; rabies control, § 5-101 et seq.; buildings and
building regulations, Ch. 6; barbed wire and electrified fences prohibited,
§ 6-1; building construction standards, § 6-26 et seq.; uniform abatement
of dangerous buildings code adopted, § 6-31; fire protection and prevention,
Ch. 7; burning of trash, leaves and any other material or product prohibited,
§ 7-1; sale or discharge of fireworks prohibited, § 7-3; fire prevention
code adopted, § 7-46; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; licenses,
permits and business regulations, Ch. 10; mobile homes and mobile home parks,
Ch. 12; mobile home parks, § 12-26 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 13; streets,
sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; subdivisions, Ch. 15; traffic and
vehicles, Ch. 17; abandoned vehicles, § 17-501 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 18;
vegetation, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 9-1.  Unwholesome food, drink.



   No meat, fish, game fowl, fruit, milk, vegetables, ice or any other
article of food or drink intended for human consumption, the same being then
stale, unhealthy, unsound, tainted, putrid or unwholesome, shall be sold,
bartered, or kept for barter or sale in any public or private market, store,
shop or place within the city or peddled on streets.



(Code 1982, § 15-100)



Secs. 9-2—9-25.    Reserved.



ARTICLE II. NUISANCES*



   *Cross references—Sanitary conditions required for the keeping of
animals, § 5-5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; barbed wire and
electrified fences prohibited, § 6-1; uniform abatement of dangerous
buildings code adopted, § 6-31; burning of trash, leaves and any other
material or product prohibited, § 7-1; sanitation and safety in mobile home
parks, § 12-201 et seq.; littering prohibited, § 13-2; abandoned vehicles,
§ 17-501 et seq.



   State law references—Power to promote health and suppression of
diseases, SDCL Ch. 9-32; abatement of nuisances, SDCL § 9-29-13; remedies
against nuisances, SDCL Ch. 29-10.



Sec. 9-26.  Prohibited.



   No person shall create, commit, maintain, or permit to be created,
committed or maintained any nuisance including but not limited to those
described in section 9-27 within the city.



(Code 1982, § 17-100)



Sec. 9-27.  Purpose.



   Whatever is dangerous or injurious to human health, and the following
specific acts or conditions, are hereby declared to constitute nuisances:



   (1)   Junk, litter, debris. Rubbish, building materials, lumber,
vehicle parts, appliances, furniture, yard waste, noxious matter, and any
debris not normally associated with residential areas are considered
nuisances and must be screened from view or removed from the property.



   On construction sites, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or
general contractor to have a container, with lid, for all smaller,
lightweight, construction debris. Any complaint of blowing debris from
construction sites may result in immediate resolution by the code enforcement
officer with assistance by the police department.



   (2)   Junk vehicles. Wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked,
partially dismantled, or unlicensed motor vehicles, on private property, must
be stored behind the front building line and screened from view, or removed
from the property.



   (3)   Weeds/tall grass. Tall grass and noxious vegetation are
declared a nuisance and no owner of any property within the city shall permit
any noxious vegetation or tall grass to be located on the property, including
the public right-of-way.



   (4)   Sidewalks. Every person owning or occupying property shall
keep all sidewalks abutting such property free of ice, snow and obstructions.
If city personnel find that any portion of a sidewalk has not been cleared of
ice, snow or other obstructions and that a hazardous condition exists, the
code enforcement officer shall provide written notice to the owner and/or
occupant of such property that such obstruction(s) shall be removed within
twenty-four (24) hours. In the event that the property owner and/or occupant
does not comply, the code enforcement officer may cause the removal of such
obstruction and bill the property owner the removal costs plus administrative
costs.



(Code 1982, § 17-101; Ord. No. 951, 4-21-03)



   State law reference—Authority to require snow removal, SDCL § 9-30-5
et seq.



Sec. 9-28.  Complaint.



   Any person directly affected may file a written or verbal complaint
alleging a violation of this article. The complaint shall state the basis for
the violation, how the complainant is affected, and shall be filed with the
code enforcement officer, who shall timely investigate and take appropriate
action as provided by this article.



(Code 1982, § 17-120; Ord. No. 951, 4-21-03)



   State law reference—Remedies against nuisances, SDCL Ch. 21-10.



Sec. 9-29.  Notice.



   Unless otherwise specified herein, the code enforcement officer, in his
or her discretion, shall notify the property owner and/or occupant creating,
permitting or maintaining such nuisance by: (1) phone call; (2) hand
delivered notice; (3) certified mail, return receipt requested; or (4)
personal service. Property owners residing out of the area shall always be
notified by certified mail, return receipt requested or personal service.
Such notice shall require the property owner and/or occupant to abate the
nuisance and shall reference this article. Depending on the circumstance,
abatement may be required immediately or within a time period, as set forth
herein or as determined by the code enforcement officer. Failure to do so
within the time allowed in such notice shall cause such nuisance to be abated
by the city as costs to be assessed as provided herein.



(Code 1982, § 17-121; Ord. No. 951, 4-21-03)



Sec. 9-30.  Abatement by code enforcement officer.



   (a)   Abatement authorized. In the event a property owner shall
fail, after receiving written notice, to abate the nuisance within the time
allowed, the code enforcement officer shall hereby be authorized and
empowered to provide for the abatement of the nuisance.



   (b)   Costs assessed. Upon completing abatement process, all related
receipts, administrative and investigative costs shall be billed to the
property owner. If full payment is not received from the owner within thirty
(30) days, a lien shall be placed on the property.



(Code 1982, § 17-130; Ord. No. 951, 4-21-03)



Sec. 9-31.  Alternate abatement procedure.



   In addition to any method of abatement of nuisances within the city
provided by the provisions of this article, any nuisance found within the
city may be abated in the manner provided by state law.



(Code 1982, § 17-131)



Sec. 9-32.  Recovery of expenses.



The city may recover the expenses incurred by the board of health in abating
any nuisance under the provisions of this article from the person creating,
permitting or maintaining the same in a civil suit instituted for such
purpose.



(Code 1982, § 17-132)



CHAPTER 10 LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS*




   Art. I.   In General, §§ 10-1—10-30





   Art. II.   License Procedure Generally, §§ 10-31—10-75





   Art. III.   Amusements, §§ 10-76—10-95





   Art. IV.   Vegetation, §§ 10-96—10-120





   Art. V.   Building Contractors, §§ 10-121—10-145





   Art. VI.   Electrician or Plumber, §§ 10-146—10-170





   Art. VII.   Pawnbrokers, §§ 10-171—10-195





   Art. VIII.   Peddlers, §§ 10-196—10-230





   Art. IX.   Reserved, §§ 10-231—10-250





   Art. X.   Solid Waste Collectors and Haulers, §§ 10-251—10-269





   Art. XI.   Licensing Owners of Commercially Zoned Private Property
Who Allow Vendors on Their Property, §§ 10-270—10-274





   Art. XII.   Adult Oriented Businesses, §§ 10-300—10-318





   Art. XIII.   Mobile Food and Beverage Vending §§ 10-400—10-409




   *Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; finance, § 2-161 et seq.;
advertising, Ch. 3; distribution of handbills, § 3-26 et seq.; alcoholic
beverages, Ch. 4; consuming, blending, possessing, alcoholic beverages in
public places prohibited and the disposal of containers containing alcoholic
beverages restricted, § 4-17; alcoholic beverage licenses required, § 4-3
et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; barbed wire and
electrified fences prohibited, § 6-1; building permit fees, § 6-29; pole
buildings prohibited in certain areas, § 6-32; fire protection and
prevention, Ch. 7; burning of trash, leaves and any other material or product
prohibited, § 7-1; sale or discharge of fireworks prohibited, § 7-3; fire
prevention code adopted, § 7-46; storage of explosives, blasting agents,
etc., restricted, § 7-49; routes established for vehicles transporting
houses and chemicals, § 7-51 et seq.; fire lanes established by the fire
chief and chief of police, § 7-52; development permit required, § 8-31;
health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; disposal of wastes from lumber
yards, building material suppliers, building contractors, and certain other
businesses, § 13-30; sales and use tax, § 16-26 et seq.; zoning, App. A;
sign regulations, App. A, Art. V, § 6.



   State law references—Trade regulations and licenses, SDCL § 9-34-1
et seq.; professions and occupations, SDCL § 36-1-1 et seq.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 10-1.  Temporary and special events licenses and permits for sale of
food, etc., on city property.



   Permits and licenses for vendors, peddlers, temporary merchants and
temporary structures shall not be issued for use on city property, including
parks, streets, sidewalks, alleys, boulevards or rights-of-way, except for
designated city events or as otherwise permitted by this chapter.



   Rental of the W. S. Tretheway Pavilion shall be upon the terms and
conditions established by the public works administrator as approved by the
common council.



(Ord. No. 575, § 11-207, 7-15-85; Ord. No. 684, 6-18- 90)



   Cross reference—Temporary merchants, temporary professional people
and temporary structures, § 10-270 et seq.



Secs. 10-2—10-30.    Reserved.



ARTICLE II. LICENSE PROCEDURE GENERALLY *



   *State law references— Professions and occupations, SDCL Title 36;
trade regulation, SDCL Title 37; trade regulation and licenses, SDCL Ch. 9-34.



Sec. 10-31.  Qualifications for applicants.



   The general standards herein set out relative to the qualifications of
every applicant for a city license shall be considered and applied by the
city license officer. The applicant shall:



   (1)   Be a citizen of the United States or a declarant therefor or a
resident alien as authorized by federal law;



   (2)   Not, either individually, or as a member of any party, group,
or organization, at the time of any such application for a license or special
permit, advocate or resort to any practices subversive of or designed for the
overthrow, destruction or sabotage of the government of the United States in
violation of federal law;



   (3)   Be of good moral character and in making such determination
the city license officer shall consider:



      a.   All convictions, the reasons therefor, and the actions of
the applicant subsequent to his release;



      b.   The license history of the applicant; whether such
person, in previously operating in this or another state under a license has
had such license revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor, and the demeanor
of the applicant subsequent to such action;



      c.   Such other facts relevant to the general personal history
of the applicant as he shall find necessary to fair determination of the
eligibility of the applicant.



   (4)   Not be in default under the provisions of this chapter or
indebted or obligated in any manner to the city except for current taxes.



   (5)   Present a certificate of occupancy furnished by the building
inspector to the effect that the proposed use of any premises is not a
violation of city zoning regulations.



(Code 1982, § 11-104)



Sec. 10-32.  Liability of violator.



   (a)   The amount of any unpaid fee, the payment of which is required
under this chapter, shall constitute a debt due the city.



   (b)   The city attorney shall, at the direction of the license
officer, institute civil suit in the name of the city to recover any such
unpaid fee.



(Code 1982, § 11-110(G))



Secs. 10-33—10-75.    Reserved.



ARTICLE III. AMUSEMENTS†



   †State law references—Authority to license, regulate, etc. exhibits
and amusements, SDCL § 9-34-13; authority to license, prohibit, etc., dances
or dance halls, SDCL § 9-34-15; public dance halls, SDCL § 42-4-1 et seq.



Sec. 10-76.  Permission required for amusement rides.



   No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any ferris wheels,
merry-go-rounds or other amusement rides operated for hire or for the purpose
of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first having
obtained a license and permission from the chief of police.



(Code 1982, § 8-100)



Sec. 10-77.  Amusement ride fee.



   Any person who shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any amusement
ride defined in section 10-76 shall pay a license fee based upon the duration
he shall desire to engage in such business as follows:



   (1)   Per day   $ 50.00



   (2)   Per week   150.00



   (3)   Per month   300.00



(Code 1982, § 11-206)



Sec. 10-78.  Bond or liability insurance required for amusement rides.



   No license shall be issued to any person under this article until such
person shall comply with the applicable provisions contained in section 10-31
et seq. Such person shall file with the city finance officer a bond or
certificate of liability insurance, in the amount of at least five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00), indemnifying the public against damages
sustained by reason of the operation of such rides. Such bond or certificate
of insurance shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. This section
shall apply to all rides described in section 10-76 whether or not a license
is required by any other provisions of this chapter.



(Code 1982, § 8-101)



        Sec. 10-79.  Circuses, carnivals, and other such shows.



   A circus, carnival or show or entertainment of a theatrical troupe
given in any room, building, tent or any area other than a licensed public
hall or theater must be sponsored by a local organization. The license fee
shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day.



(Code 1982, § 11-201)



   State law reference—Authority, SDCL § 9-34-13.



Sec. 10-80.  License and fee.



   No person shall operate for profit any horse drawn carriage upon the
streets, alleys and public ways of the city without a license and paying a
license fee of twenty- five ($25.00) dollars.



(Ord. No. 980, 4-9-04)



Sec. 10-81.  Operation.



   The licensee will provide short distance transportation by means of a
two-horse team and carriage only upon routes approved by the city.



(Ord. No. 980, 4-9-04)



Sec. 10-82.  Indemnification.



   It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the licensee and
the city that the licensee shall save, hold and keep harmless from all loss
sustained by the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or
demand whatsoever resulting from licensee’s operation.  The licensee shall
notify the city within fifteen (15) days after it has been presented with any
claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise made against the licensee.  The
city shall notify the licensee within fifteen (15) days after the
presentation of any claim or demand either by suit or otherwise made against
the city on account of licensee’s operations.



(Ord. No. 980, 4-9-04)



Sec. 10-83.  Insurance.



   Licensee shall at all times during the term of the license obtain and
maintain liability insurance whereby  the city is named as an additional
insured.  Said insurance shall be in the minimum amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury or property
damage.  The licensee shall provide proof of insurance to the city prior to
commencement of operations.



(Ord. No. 980, 4-9-04)



Sec. 10-84.  Requirements of licensee.



   The licensee shall comply with the following terms and conditions:



   (a)   Licensee shall operate its carriage only from Memorial Day
through Labor Day inclusive.



   (b)   Licensee shall not stand or park its carriage for hire except
at locations approved by the city.



   (c)   Licensee shall use croup bags on its livestock and shall
promptly pick up any solid waste not so contained.



   (d)   Licensee shall operate its carriage only during daylight hours.



   (e)   Display of any signage upon the carriage or team shall be upon
the approval of the Planning and Zoning Administrator.



   (f)   Licensee shall comply with all federal, state and local
regulations otherwise governing the operation of horse powered conveyances
upon public streets and highways.



   (g)   Any carriage shall have adequate lights, reflectors and slow
moving vehicle signange.



(Ord. No. 980, 4-9-04)



Secs. 10-85—10-95.    Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. VEGETATION*



   *Cross reference- Vegetation, Ch. 19.



Sec. 10-96.  Arborists - License and insurance.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, spraying, treating, or removing trees within the city
without a contractor’s license issued by the city. Each applicant therefore
shall furnish evidence of general liability insurance in the amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) aggregate coverage.



(Ord. No. 541, § 9-114, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 607, § 9-112, 1-19-87; Ord. No.
879, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 1121, 8-2-10)



Sec. 10-97.  Pesticide applicators - License and insurance.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or
occupation of spraying or treating of lawns, noxious weeds, or bare ground
control within the city without a contractor’s license issued by the city.
Issuance of the contractor’s license pursuant to this section shall require
evidence that the contractor holds a valid commercial applicator’s license
issued by the State of South Dakota. Each applicant therefor shall furnish
evidence of general liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00)
aggregate coverage.



(Ord. No. 1121, 8-2-10)



Secs. 10-98—10-120. Reserved.



ARTICLE V. BUILDING CONTRACTORS†



   †Cross references- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6;
construction standards, § 6-26 et seq.



Sec. 10-121.  Definition.



   For the purposes of this article, the term "contractor" shall be
defined as any person, firm or corporation who is engaged in the act of
*construction, supervision of *construction, or excavation on any property
within the licensing jurisdiction of the City of Spearfish. A licensed
contractor shall be required on all *construction other than that which is
owned and occupied by permittee as his/her primary residence or is an
existing commercial structure under his/her ownership.



   *Construction: For the purposes of this article, the term
"construction" shall include, but is not limited to, cement or concrete
contracting; masonry contracting; carpenter contracting; excavation
contracting; all building trade contracting which includes within limitation
to electrical, plumbing, roofing, painting, remodeling, siding, rough
framing; all phases of new construction; alterations, additions, repairs and
demolition of structures; street, sidewalk and pavement contracting and any
items requiring a permit within the licensing jurisdictional limits of the
City of Spearfish.



(Code 1982, § 12-200; Ord. No. 880, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 894, 2-20-01)



   Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



Sec. 10-122.  License required.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to engage in business in the city as a
contractor without first having obtained a license, unless the construction
is on the permittee's primary residence or on an existing commercial
structure under his/her direct ownership. However, if the improvements to the
commercial property constitute a structural improvement, a licensed
contractor will be required, regardless of ownership.



   (b)   License use restricted. No licensed contractor shall allow
their name to be used by any other person directly or indirectly, either to
obtain a building permit or to perform work outside their personal
supervision. A license is not assignable and shall be valid only for the
individual/company in whose name it is issued.



(Ord. No. 894, 2-20-01)



Sec. 10-123.  Fees.



   (a)   The initial fee, as well as the annual renewal fee, for said
contractor's license shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). All licenses
shall take effect when issued and shall terminate on December 31 in the year
for which issued.  The license charged shall be paid on the basis of a full
year. However, if the license is not renewed prior to the expiration date and
the contractor has a job in progress, the fee will be increased to one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).



   (b)   Any person who has a valid contractor's license shall not be
required to secure an additional license for other building trades with the
exception of electricians and plumbers.



(Code 1982, § 12-201; Ord. No. 880, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 894, 2-20-01; Ord. No.
1152, 2-21-12)



Sec. 10-124.  Reserved.



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 894, adopted Feb. 20, 2001, repealed §
10-124, which pertained to expiration. See the Code Comparative Table.



Sec. 10-125.  Subcontractors.



   Any person doing business as a subcontractor shall be construed as
engaged in the business of *construction for which a license is required by
this article.



(Code 1982, § 12-202; Ord. No. 894, 2-20-01)



Sec. 10-126.  Compliance with regulations.



   It shall be the duty of all contractors to comply with all ordinances
relating to the construction of buildings or other structures, to the
construction of streets or sidewalk pavements, and all laws or ordinances
pertaining to regulating the activities engaged in.



(Code 1982, § 12-210; Ord. No. 894, 2-20-01)



Sec. 10-127.  Revocation of license.



   Any contractor's license may be revoked by the council for repeated
violations of any ordinance relating to the construction of buildings, the
use of streets, or the replacing of streets, sidewalks or parkways, or any
other ordinance relating to the work performed by such contractor. Such
revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed for violating this article.



(Code 1982, § 12-220; Ord. No. 894, 2-20-01)



Sec. 10-128.  Insurance; bond.



   (a)   No permit shall be issued for the construction of a building
or structure in the city, or for the repair or alteration of any building,
structure, street or right-of-way, unless a certificate or other proof is
filed showing that the contractor is licensed by the city and carries
worker's compensation insurance with limits that comply with SD Workers
Compensation Law. Contractor must also carry public liability insurance with
single limits of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence
and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate. Contractor shall also
provide state excise tax license number.



   (b)   Before any contractor doing any work for the city on any
street or highway or on any building or premises owned by the city commences
work, he shall file with the city zoning administrator a certificate or other
proof showing that he carries workmen's compensation and public liability
insurance as required by ordinance and the terms of his contract.



(Code 1982, § 12-230; Ord. No. 556, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 753, 2-7-94; Ord. No.
869, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 871, 10-18-99)



Secs. 10-129—10-145.    Reserved.



ARTICLE VI. ELECTRICIAN OR PLUMBER*



   *Editor's note—Ord. No. 894, adopted Feb. 20, 2001, amended the title
of Art. VI to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance,
Art. VI was entitled, "electrician or electrical contractor." See the Code
Comparative Table.



   Cross reference—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6.



   State law reference—Electrician's permit and registration, SDCL Ch.
36-16.



Sec. 10-146.  License required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as an
electrician or electrical contractor within the jurisdiction of the City of
Spearfish unless such person is licensed under state law. The electrician or
plumber shall furnish to the building department satisfactory evidence of
his/ her license with the State of South Dakota before a contractor's license
can be issued.



(Code 1982, § 13-100; Ord. No. 894, 2-20-01)



   State law references—Electrician's permit and registration, SDCL Ch.
36-16; National Standard's Plumbing Code, Sec. 36-25-17.



Secs. 10-147—10-170.    Reserved.



ARTICLE VII. PAWNBROKERS*



   *State law references—Authority to license, tax, regulate
pawnbrokers, SDCL § 9-34-8; pawnbrokers, SDCL § 37-16-1 et seq.



Sec. 10-171.  Definition.



   When used in this article, pawnbroker shall mean any person who:



   (1)   Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or
pledge of personal property, other than those in action, securities or
evidence of indebtedness.



   (2)   Purchases personal property with an expressed or implied
agreement or understanding to sell it back at a stipulated price.



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



Sec. 10-172.  License required, fee, term.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business
of pawnbroker without first obtaining a license from the finance officer. Any
person applying for a pawnbroker license must before their application will
be considered come to the police department and furnish adequate
identification. No license under this article shall be issued to any person
who has been convicted of a felony. No license under this article shall be
issued to any corporation of which one (1) or more officers or directors have
been convicted of a felony.



   (b)   The annual license fee for pawnbrokers shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) payable in advance by January 1 of each year.



Sec. 10-173.  Suspension, revocation of license.



   (a)   A license issued to a licensee under this article, who shall
have violated the provisions of this article may be suspended for a
prescribed period not to exceed sixty (60) days, in the event of a failure on
the part of the licensee to comply with the provisions of this article after
ten (10) days written notice and a public hearing.



   (b)   A license issued to a licensee under this section, who shall
violate the provisions of this section, may be revoked by the common council
after ten (10) days' written notice and a public hearing.



Sec. 10-174.  Records required.



   (a)   Every pawnbroker shall keep books or records of pawn tickets
in a manner satisfactory to the chief of police, where he shall accurately
and intelligibly enter, in ink, in the English language, at the time of
purchasing or receiving any personal property, and after requiring and
observing identification from the person seeking to pawn the property, record
the following information:



   (1)   The name of the person from whom the property is purchased or
received, his place of residence, and his date of birth.



   (2)   Any serial numbers, style model number, engraved initials or
other identifying marks.



   (3)   The date and the time of transaction.



   (4)   The amount necessary for redemption.



   (5)   The date when the article is to be redeemed.



   (6)   Any mortgage or bill of sale taken, or receipt of pawn ticket
given.



   (7)   Date and name of person that purchased the article that was
pawned.



   (8)   The date of disposition or redemption from pawn of the article
or any part or portion thereof. The disposition report shall be located in
the same book and at the same place where the receiving records of the
article are located.



   (b)   Any person who fails to keep such records or fails to make the
required entries therein, or shall intentionally or knowingly make any false
or unintelligible entry, or any entry which he has reason to believe is
untrue, or who shall fail to make the inquiries necessary to enable him to
make such entries or any of them, or who shall fail to produce his records
when requested by a city police officer during reasonable business hours, or
who shall destroy or willfully permit such records to be destroyed or lost
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (c)   The records required by this section shall be maintained for
one (1) year after the date of purchase or receipt and shall be made
available for inspection to the city police officer during reasonable
business hours.



Sec. 10-175.  Reports to the chief of police, duty of the police department.



   (a)   It shall be the duty of the police department to periodically
contact the licensed premises under this article to inspect or obtain copies
of records required to be kept, setting forth a description of the person by
whom they were left in pledge or sold.



   (b)   The chief of police shall have the power and authority to
require such reports to be made in a manner and form, subject to his approval.



   (c)   When such item is out of pawn and sold to a different person:



   (1)   The name of the person from whom the property was purchased
and his residence, his date of birth and his social security number.



   (2)   Date and time of transaction.



   (3)   A detailed description of the item which will come off of the
pawn ticket.



Sec. 10-176.  Holding period.



   Any pawnbroker may effect the purchase of secondhand personal property
for resale purposes under the term of this article by acquiring any pawn
ticket of his own issued by transfer. Any person licensed as a pawnbroker,
who shall purchase any new or secondhand goods of any individual not engaged
in trade, shall keep the same for inspection for ten (10) days from the time
of the transfer, except on written release from the chief of police or his
designee, the mentioned property shall be held during this period on the
licensed premises or some other secure location within the city and shall not
be disposed of or altered from the form which it was received during this
period.



Secs. 10-177—10-195.    Reserved.



ARTICLE VIII. PEDDLERS*



   *Cross references—Distribution of handbills prohibited where sign
indicating no peddlers, or agents, is located, § 3-31; mobile homes and
mobile home parks, Ch. 12; mobile home parks, § 12-26 et seq.; streets,
sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; streets and public rights-of-way,
§ 14-26 et seq.; sidewalks, § 14-76 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 15; traffic
and vehicles, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A.



   State law references—Peddlers generally, SDCL Ch. 37-13; authority to
license, tax, regulate peddlers, hawkers, etc., SDCL §§ 9-34-7, 9-34-8.



Sec. 10-196.  Definition.



   The word "peddler" as used in this article shall mean any person,
whether a resident of this city or not, locating upon any public property or
traveling from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street,
by foot or by any vehicle for the purpose of selling anything including
goods, wares, merchandise or services; and shall include the terms
"solicitor," "transient or itinerant merchant or vendor," or "transient or
itinerant photographer."



(Code 1982, § 8-200; Ord. No. 1059, 7-2-07)



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



   State law reference—Definition of peddler, etc., SDCL § 37-13-1.



Sec. 10-197.  Exceptions.



   The provisions of this article shall not apply to solicitations, sales
or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations
which have their principal place of activity in the city.



(Code 1982, § 8-201)



   State law reference—Additional exceptions, SDCL § 37-13-2.



Sec. 10-198.  Entrance to premises restricted.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon a private premises
when the same are posed with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed," "No
Solicitors Allowed," or the like.



(Code 1982, § 8-202)



Sec. 10-199.  Refusing to leave.



   Any peddler who enters upon premises owned or leased by another and
willfully refuses to leave the premises having been notified by the owner or
possessor of the premises, or his agent to leave the same, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Code 1982, § 8-203)



Sec. 10-200.  Misrepresentation.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent
statements concerning the quality or nature of goods, wares, merchandise or
services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same.



(Code 1982, § 8-204)



Sec. 10-201.  Hours of operation.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of
peddling between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and 9:00 a.m.
thefollowing morning, or at any time on Sundays, except by specific
appointment with an invitation from the prospective customer.



(Code 1982, § 8-205)



   State law references—Authority to license, tax, regulate hawkers,
peddlers, pawnbrokers, transient merchants, SDCL §§ 9-34-7, 9-34-8;
peddlers and solicitors, SDCL § 37-13-1 et seq.



Sec. 10-202.  Permit required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler
within the city without first obtaining a permit and paying the fee in
section 10-204 et seq.



(Code 1982, §§ 8-206, 8-207)



Sec. 10-203.  Information required.



   The applicant for a permit under this article shall state:



   (1)   Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand,
accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery;



   (2)   The period of time the applicant wishes to engage in business
within the city;



   (3)   The local and permanent address of applicant;



   (4)   The local and permanent address and the name of the person, if
any, that the applicant represents;



   (5)   The kind of goods, wares, merchandise or services the
applicant wishes to engage in such business within the city;



   (6)   The last five (5) cities or towns wherein the applicant has
worked before coming to this city;



   (7)   Such other relevant information as the city may require for
the investigation of the applicant.



(Code 1982, § 8-208)



Sec. 10-204.  Permit fee.



   Any person engaged in the business of peddling as defined in section
10-196, shall pay a permit fee based upon the duration he shall desire to
engage in business within the city, as follows:



   (1)   Per day    $ 25.00



   (2)   Per week    75.00



   (3)   Per month    200.00



(Code 1982, § 11-205; Ord. No. 682, 6-18-90)



Sec. 10-205.  Driver's license.



   At the time of filing his application, the applicant for a permit
required by this article shall present his driver's license or other picture
identification.



(Code 1982, § 8-209)



Sec. 10-206.  False information.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading
information in connection with his application for a permit required by this
article.



(Code 1982, § 8-210)



Sec. 10-207.  Photographs.



   At the time of making application for a permit required by this
article, the applicant shall submit to photographing by the chief of police.



(Code 1982, § 8-211)



Sec. 10-208.  Issuance.



   No permit shall be issued by the chief of police under the provisions
of this article until the applicant shall have complied with all the
provisions and requirements of this chapter.



(Code 1982, § 8-212)



Sec. 10-209.  Issuance restricted.



   No peddler's permit shall be issued to a corporation, partnership or
other impersonal legal entity, but each individual person engaging in the
business of peddling within the city shall be required to have a permit
whether acting for himself or as an agent or representative of another.



(Code 1982, § 8-213)



Sec. 10-210.  Contents of permit.



   Each permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be signed
by the chief of police, shall be dated as of the date of its issuance, and
shall state the duration or term of such permit on the face thereof. Any
permit not dated and signed as herein provided, or which was issued in
violation of this section, shall be void.



(Code 1982, § 8-214)



Sec. 10-211.  Display.



   Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this
article and doing business within the city shall display his permit upon the
request of any person; and failure so to do shall be deemed a misdemeanor.



(Code 1982, § 8-215)



Sec. 10-212.  Duration.



   Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid
for the period of time stated therein, but in no event shall any such permit
be issued for a period of time in excess of twelve (12) months.



(Code 1982, § 8-216)



Sec. 10-213.  Revocation.



   Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked
for the violation by the permittees of any provision of this Code, state law
or city ordinance. Upon such revocation such permit shall immediately be
surrendered to the chief of police and failure to do so shall be a
misdemeanor.



(Code 1982, § 8-217)



Sec. 10-214.  Sales from vehicles prohibited; exceptions.



   No person shall sell or offer for sale any goods or merchandise from a
cart, wagon, automobile, truck or other vehicle in the streets, sidewalks or
thoroughfares of the city. This section does not apply to the delivery of
farm and garden products where the order for the same has been placed in
advance, nor does it apply to drayage or the delivery of goods sold in the
regular course of an established business. Nothing in this paragraph shall
prohibit the city from entering into a contract for the sale of ice cream and
sundries for immediate consumption on the terms and conditions agreed to by
the common council.



(Ord. No. 683, 6-18-90)



Sec. 10-215.  Sales in city parks prohibited; exception.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler or other person to sell or offer
to sell to any person within a municipal park of the city any goods, wares,
merchandise, books, pictures, novelties, souvenirs or trinkets or any other
article of commerce or trade, including goods of his own production or
manufacture, except for designated city events as authorized in section
10-214.



Secs. 10-216—10-230.  Reserved.



ARTICLE IX. RESERVED*



   *Editor's note—Ord. No. 894, adopted Feb. 20, 2001, repealed Art. IX,
§§ 10-231-10-236, which pertained to plumber. See the Code Comparative
Table.



Secs. 10-231—10-250.  Reserved.



ARTICLE X. SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS AND HAULERS*



   *Cross references—Solid waste, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 18.



Sec. 10-251.  Issuance of license; fee.



   No person shall use the streets or alleys of the city for the
collection or removal of any garbage for hire, without first having obtained
a license to perform such services from the common council under this article
and having paid a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. Each
license issued under this article shall be renewed on or before December 31
of each year.



(Code 1982, § 16-400; Ord. No. 631, § 16-400, 12-21-87)



Sec. 10-252.  General vehicle requirements.



   (a)   Licensed collectors of garbage shall provide themselves with
suitable vehicles so as to prevent the escape of the contents thereof.



   (b)   It is prohibited for any licensed garbage collector to collect
or haul wet garbage or material subject to rot, decay or putrefaction, or
material or liquids emitting strong or noxious odors, in any type vehicles
except in an all metal, packer type-vehicle which has been approved by the
city's health officer or supervisor of sanitation.



   (c)   It is prohibited for any licensed commercial garbage hauler to
operate a garbage collection vehicle except in conformity with this article
and any other applicable ordinances.



(Code 1982, § 16-401)



Sec. 10-253.  Painting and identification of vehicles.



   Garbage hauling vehicles used by haulers licensed under this article
shall be painted as determined by the public works administrator and shall
have displayed thereon sufficient identification that distinguish them as
commercial garbage collectors.



(Code 1982, § 16-402; Ord. No. 631, § 16-402, 12-21-87)



Sec. 10-254.  Washing and sanitizing vehicles.



   All vehicles used for the collection and hauling of garbage by licensed
garbage collectors shall be washed and sanitized and records of the same
shall be available to the public works administrator.



(Code 1982, § 16-403; Ord. No. 631, § 16-403, 12-21-87)



Sec. 10-255.  Requirements for premises where vehicles are parked or
serviced.



   The premises on which commercial garbage vehicles licensed under this
article are parked or serviced shall be kept free of rubble, trash, debris,
or garbage.



(Code 1982, § 16-404)



Sec. 10-256.  Revocation of license.



   The common council may revoke, suspend, refuse to issue or transfer any
license under this article to any licensee or applicant who fails to comply
with the requirements of this article or engages in unfair business
practices. The council shall give fifteen (15) days' written notice prior to
hearing.



(Code 1982, § 16-406)



Secs. 10-257—10-269.  Reserved.



ARTICLE XI. LICENSING OWNERS OF COMMERCIALLY ZONED PRIVATE PROPERTY WHO ALLOW
VENDORS ON THEIR PROPERTY*



   *Editor's note—Ord. No. 863, § 1, adopted June 21, 1999, repealed
Art. XI, §§ 10-270—10-284, which pertained to temporary merchants,
temporary professional people and temporary structures. Section 2 of said
ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Art. XI, §§
10-270—10-274. Ord. No. 1289, adopted August 20, 2018, repealed the new
Art. XI, §§ 10-270—10-274. See the Code Comparative Table.



Secs. 10-270—10-274.  Reserved.



ARTICLE XII. ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Sec. 10-300.  Definitions.



   (a)   Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of
consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled
still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five and fewer
persons per machine at anyone time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   (b)   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store
means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of
the following:



   (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas"; or



   (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use in connection with "specified sexual activities."



      A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" and still be categorized as "adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store". Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an "adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store" so long as one of its
principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas." A principal business purpose is defined as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock or trade for sale or rental, and
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   (c)   Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant,
bottle club or similar commercial establishment whether or not alcoholic
beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude.



   (d)   Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:



   (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign
visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of
this adult type of photographic reproductions; or



   (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than ten hours; or



   (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the
room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.



   (e)   Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown
which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   (f)   Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances which are
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of "specified anatomical areas"
or by "specified sexual activities."



   (g)   Employee means a person who performs any service on the
premises of an adult oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract
basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a
salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee
does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.



   (h)   Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers
to act as a companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.



   (i)   Escort agency means a person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.



   (j)   Establishment means and includes any of the following:



   (1)   The opening or commencement of any adult oriented business as
a new business;



   (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an
adult oriented business, to any adult oriented business;



   (3)   The additions of any adult oriented business to any other
existing adult oriented business; or



   (4)   The relocation of any adult oriented business.



   (k)   Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate an
adult oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as
an applicant on the application for a license.



   (l)   Semi-nude model studio means any place where a person who
appears semi-nude, or who displays "specified anatomical areas" and is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed,
or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration. Nude Model Studio shall not include a proprietary school
licensed by the State of South Dakota or a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private
college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:



   (1)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is
available for viewing; and



   (2)   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and



   (3)   Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.



   (m)   Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with
less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



   (n)   Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association or other legal entity.



   (o)   Regularly featured or regularly shown means a consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a
part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.



   (p)   Semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition means the showing of the
female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its
highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition
shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall
not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited
by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



   (q)   Adult oriented business means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency or nude
model studio.



   (r)   Specified anatomical areas means:



   (1)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or



   (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.



   (s)   Specified criminal activity means any of the following
offenses:



   (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of
obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child;
engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a
child; unlawful gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance;



   (2)   For which:



      a.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



      b.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or



      c.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or
more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twenty-four (24) month period.



   (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant.



   (t)   Specified sexual activities means any of the following:



   (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of another's human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;



   (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or



   (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of
the activities set forth in paragraphs (a) and (b) above.



   (u)   Substantial enlargement of an adult oriented business means
the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the
floor areas exist on the date this chapter takes effect.



   (v)   Transfer of ownership or control of an adult oriented business
means and includes any of the following:



   (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;



   (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling
interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or



   (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal
device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-301.  Classification.



   Adult oriented businesses are classified as follows:



   (1)   Adult arcades;



   (2)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;



   (3)   Adult cabarets;



   (4)   Adult motels;



   (5)   Adult motion picture theaters;



   (6)   Adult theaters;



   (7)   Escort agencies; and



   (8)   Nude model studios.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-302.  License required.



   (a)   It is unlawful: 



   (1)   For any person to own, manage or operate an adult oriented
business without a valid adult oriented business license issued by the city
pursuant to this article.



   (2)   To own, manage, or operate an adult oriented business in
places other than the locations permitted by the criteria of Appendix A of
the City Code, Zoning Regulations; Article IV, Section 13 A. through D.  A
violation of this provision is a Class 1 misdemeanor.  Each day of violation
constitutes a separate offense.



   (3)   For any person to obtain employment as an escort, or operate
as an escort, without having secured an adult oriented business escort
license.



   (4)   For any person who owns, manages, or operates an adult
oriented business to employ an escort to work for the adult oriented business
who is not licensed as an adult oriented business escort.



   (b)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the city.



   (c)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions
of this article.  The application may request and the applicant shall
provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
article.



   (d)   If a person/who wishes to operate an adult oriented business
is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate an adult oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has any financial interest in
the business must sign the application for a license as applicant.  Each
applicant must be qualified under the following section and each applicant
shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 1143, 9-19-11)



Sec. 10-303.  Issuance of license.



   (a)   Upon the filing of said application for an adult oriented
business license, the application shall be referred to the appropriate city
departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is
contained on the application.  The application process shall be completed
within thirty (30) days from the date the completed application is filed. 
After the investigation, the city shall issue a license, unless it is
determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the
following findings is true:



   (1)   The applicant has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;



   (2)   The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;



   (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal
activity" as defined in this article;



   (4)   The adult oriented business license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation or prohibited by a particular provision of this article; or



   (5)   The applicant has had an adult oriented business license
revoked by the city within two (2) years of the date of the current
application.



   (b)   Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant
to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in section
10-308.d, if applicant pursues an appeal.



   (c)   An application shall be considered complete when it contains
the information required in subsections (a)(1)—(5) of this section.



   (d)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the city that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal
activity as defined in this article or committed any act during the existence
of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license
application.  The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of
the fee as set forth in section 10-304.



   (e)   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed adult
oriented business application, the city shall approve the issuance of a
license to the applicant or shall issue a letter of intent to deny a license
to the applicant.  The city shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one
or more of the following findings is true:



   (1)   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.



   (2)   An applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to
any adult oriented business.



   (3)   An applicant has been denied a license by the city to operate
an adult oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months or whose
license to operate an adult oriented business has been revoked within the
preceding twelve (12) months.



   (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity defined in this article.



   (5)   The license fee required by this article has not been paid.



   (6)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of
or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article.



   (f)   All business licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance to the adult oriented business so that they may be
easily read at any time.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 1143, 9-19-11)



Sec. 10-304.  Fees.



   (a)   Every application for an adult oriented business license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by a two hundred dollars ($200.00) non-refundable application and
investigation fee.



   (b)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required
above, every adult oriented business that is granted a license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the city an annual non-refundable license fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) within thirty (30) days of license issuance or
renewal.



   (c)   Every application for an adult oriented business escort
license (whether for a new license or renewal of an existing license) shall
be accompanied by a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) non-refundable license fee.



   (d)   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the
city finance officer.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-305.  Inspection.



   Adult oriented businesses and adult oriented business employees shall
permit officers or agents of the city to inspect, from time to time on an
occasional basis, the portions of the adult oriented business premises where
patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the
specific regulations of this article, during those times when the adult
oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open for business.  A
licensee's knowing or intentional refusal to permit such an inspection shall
not constitute a misdemeanor, but shall constitute a violation of this
section for purposes of license denial, suspension, and/or revocation. This
section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable
inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article, but not to
authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-306.  Expiration of license.



   (a)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section
10-303.  Application for renewal shall be made at least ninety (90) days
before the expiration date, and when made less than ninety (90) days before
the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.



   (b)   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for one (1) year  from the date of denial. If,
subsequent to denial the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-307.  Suspension.



   (a)   The city shall issue a letter of intent to suspend a license
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines that a licensee
or an employee of a licensee has:



   (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
article;



   (2)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult oriented business
premises as authorized by this article.



   (b)   Suspension of the license shall be effective fourteen (14)
days after the letter of intent to suspend is sent.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-308.  Revocation.



   (a)   The city shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a license if
a cause of suspension in section 10-307 occurs and the license has been
suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.  Revocation of the
license shall be effective fourteen (14) days after the letter of intent to
revoke is sent



   (b)   The city shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a license if
it determines that:



   (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;



   (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;



   (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;



   (4)   A licensee knowingly operated the adult oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;



   (5)   Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation
or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or



   (6)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or
state for any taxes or fees past due.



   (7)   A licensee has been convicted of specified criminal activity
as defined in this article.



   (c)   When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue
for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued an adult oriented
business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective.
If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective.



   (d)   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any
court of competent jurisdiction.  The administrative action shall be
promptly reviewed by the court.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-309.  Transfer of license.



   A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate an adult oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-310.  Additional regulations for adult motels.



   (a)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in
a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this
article.



   (b)   A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of
a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that
does not have an adult oriented license, he rents or sub-rents a sleeping
room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented,
he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.



   (c)   For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms
"rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any
form of consideration.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-311.  Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films, videos or live entertainment in adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult
novelty stores or adult video stores.



   (a)   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult
arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store which
exhibits on the premises a film, video cassette, live entertainment, or other
video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:



   (1)   Upon application for an adult oriented license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted.  A manager's station may
not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted.  A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's
or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should
be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be
drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to
an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The city may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if  the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.



   (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.



   (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the city.



   (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that
at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station
or able to see electronic monitoring stations.



   (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms.  Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager's station or by electronic monitoring.



   (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view
area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by
any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection
(a)(1) of this section.



   (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at
any time.



   (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot-candles as
measured at the floor level.



   (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.



   (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.



   (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any
kind between viewing booths or rooms.



   (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly
inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.



   (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing
booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.



   (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling
surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or
other porous material shall be used within forty-eight (48) inches of the
floor.



   (b)   A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through
(a)(14) of this section commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to
fulfill that duty. 



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-312.  Additional regulations for escort agencies.



   (a)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years.



   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or
agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18).



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-313.  Additional regulations for nude model studios.



   (a)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age
of eighteen (18) years.



   (b)   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an
offense if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this
subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open
to public view or visible to any other person.



   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state
of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an
area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public
right-of-way.



   (d)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or
mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-314.  Additional regulations concerning public nudity.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a person who knowingly and
intentionally, in an adult oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or
depicts specified sexual activities.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any employee, while semi-nude in an
adult oriented business, to knowingly or intentionally receive any pay or
gratuity directly from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer
to knowingly or intentionally pay or give any gratuity directly to any
employee, while said employee is semi-nude in an adult oriented business.
Gratuities may be provided by any patron or customer to designated employees
who are not semi-nude or to any designated containers used solely as a
collection device to receive gratuities.



   (c)   It shall be unlawful for an employee, while semi-nude, to
intentionally touch, fondle or caress a customer or the clothing of a
customer.



   (d)   It shall be unlawful for a patron or customer of an adult
oriented business to knowingly and intentionally touch any semi-nude employee
or the stage of the adult oriented business.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-315.  Prohibition against children in an adult oriented business.



   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person allows a person under the
age of eighteen (18) years on the premises of an adult oriented business.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-316.  Hours of operation.



   No adult oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open
at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on each day of the
week.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-317.  Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee
liability.



   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this
article, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or
revocation shall be imputed to the adult oriented business licensee for
purposes of finding a violation of this chapter, or for purposes of license
denial, suspension or revocation, only if an officer, director or general
partner or a person who managed, supervised or controlled the operation of
the business premises, knowingly allowed such act to occur on the premises.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05)



Sec. 10-318.  Injunction.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult oriented
business without a valid license is subject to a suit for injunction as well
as prosecution for criminal violations.  Such violations shall be punishable
by a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), thirty (30) days
imprisonment or both such fine and imprisonment.  Each day an adult oriented
business so operates is a separate offense or violation.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 1060, 7-2-07)



Secs. 10-319—10-399. Reserved.



ARTICLE XIII. MOBILE FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING



Sec. 10-400.  Definitions.



   (1)   Food Truck. For the purposes of this article, the term “food
truck” shall be defined as a licensed motor vehicle that has equipment for
cooking, preparing, or selling food or beverages. This definition shall not
include deliveries of prepared food or beverages by passenger vehicles, vans,
or trucks having only devices installed for securing food or beverages during
transport and is not equipped with any equipment for food or beverage
preparation.



   (2)   Food Cart. For the purposes of this article, the term “food
cart” shall be defined as any type of mobile carrier designed to facilitate
the sale and marketing of food or beverages, and is not defined as a food
truck.



   (3)   Mobile Food and Beverage Vending/Vendor(s). For the purposes
of this article, the term “mobile food and beverage vending/vendor(s)”
shall be defined as an activity whereby prepared food or beverages are sold
to the general public from a food truck or food cart. This definition shall
not include food and beverage delivery services.



(Ord. No. 1282, 8-20-18)



Sec. 10-401.  License required.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a food truck or food cart in the City
of Spearfish without first having obtained a license as described herein.



(Ord. No. 1282, 8-20-18)



Sec. 10-402.  Fees and licensing procedure.



   (1)   The operator of all food trucks and food carts shall apply for
a license on forms provided by the City of Spearfish finance office.



   (2)   The annual license fee shall be set by resolution of the
Common Council.



   (3)   The annual license and fee shall not apply in the following
instances:



      a.   Mobile food and beverage vendors operating where a city
approved special event permit has been issued, and with authorization from
the special event sponsor, and if the vendor does not operate from any city
public street, city sidewalk or city park at any other time.



      b.   Mobile food and beverage vendors that operate on public
or private property for a one-time event lasting 3 calendar days per year or
less.



(Ord. No. 1282, 8-20-18)



Sec. 10-403.  Permitted locations.



   Mobile food and beverage vending shall be permitted at the following
locations:



   (1)   On private property zoned commercial or industrial.



   (2)   Parked lawfully on a public street except where prohibited.



   (3)   Any parking lot that serves a City of Spearfish park, and the
parking lot is owned by the City of Spearfish.



   (4)   On public sidewalks, only food carts are permitted.  A clear
space of four feet in any direction around the food cart must be provided on
the public sidewalk.



(Ord. No. 1282, 8-20-18)



Sec. 10-404.  Locations and times prohibited.



   (1)   Mobile food and beverage vending is prohibited where vending
activity is blocking access to a public street, alley, bike path, sidewalk,
or access to an adjacent property.



   (2)   Mobile food and beverage vending is prohibited from any
diagonally striped parking space located between the south right of way line
of Jackson



Boulevard to the center line of Grant Street and the center lines of Canyon
Street to 7th Street between the hours of 2AM and 10PM. 



   (3)   The above prohibited times and locations do not apply to
vendors operating where a city approved special event permit has been issued,
and with authorization from the special event sponsor.



(Ord. No. 1282, 8-20-18)



Sec. 10-405.  Health, safety and sanitation.



   Mobile food and beverage vendors shall:



   (1)   Operate according to the minimum public health and food safety
requirements determined by South Dakota Department of Health.



   (2)   Comply with the fire safety requirements checklist as provided
on the mobile food and beverage vending license.



   (3)   Comply with the licensing requirements of the State of South
Dakota including food, sales tax, and mobile food and beverage vending.



   (4)   Provide a trash bin for public use and remove all garbage
within twenty-five feet of any food truck or food cart.



   (5)   Not broadcast loud noise that results in a nuisance to the
surrounding properties.



(Ord. No. 1282, 8-20-18)



Sec. 10-406.  Signage.



   No signage shall be permitted except for what appears on the mobile
food and beverage truck or cart.



(Ord. No. 1282, 8-20-18)



Sec. 10-407.  Alcohol.



   Mobile food and beverage vendors shall not sell or distribute alcoholic
beverages.



(Ord. No. 1282, 8-20-18)



Sec. 10-408.  Liability and insurance.



   Mobile food and beverage vendors operating from public streets and
sidewalks or other City-owned property shall maintain commercial general
liability insurance with a limit of not less than one million dollars per
occurrence and two million dollars general aggregate naming the City of
Spearfish as an additional insured.  A copy of the certificate of coverage
shall be provided to the City of Spearfish at all times while the license is
in effect and notice to the City of Spearfish Finance Officer shall be
provided when coverage is terminated.



(Ord. No. 1282, 8-20-18)



Sec. 10-409.  Violations and revocation of license.



   Licenses shall be subject to revocation by the Common Council for
violation of any provisions of city code, state law, or city ordinance
according to the following procedure:



   (1)   Vendor shall be provided with written notice that describes
the nature of the violation and a timeline for correction.



   (2)   If correction is not completed within the time specified, the
Common Council may revoke the license at a regularly scheduled City Council
meeting.



(Ord. No. 1282, 8-20-18)



CHAPTER 11 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES*




   Art. I.    In General, §§ 11-1—11-25





   Art. II.    Obstruction of Justice, §§ 11-26—11-45





   Art. III.    Public Disturbances, §§ 11-46—11-65





   Art. IV.    Offenses Against Property, §§ 11-66—11-85





   Art. V.    Weapons, §§ 11-86—11-99





   Art. VI.    Minors, §§ 11-100—11-107




   *State law references—Crimes, SDCL Title 22; criminal procedure and
law enforcement, SDCL Title 23.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 11-1.  Public nudity prohibited.



   (a)   A person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place:
(i) engages in sexual intercourse, (ii) engages in sodomy as defined by South
Dakota Codified Law, (iii) appears in a state of nudity, (iv) fondles the
genitals of himself, herself or another person commits indecent exposure as
defined by South Dakota Codified Law.



   (b)   [Definitions.]



   Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum
anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a
cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device
simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.



   Public place includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the
general public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the
general public, including such places of entertainment, bars, taverns, pubs,
restaurants, casinos, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party
rooms or halls limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to
patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied.



   (c)   The prohibition set forth in subsection (a)(iii) shall not
apply to: (a) any child under ten (10) years of age; or (b) any individual
exposing a breast in the process of breast feeding an infant under two (2)
years of age.



(Ord. No. 920, 4-1-02)



Secs. 11-2—11-25.    Reserved.



ARTICLE II. OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE



Sec. 11-26.  Refusal to aid law enforcement officers.



   It is unlawful for any person after being lawfully commanded to aid any
law enforcement officer in arresting any person or in retaking any person who
has escaped from legal custody to intentionally refuse without lawful cause
to aid such officer.



(Code 1982, § 22-200)



Sec. 11-27.  Resisting officers.



   Any person who intentionally prevents or attempts to prevent a law
enforcement officer, acting under color of his authority from effecting an
arrest of the actor or another by threatening to use physical force or
violence against a law enforcement officer or any other person or using any
other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to
the law enforcement officer or any other person, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Code 1982, § 22-201)



   State law reference—Resisting officer or legal process, SDCL §
22-11-4.



Sec. 11-28.  Impersonating officers.



   Every person who intentionally impersonates any public officer or any
other person having special authority by law to perform any act affecting the
rights or interests of another or assumes, without authority, any uniform or
badge by which assumed character does any act whereby another person is
injured, defrauded, vexed or annoyed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Code 1982, § 22-201)



   State law reference Similar provisions, SDCL § 22-11-8.



Sec. 11-29.  Airtight containers; restricted.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to
remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any
unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his
control in a place accessible to children any abandoned or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock
or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without
removing the door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from the icebox,
refrigerator or container.



   (b)   The keeping of any discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
airtight container is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and the
same shall be abated as provided by state law and the abatement of such
nuisance shall, not in any manner, affect any penalty which may be imposed
for the violation of this Code.



(Code 1982, §§ 22-206, 22-207)



Secs. 11-30—11-45.    Reserved.



ARTICLE III. PUBLIC DISTURBANCES*



   *State law references—Prohibition of disorders and disturbances, SDCL
§ 9-29-3; breach of the peace and disorderly conduct generally, SDCL Ch.
22-13.



Sec. 11-46.  Disturbing the peace.



   No person shall disturb the peace of the city or of any person by
violent, tumultuous, or offensive conduct; or by loud or unusual noises; or
by profane, obscene, indecent, violent or threatening language; or by
assaulting, striking or attempting to assault or strike another person or
inviting or defying another person to fight or quarrel; or by engaging in a
fight with another person.



(Code 1982, § 22-300)



Sec. 11-47.  Disorderly conduct.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally cause serious
public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to any other person, or create a
risk thereof by:



   (1)   Engaging in fighting or in violent or threatening behavior.



   (2)   Making unreasonable noises.



   (3)   Disturbing any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without
lawful authority.



   (4)   Obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



(Code 1982, § 22-301; Ord. No. 826, 9-15-97)



Sec. 11-48.  Hindering or molesting passersby.



   No person shall upon any street, or at the entrance to any building on
any street, alley or sidewalk, wrongfully hinder, impede or molest any
passerby, or use any rude, obscene, vulgar, indecent, or threatening language
to any passerby, or by any indecent act, gesture or noise molest, annoy or
insult or put in fear any person passing or attempting to pass on such
street, alley, or sidewalk or through the entrance to such building within
the city.



(Code 1982, § 22-302)



Sec. 11-49.  Assault and battery and fighting.



   (a)   It shall he unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight
or to fight or to commit any assault or battery in any place in the city.



   (b)   An assault is any willful and unlawful attempt or offer, with
force or violence, to do a corporal hurt to another. A battery is any willful
and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another.



   (c)   The use or attempt or offer to use force or violence toward
the person of another is not unlawful if necessarily committed by a public
officer in the performance of any legal duty or by any other person assisting
him or acting by his direction.



(Code 1982, § 22-303)



Sec. 11-50.  Deposit of human excrement upon public property prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate upon the
streets, sidewalks, alleys, public parks or public property of the city.



(Ord. No. 964, 9-2-03)



Secs. 11-51—11-65.    Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Sec. 11-66.  Malicious mischief.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, damage, deface, break,
tamper with or otherwise harm any property, public or private, real or
personal, not his own.



(Code 1982, § 22-400)



Sec. 11-67.  Shoplifting.



   Any person who shall willfully take possession of any goods, wares or
merchandise offered for the sale by any store or other mercantile
establishment with the intention of converting the same to his use without
paying the purchase price thereof, shall be guilty of the offense of
shoplifting. (Code 1982, § 22-401)



   State law reference—Shoplifting, SDCL § 22-37-20 et seq.



Sec. 11-68.  Willfully concealed unpurchased merchandise.



   Any person willfully concealing unpurchased goods or merchandise of any
store or other mercantile establishment either on the premises or outside the
premises of such store, shall be prima facie presumed to have so concealed
such article with the intention of converting the same to his own use without
paying the purchase price thereof, and the finding of such unpurchased goods
or merchandise concealed upon a person shall constitute prima facie evidence
of willful concealment of the part of the person so concealing such goods.
Persons so concealing such goods may be detained in a reasonable manner and
for a reasonable length of time by merchant or merchant's employee shall not
render such merchant or merchant's employee criminally or civilly liable for
false arrest, false imprisonment or unlawful detention provided that said
exemption shall not apply if the merchant or merchant's employee shall refuse
to sign a formal complaint and testify at any legal proceedings, if requested
to do so by the prosecuting attorney, if any prosecutions thereafter arise
out of such matter.



(Code 1982, § 22-402)



Sec. 11-69.  Trespass and unauthorized use of property prohibited.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly lodge in, use
or occupy any barn, garage, shed, shop or other house or building or
structure or any automobile, truck, railroad car or other vehicle without
permission of the owner or person entitled to possession.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly lodge in any
public way, park or place after being instructed by a police officer to
remove himself from the public way, park or place.



   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly enter upon
any privately owned real property which is not open to the use of the public
unless he has first obtained the consent of the owner or person in possession
or control thereof.



(Code 1982, § 22-403)



Sec. 11-70.  Petit larceny.



   Petit larceny is the taking of personal property of a value not
exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) accomplished by fraud or theft and with
intent to deprive another thereof. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person
to commit petit larceny within the city.



(Code 1982, § 22-404)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 22-37-2.



Secs. 11-71—11-85.    Reserved.



ARTICLE V. WEAPONS



Sec. 11-86.  Carrying concealed weapons.



   No person shall carry concealed about his person any pistol or other
firearm, slingshot, brass knuckle or knuckles of other material, or any sand
bag, dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife, or other dangerous or deadly weapon, or
any instrument or device which when used is likely to produce death or great
bodily harm. Any peace officer may wear or carry such weapons as may be
necessary and proper for the discharge of his official duties.



(Code 1972, § 22-48)



   State law reference—Carrying concealed weapons, SDCL § 22-14-1.



Sec. 11-87.  Drawing deadly weapons.



   No person, except officers of the law in the execution of their duties
or a person in self-defense, shall, in the city, draw a pistol, revolver,
knife or any other deadly or dangerous weapon so that the same may be used
against or upon another person.



(Code 1982, § 22-510)



Sec. 11-88.  Reckless discharge of firearm or shooting of bow and arrow;
trip device.



   Any person who recklessly discharges a firearm or recklessly shoots a
bow and arrow or sets a device designed to activate a weapon upon being
tripped or approached, and leaves it unmarked or unattended by a competent
person or has in his possession a loaded firearm while he is intoxicated is
guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Code 1982, § 22-500)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 22-14-7.



Sec. 11-89.  Hunting and discharge of firearms in rural service district.



   The owner of a parcel of real estate containing at least twenty (20)
contiguous acres located within a rural service district may hunt, control
predators, pests and feral animals on such property, or permit such activity
by others on such property, provided all such activities comply with South
Dakota law.  City ordinances governing such activities shall apply upon the
removal of any property from the rural service district. 



(Ord. No. 1039, 11-6-06)



Secs. 11-90—11-99. Reserved.



ARTICLE VI. MINORS



Sec. 11-100.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this section the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section.



   Minor is any person under the age of eighteen (18) who is not legally
emancipated.



   City is all area within one mile beyond the city limits of Spearfish.



   Custodian is any person over the age of eighteen (18) who is in loco
parentis to a juvenile.



   Guardian is any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship
of a juvenile.



   Juvenile is any person under the age of eighteen (18) who is not
legally emancipated.



   Parent is the natural or adoptive parent of a juvenile.



   Public place shall mean any street, alley, high-way, sidewalk, park,
playground, or place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose.



   In loco parentis is in the place of a parent, instead of a parent,
charged, factitiously, with a parent's rights, duties, responsibilities.



(Ord. No. 822, 4-21-97)



Sec. 11-101.  Purpose.



   The purpose of this section is to regulate the presence of juveniles on
the streets and other public places in the city during late-night hours. The
city has a compelling interest in said regulation due to the increase of
juvenile delinquency in the city. It is a compelling interest and goal of the
city to protect the public from the illegal acts of juveniles committed after
the curfew hours and also to protect the juveniles from improper influences
and from criminal activity that occurs after the curfew hour. It is also the
intent of this section to help parents control their children.



(Ord. No. 822, 4-21-97)



Sec. 11-102.  Curfew hours.



   It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to be or remain in or upon any
public place, either on foot or in a motor vehicle, after the hour of 12:00
midnight or before the hour of 5:00 a.m. on any day of the week, unless
accompanied by their parent, guardian, or custodian.



(Ord. No. 822, 4-21-97)



Sec. 11-103.  Exceptions to curfew.



   The provisions of this article imposing a curfew on minors shall not
apply to a juvenile accompanied by their parent, guardian, or custodian or
where the juvenile is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business, or
other reasonably necessary travel directed or authorized by their parent,
guardian, or custodian.



   Further, it shall not be a violation of this section for any juvenile
to attend a special function or entertainment sponsored by any church,
school, club or other organization if such juvenile can establish that such
attendance is with the specific permission of said juvenile's parent,
guardian, or custodian.



(Ord. No. 822, 4-21-97)



Sec. 11-104.  Responsibility of parents.



   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or custodian of a
juvenile to knowingly permit the violation of these sections. It shall not be
a violation of these sections if the exceptions to curfew are applicable.



(Ord. No. 822, 4-21-97)



Sec. 11-105.  Responsibility and procedures of officers.



   It shall be the right of any authorized officer or person to arrest or
detain any juvenile or person in violation of these sections, and make
reasonable attempts to notify the juvenile's parent, guardian, or custodian
regarding violations of these sections. A summons and complaint citation form
will be completed as per procedure, with a POA option, and handled as a
routine traffic violation in magistrate court.



(Ord. No. 822, 4-21-97)



Sec. 11-106.  Penalty.



   Violation of any provisions of these sections will be punished in
accordance to a Class 2 Misdemeanor. Enforcement of any provisions of these
sections will be in compliance of sections 17-51 to 17-64. Bond for
violations of any provisions of these sections will be per bond schedule or
as determined by the court.



(Ord. No. 822, 4-21-97)



Sec. 11-107.  Construction and severability.



   The city does not intend a result that is absurd, impossible to execute
or unreasonable. It is intended that the curfew ordinance codified in these
sections be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application
would be unconstitutional. Constitutional construction is intended and shall
be given.



   The city does not intend to violate the Constitution of the State of
South Dakota or the Constitution of the United States of America.
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of the curfew
ordinance codified in these sections.



   If any provision including any exception, part, phrase or term, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held to be invalid, the
application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby
and validity of the curfew ordinance codified in these sections in any or
other respects shall not be affected.



(Ord. No. 822, 4-21-97)



CHAPTER 12 MOBILE HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOMES AND PARKS*




   Art. I.    In General, §§ 12-1—12-2





   Art. II.    Manufactured Home Parks and Subdivisions, §§
12-3—12-12





      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 12-3—12-5





      Div. 2.   Placement and Connection Permits, §§ 12-6—12-10





      Div. 3.   Maintenance of Park, §§ 12-11—12-12




   *Cross references—Consuming, blending, possessing, alcoholic
beverages in public places prohibited and the disposal of containers
containing alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17; buildings and building
regulations, Ch. 6; barbed wire and electrified fences prohibited, § 6-1;
building construction standards, § 6-26 et seq.; building permit fees, §
6-29; pole buildings prohibited in certain areas, § 6-32; numbering of
buildings, § 6-76 et seq.; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7; burning of
trash, leaves and any other material or product prohibited, § 7-1; sale or
discharge of fireworks prohibited, § 7-3; fire prevention code adopted, §
7-46; storage of explosives, blasting agents, etc., restricted, § 7-49;
flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; development permit required, § 8-31;
residential construction standards, § 8-77; flood prevention and protection
requirements for manufactured homes, §§ 8-79 and 8-80; health, sanitation
and nuisances, Ch. 9; peddlers' regulations, § 10-196 et seq.; abandoned
vehicles, § 17-501 et seq.; trees on private property, § 19-73 et seq.;
development standards for mobile home parks, Appendix A, Zoning Art. V.1.A;
sign regulations, Appendix A, Zoning Art. V.6.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 12-1.  Definitions.



   Manufactured home shall mean a moveable or portable unit, designed and
constructed to be towed on its own chassis (comprised of frame and wheels,
whether or not such wheels have been removed) and designed to be connected to
utilities for year-round occupancy. The term shall include:



   (1)   Units containing parts that may be folded, collapsed or
telescoped when being towed and that may be expanded to provide additional
cubic capacity.



   (2)   Units composed of two (2) or more separately towable
components designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of being
separated again into the components for repeated towing.



The term ‘manufactured home’ shall include units designed or designated
to be used for residential, commercial, educational or industrial purposes,
excluding, however, recreational vehicles and other trailers and also
excluding manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, and other trailers
placed on the grounds of the Black Hills Airport pursuant to a ground lease.
For purposes of this Chapter and Appendix A to Ord. 1201, the terms
manufactured home and mobile home shall be interchangeable.



   Manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean any parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided or arranged into two (2) or more
manufactured home lots for owner occupancy, rent or sale.



   Manufactured home space means a defined plot of ground or lot within a
manufactured home park which is designed for and designated as the location
for two (2) or more automobiles and one (1) manufactured home, and not used
for any other purposes whatsoever other than the customary accessory uses.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14; Ord. 1279, 5-7-18)



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



Sec. 12-2.  Nonconforming use.



   Any manufactured home within the city limits and not in a manufactured
home park or campground is hereby declared a non- conforming use.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



ARTICLE II. MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 12-3.  Manufactured home parks subdivision minimum standards.



   (a)   All manufactured home parks/subdivisions shall comply with the
requirements of Article V, Section 1 of Appendix A to Ord. 1201.



   (b)   The owner of a manufactured home park shall at all times
operate the park in compliance with the Revised Ordinances of the City of
Spearfish, and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its
facilities and equipment in good repair in a clean and sanitary condition at
all times.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



Sec. 12-4.  Manufactured home parks maintenance.



   The owner of a manufactured home park shall at all times operate the
park in compliance with the Revised Ordinances of the City of Spearfish, and
shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and
equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



Sec. 12-5.  Owner’s right of entry to make repairs.



   It shall be the duty of every occupant of a manufactured home park to
give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such
manufactured home park or its premises at reasonable times for the purposes
of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance
with this article, or with any lawful regulations adopted thereunder or with
any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



DIVISION 2. PLACEMENT AND CONNECTION PERMIT*



Sec. 12-6.  Permit Required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to set- up, place, establish, or
connect to utilities any manufactured home within the jurisdiction of the
city without first obtaining a Placement and Connection Permit issued by the
city building official. The permit fee shall be as established by resolution
as approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



Sec. 12-7.  Placement of manufactured home.



   The placement of a manufactured home located on any lot within the
jurisdiction of the city shall meet the requirements of this chapter and must
be located according to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance Appendix A,
Article V. Section 1.A Manufactured home parks/subdivisions. If the owner of
the manufactured home also owns the lot where the home is placed, the home
shall be placed on a foundation approved by the building official. 
Manufactured homes located within a manufactured home park or leased lot may
either be placed on a permanent foundation or on footing pads and piers as
approved by the building official.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



Sec. 12-8.  Conditions of support and anchoring.



   All manufactured homes shall be supported and anchored in accordance
with the manufacturers installation instructions, the Federal Model
Manufactured Home Installation Standards 24 CFR 3285, or as approved by the
city building official.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



Sec. 12-9.  Initial inspection.



   All blocking, piers, anchoring, plumbing, and mechanical work shall be
completed and inspected by the building official prior to the installation of
skirting. Only the area directly behind a landing or deck may be skirted
prior to the required inspection. Manufactured homes may not be occupied
until the initial inspection has been completed and approved.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



Sec. 12-10.  Final inspection.



   A final inspection of the manufactured home by the building official is
required upon the installation of skirting, porches, steps, landings and
guardrails. Approved residential numbering must be attached to the home prior
to final inspection.



   (1)   The location and width of roadways and walkways.



   (2)   The location of water and sewer lines, storm drains and catch
basins.



   (3)   The location and size of the recreation area.



(Code 1982, § 21-304; Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



DIVISION 3. MAINTENANCE OF PARK



Sec. 12-11. Drainage.



   Every manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained site,
and shall be so located that its drainage will not endanger any water supply.
Individual manufactured homes shall be placed to provide positive drainage
around the home.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



Sec. 12-12. Use of spaces generally.



   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a manufactured home park
to allow any manufactured home to be occupied unless the manufactured home is
situated on a manufactured home space.



(Ord. 1201, 10-20-14)



         



   *Cross-reference—Finance, § 2-161 et seq.



CHAPTER 13 SOLID WASTE*




   Art. I.   In General, §§ 13-1—13-25





   Art. II.   Collection, §§   13-26—13-41





   Art. III.   Restricted Use Site, §§ 13-42—13-50





   Art. IV.   Rates, Charges, Billing Procedure, §§ 13-51—13-54




   *Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; animals, Ch. 5; buildings
and building regulations, Ch. 6; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7;
burning of trash, leaves and any other material or product prohibited, §
7-1; fire prevention code adopted, § 7-46; flood prevention and protection,
Ch. 8; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; license required for solid
waste collectors and haulers, § 10-251 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other
public places, Ch. 14; streets and public rights-of-way, § 14-26 et seq.;
sidewalks, § 14-76 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 15; abandoned vehicles, §
17-501 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 18; vegetation, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A.



SOLID WASTE ADMINISTRATIVE RATES & POLICIES



The following policies and fees shall control excess garbage, loose garbage
placed in containers, pickup services, truck services, clean up containers,
and automobile disposal for City of Spearfish residential and commercial
customer accounts.



   1.   Residential Garbage -



      •   35-gallon container, available upon request in lieu of
the 65-gallon container, collected once a week.



      •   65-gallon container collected once per week.



      •   95-gallon container, available upon request in lieu of
the 65-gallon container, collected once per week.



      •   Residential customers who request an extra pickup of
their 35, 65, or 95 gallon container or who missed their regular garbage
pickup day and request their container be emptied, will be charged an extra
pickup fee equivalent to respective monthly pick up charges.



   2.   Loose Garbage in the containers will not be tolerated and
violators may be charged double the standard rate per occurrence per month.



   3.   Requested Special Pick up Service — The City will provide
pick up service for residential customers. Customers must contact the Public
Works Office to make a reservation. The following items are accepted:



      a.   Furniture, mattresses, & box springs



      b.   Appliances



         •   Appliances that do NOT use freon



         •   Containing freon — Appliances will be taken to
the Belle Fourche landfill and will NOT be accepted at the Rubble Site



   4.   Truck Services — The City may provide a truck for City
residents’ use based on availability. Spearfish residents with a
current/up-to-date account can reserve a truck through the Public Works
Office and authorize the payment to be added to their monthly utility bill.



   Trucks are delivered and removed by City staff during normal business
hours. The truck will be parked on paved or graveled surfaces only. The City
will not be responsible for rutting or driveway damage.



      •   Residents may not mix loads



      •   Residents may not operate the truck



   Allowed Items:



      •   Branches (by themselves)



      •   Shingles (no paper or plastic)



      •   Concrete, asphalt, dirt and rock (may be combined or
separate)



   Items not allowed:



      •   Plastic



      •   Cardboard



      •   Treated lumber



      •   Hazardous materials



      •   Household garbage



   5.   Clean up Containers – TThe City will provide a 300 or 450
gallon-automated container to residential and commercial customers with
current up-to-date accounts for the disposal of material associated with
general clean up.



      •   Material considered being hazardous, lumber, tires,
batteries, or metal may not be placed in the container.



      •   Container contents are disposed of at the Belle Fourche
Landfill.



      •   If the customer extends the use of the container beyond
thirty (30) days, there is an additional fee.



      •   Requests for containers must be made to the Public Works
Department and the fee will be added to the customer’s monthly billing.



      •   The customer is responsible for any loss or damaged
container, other than normal wear, and will be charged accordingly.



   6.   Trees, branches, and yard waste —



      a.   The City will NOT collect these items unless specifically
authorized by the City Council.



      b.   Residential customers may request truck service for trees
and branches. (Refer to residential truck service use and rate policy.)



      c.   Christmas tree disposal — The City will provide free of
charge, collection and disposal service to residential customers with
specific pick up times and dates determined by the Public Works Department.
Christmas trees may also be taken to Restricted Use Site during hours of
operation free of charge.



   7.   Tires —



      •   Only tires without rims will be accepted at the
Restricted Use Site.



      •   Tires with rims will NOT be accepted.



      •   The City will NOT provide pickup or truck service for
tire disposal.



   8.   Used oil & antifreeze will be accepted free of charge at the
Canyon Street Shop during business hours. Oil and antifreeze must be in
separate containers and labeled.



   9.   Rubbish, building material, and metal — These items are
described in the attached permit and will be accepted at the Spearfish
Restricted Use Site during posted operating hours. Fees will reflect current
disposal rates and are collected prior to disposal.



   10.   Batteries will be accepted free of charge at the Spearfish
Restricted Use Site. The site operator must check in batteries.



(Ord. No. 1103, 9-21-09; Ord. 1144, 9-19-11)



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 13-1.  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Commercial shall be given its ordinary meaning. In addition, multi-unit
structures not having separately and individually metered domestic units for
water and/or sewer service shall be classified as commercial.



   Domestic shall mean an individual residential dwelling unit whose
primary use is for residential purposes, whether located in a single or
multi-unit structure that is separately and individually metered for water
and/or sewer service.



   Garbage shall mean kitchen refuse, cans, bottles, paper, cardboard,
plastics, and other waste materials ordinarily originating on household or
commercial premises. The word "garbage" shall not include flammable materials
as described in section 13-28, heavy accumulations as described in section
13-29, or certain wastes as described in section 13-30.



   Rubbish shall mean accumulations of clipped grass, tree leaves, tree
limbs and branches, and construction debris. The word "rubbish" shall not
include flammable materials as described in section 13-28, heavy
accumulations as described in section 13-29, or certain wastes as described
in section 13-30. Disposal of rubbish shall be at the expense of the party
responsible for the same.



(Code 1982, § 16-100; Ord. No. 851, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03)



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



Sec. 13-2.  Littering prohibited generally.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast, or deposit
upon any street, alley, sidewalk or any yard or premises, public or private,
any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, bottles,
refuse, or any other form of litter or waste matter.



(Code 1982, § 16-110; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03)



   Cross reference—Nuisances, § 9-26 et seq.



Secs. 13-3-13-25.    Reserved.



ARTICLE II. COLLECTION



Sec. 13-26.  Supervision.



   All garbage and rubbish accumulated in the city shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of under the supervision of the common council.



(Code 1982, § 16-200; Ord. No. 631, § 16-200, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 941,
2-18-03)



Sec. 13-27.  Domestic garbage collection.



   The city shall be solely responsible for the collection and disposal of
all domestic garbage as defined in section 13-1. All domestic units within
the city shall pay the rates specified in section 13-53 et seq. and shall
comply with the following rules and regulations pertaining to the collection
of garbage:



   (1)   Domestic units of the city, subject to this article, shall
comply with automated collection approved by the city in the manner which
follows.



      a.   All domestic units as defined shall select a city issued
automated collection container as specified in section 13-53.



      b.   Domestic units may select multiple automated collection
containers as specified in section 13-53.



      c.   Only city issued automated collection containers shall be
allowed for use as garbage containers.



      d.   If the container is stored outside, it shall be kept so
as to protect the container and its contents from animals. Garbage placed in
the containers shall be bagged and tied to prevent blowing during collection.
Loose garbage placed in the container will not be allowed and violators may
be penalized as per section 13-32.



      e.   Domestic unit users shall place the automated collection
containers in a location suitable and readily accessible for collection by
the automated collection truck on the scheduled collection day. Containers
shall be removed from the curb within twenty-four (24) hours after emptied.
Containers shall not be stored at a location closer to the curb than the
front of the residence.



      f.   If the city has entered into a contract with a private
recycling company for domestic curbside recycling services, customer may
elect to request curbside recycling pickup from that private company for a
monthly fee. Customer must follow all established rules relating to pick-up
dates and times, pick-up locations, containers, and other specifications. No
person or entity may use city property or rights of way to deposit or pick-up
recycling other than the sole private recycling company under contract with
the city.



   (2)   Residents of the city are responsible for picking up garbage
from tipped containers.



   (3)   If an automated collection container issued by the city
becomes unusable because of damages resulting from the automated collection
truck, the city will replace the container at no cost to the domestic unit
resident. However, if an automated collection container becomes unusable due
to damages resulting from causes other than the automated collection truck,
the domestic unit resident shall be responsible to purchase a new container
from the city.



(Code 1982, § 16-210; Ord. No. 631, § 16-210, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 814, § 1,
12-2-96; Ord. No. 851, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 1193, 7-7-14)



Sec. 13-28.  Disposition of flammable materials.



   Highly flammable, explosive materials, and toxic materials will not be
placed in containers for regular collection or disposal but shall be disposed
of as directed by the city supervisor of sanitation at the expense of the
owner or possessor thereof.



(Code 1982, § 16-140; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03)



   Cross reference—Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7.



Sec. 13-29.  Disposition of heavy accumulations.



   Heavy accumulations such as earth or dirt, brick, broken concrete,
lumber ashes, plaster, sand or gravel, large dead trees, automobile frames or
parts, batteries, appliances, furniture, and other bulky, heavy materials,
shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling the
same.



(Code 1982, § 16-150; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03)



   Cross reference—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6.



Sec. 13-30.  Disposition of certain wastes.



   Wastes from lumber yards, building material suppliers, building
contractors, offal from meat and other packing plants, waste oil, batteries,
and used tires shall be disposed at the expense of the party responsible for
the same.



(Code 1982, § 16-160; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03)



   Cross references—Construction standards, § 6-26 et seq.; licenses,
permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



Sec. 13-31.  Frequency of collection and rates.



   Domestic unit services will provide one (1) pickup per week. Residents
which habitually exceed this volume of garbage will be contacted by the city
and special provisions made with respect to container and cost. Large
container charges will be as specified in section 13-53.



(Code 1982, § 6-210; Ord. No. 631, § 16-220, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 814, § 2,
12-2-96; Ord. No. 851, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03)



Sec. 13-32.  Extraordinary garbage collection policies.



   The public works administrator, subject to council approval, may adopt
policies and fees for excess garbage, loose garbage placed in containers,
collection by request of automobiles, appliances, trees, branches, and
rubbish of an extraordinary character. The public works administrator may
amend and modify the same with council approval. (Refer to solid waste
administrative rates and policies)



(Ord. No. 631, § 16-222, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 814, § 3, 12-2-96; Ord. No.
941, 2-18-03)



Sec. 13-33.  Commercial collection.



   Commercial operations within the city as defined in section 13-1 may
elect to be served by the city garbage service or by a private hauler. A home
occupation shall be considered to be a domestic unit as defined in section
13-1, but will be allowed to select commercial containers and shall pay the
commercial rates specified in section 13-51. The city shall be solely
responsible for collection of garbage from a home occupation. Commercial
operations shall be subject to the following rules and regulations:



   (1)   Replacement provisions for automated collection containers
shall be the same as for domestic units.



   (2)   Businesses may combine and request a large container to be
provided by the city to be charged according to section 13-53.



   (3)   All large containers must be situated on a hard surface,
located outside of public rights-of-way and be readily accessible to the
collection equipment.



(Ord. No. 631, § 16-230, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 814, § 4, 12-2-96; Ord. No.
851, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03)



Sec. 13-34 Private collection of business operations.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit commercial
operations from hiring or employing nonmunicipal garbage collection and
removal.



(Ord. No. 631, § 16-231, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 851, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 941,
2-18-03)



Sec. 13-35.  Containers.



   (a)   City issued containers shall be constructed of polyethylene
with a molded hinged lid, which shall be kept closed. All containers will
have an identification number issued by the city.



   (b)   All private hauler containers provided to commercial units
shall be constructed of either metal or polyethylene and must have a suitable
watertight lid, which shall be kept closed.



(Code 1982, § 16-405; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03)



Sec. 13-36.  Illegal use of containers.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit garbage in a container
that is not issued to him or her by the city.



   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and the current container fee.



(Ord. No. 686, 8-6-90; Ord. No. 851, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03)



Secs. 13-37—13-41.    Reserved.




ARTICLE III. RESTRICTED USE SITE*





   * Note—Title amended by Ord. No. 1043, passed 1-2-07.




Sec. 13-42.  Definition.



   The word "rubble" as used in this article shall mean trees, branches,
leaves, grass clippings, construction materials and lumber yard waste.



(Ord. No. 657, § 16-501, 6-19-89)



Sec. 13-43.  Authorized.



   The city is hereby authorized to operate and maintain a rubble site
facility in accordance with South Dakota Solid Waste Rules and Regulations,
SDCL Ch. 34A-6 and ARSD 74:27.



(Ord. No. 657, § 16-500, 6-19-89)



Sec. 13-44.  Days and hours of operation.



   The public works administrator shall establish the days and hours of
operation.



(Ord. No. 657, § 16-502, 6-19-89; Ord. No. 1116, 2-1-10)



Sec. 13-45.  Unlawful disposal.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any hazardous, toxic
or household wastes at the rubble facility.



(Ord. No. 657, § 16-503, 6-19-89)



Sec. 13-46.  Fees.



   Fees for disposal at restricted use site to be set by resolution and
can be found in city schedule of fees.



(Ord. No. 657, § 16-505, 6-19-89; Ord. No. 873, 11-15-99; Ord. No. 941,
2-18-03; Ord. No. 1026, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 1102, 9-8-09)



Sec. 13-47.  Penalty for violation.



   The penalty for disposal of hazardous, toxic or any unauthorized wastes
at the restricted-use site shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
violation.



(Ord. No. 657, § 16-504, 6-19-89; Ord. No. 1116, 2-1-10)



Sec. 13-48.  Free dumping.



   The city will allow dumping without charge from time to time for city
residents at the restricted-use site. The public works department will
administer implementation of this policy.



(Ord. No. 873, 11-15-99; Ord. No. 1116, 2-1-10)



Secs. 13-49—13-50.    Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. RATES, CHARGES, BILLING PROCEDURE*



   *Cross reference—Finance, § 2-161 et seq.



Sec. 13-51.  Special rates authorized.



   Wherever the collection of garbage, trash, and refuse from any premises
in the city shall exceed the normal amount for such premises so that the fee
prescribed for such collection is not fair and reasonable as applied to that
particular premises, the public works administrator, subject to council
approval, may establish policies and fees to accommodate special situations.



(Code 1982, § 16-300; Ord. No. 631, § 16-300, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 814, § 5,
12-2-96; Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03)



Sec. 13-52.  Reserved.



   Editor's note—Section 13-52 has been deleted and reserved by the
editor inasmuch as it appears to have been superseded by Ord. No. 941,
adopted Feb. 18, 2003. Said section 13-52 pertained to multiresidence rates
and derived from Ord. No. 631, § 16-221, adopted Dec. 21, 1987; Ord. No.
814, § 6, adopted Dec. 2, 1996; and Ord. No. 851, adopted Dec. 21, 1998.



Sec. 13-53.  Charges for collection by city.



   Rates, set by resolution, can be found in the city schedule of fees. 
Applicable sales tax shall also be charged for the collection and disposal of
garbage by the city.



(Code 1982, § 16-302; Ord. No. 631, § 16-310, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 650, § 1,
3-6-89; Ord. No. 691, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 714, 12-2-91; Ord. No. 737, 3-15-93;
Ord. No. 765, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 787, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 814, § 7, 12-2-96;
Ord. No. 941, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 1073, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 1088, 11-17-08; Ord.
No. 1103, 9-21-09)



Sec. 13-54.  Billing and collection procedure.



   (a)   The charge for collection and disposal of garbage shall be
payable by and chargeable to, either the owner or occupants of the property.
Such charge shall be noted on the monthly water billing and shall be payable
with and in addition to, such water bill. In the event of nonpayment of the
garbage collection and disposal charge, water service and garbage collection
may be forthwith discontinued by the city at such premises.



   (b)   In the event garbage collections shall be made by the city
under the provisions of this chapter from any premises not independently
served by the city water service and billed therefor, the owner or occupant
of the premises shall be billed for each month at the same time the water
users are billed. Such garbage collection charge shall be forthwith payable
to the city either by the owner or occupants of such premises. In the event
of failure of prompt payment of such charges, the city may discontinue
collection of garbage at such premises.



   (c)   In addition to the methods of billing and collecting the
charges for garbage gathering, the city finance officer, with the approval of
the common council, may from time to time adopt and use and may also enforce
as above provided, other methods of billing and collection as may be
reasonably efficient, feasible, and appropriate to the end that in every
case, all collection charges provided by this section shall be paid.



(Code 1982, § 16-301; Ord. No. 631, § 16-301, 12-21-87)



CHAPTER 14 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES*




   Art. I.   In General, §§ 14-1—14-25





   Art. II.   Streets and Public Rights-Of-Way, §§ 14-26—14-75





      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 14-26—14-50





      Div. 2.   Obstructions and Encroachments, §§ 14-51—14-75





   Art. III.   Sidewalks, §§ 14-76—14-100





   Art. IV.   Assemblies, Parades, Processions, §§ 14-101—14-130





   Art. V.   Use of municipal rights-of-way (ROW) and other properties,
§§ 14-131—14-155





   Art. VI.   Cemeteries, §§ 14-156—14-250





      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 14-156—14-180





      Div. 2.   Lots, §§ 14-181—14-205





      Div. 3.   Interment, §§ 14-206—14-230





      Div. 4.   Perpetual Care, §§ 14-231—14-250





   Art. VII.    Parks and Recreation Areas, §§ 14-251—14-254





   Art. VIII.   Art in Public Places, §§ 14-301—14-320




   *Cross references—Advertising, Ch. 3; painting advertising on
sidewalks or other public property prohibited, § 3-1; distribution of
handbills, § 3-26 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; consuming, blending,
possessing, alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited and the disposal
of containers containing alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17; animals,
Ch. 5; animals running at large prohibited, § 5-1; buildings and building
regulations, Ch. 6; numbering of buildings, § 6-76 et seq.; fire protection
and prevention, Ch. 7; burning of trash, leaves and any other material or
product prohibited, § 7-1; sell or discharge of fireworks prohibited, §
7-3; fire prevention code adopted, § 7-46; routes for vehicles transporting
explosives, § 7-50; routes established for vehicles transporting houses and
chemicals, § 7-51 et seq.; fire lanes established by the fire chief and
chief of police, § 7-52; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; health,
sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; peddlers' regulations, § 10-196 et seq.;
solid waste, Ch. 13; public open spaces in subdivisions, § 15-87;
subdivisions, Ch. 15; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 17; abandoned vehicles, §
17-501 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 18; vegetation, Ch. 19; trees, § 19-26 et
seq.; zoning, App. A; sign regulations, App. A, Art. V, § 6.



   State law reference—Streets and alleys, SDCL § 9-45-1.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 14-1.  Building permit.



   A building permit shall be required with the requisite fees associated
therewith prior to the construction of sidewalks and driveways required by
the city.



(Ord. No. 518, 11-10-82)



   Cross reference—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6.



Secs. 14-2—14-25.  Reserved.



ARTICLE II. STREETS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY*



   *Cross references—Consuming, blending, possessing, alcoholic
beverages in public places prohibited and the disposal of containers
containing alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17; animals running at large
prohibited, § 5-1; burning of trash, leaves and any other material or
product prohibited, § 7-1; routes for vehicles transporting explosives, §
7-50; routes established for vehicles transporting houses and chemicals, §
7-51 et seq.; fire lanes established by the fire chief and chief of police,
§ 7-52; specific traffic regulations, § 17-186 et seq.; stopping, standing
and parking of vehicles, § 17-281 et seq.; truck routes established, §
17-406; abandoned vehicles, § 17-501 et seq.; street and park trees, §
19-71 et seq.; peddlers' regulations, § 10-196 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 13;
street widths, grades, etc., in subdivisions, § 15-78 et seq.



   State law references—Streets and alleys, SDCL § 9-45-1 et seq.;
numbering of houses, SDCL § 9-45-2.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 14-26.  Street grades.



   The grades of the streets and avenues in the city as theretofore
established and as shown on the street profiles on file in the office of the
public works administrator are hereby adopted as the official record of the
street grades in the city.



(Code 1982, § 18-110)



   State law reference—Authority to establish street grades, SDCL §§
9-45-1, 9-45-14.



Sec. 14-27.  Street name, prefixes; official map.



   (a)   The names of the streets lying easterly from Main Street shall
be designated as "East" and the names of the streets lying westerly of Main
Street shall be designated as "West." The prefixes shall be placed before the
proper names of the street as "East Colorado Street" or "West Colorado
Street."



   (b)   The names of the streets and avenues in the city are hereby
fixed and adopted in accordance with and as shown by the map of the city on
file in the office of the public works administrator, which map is hereby
designated and adopted as the official map of the city.



(Code 1982, §§ 12-305, 18-120)



   State law reference—Name of streets, avenues, SDCL § 9-45-2.



Sec. 14-28.  Obstruction of gutters.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, cause or maintain any
obstruction of whatsoever manner in any gutter or drainage ditch within the
city.



(Code 1982, § 18-130)



Sec. 14-29.  Removal, replacement of curbs and gutters.



   (a)   No person shall remove or cause to be removed any portion of
existing curb and gutter without first obtaining a written permit to do so
from the public works administrator. No such permit shall be issued for
removal of curb and gutter except in accordance with the provisions contained
herein.



   (b)   Application for such permit must be made in writing upon forms
furnished by the city. Such application shall contain the name and address of
the person making the application and the name and address of the contractor
or person who is to replace the curb and gutter.



   (c)   All such work shall be done under the jurisdiction of the
public works administrator and in accordance with the city Code and shall be
inspected upon completion by the constituted member of such department.



   (d)   All plans and specifications must conform to the following
minimum requirements before a permit for removal and replacement shall be
issued:



   (1)   The replacement of curb and gutter must conform to the
existing curb and gutter grade as established and designated by the official
grades of the streets of the city, and the profile on file in the office of
the public works administrator.



   (2)   If an existing expansion joint in the curb and gutter is
within five (5) feet of the end of the driveway opening, the existing curb
and gutter may be removed to the expansion joint, otherwise the existing curb
and gutter must be cut, making a neat edge truly at right angles to the edge
of the pavement and truly vertical.



   (3)   The new curb and gutter shall be constructed in a manner and
of a material equal at least to the existing curb and gutter adjacent thereto.



   (e)   It shall be the responsibility hereafter and required of the
property owner who removes or causes any other person to remove any portion
of curb and gutter to provide the costs for all materials, construction and
installation involved in replacing the curb and gutter, and all construction
and installation shall be performed according to plans and specifications of
the city.



   (f)   In the event any person fails to comply with the provisions of
this section, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00).



(Code 1982, § 18-140)



Sec. 14-30.  Driveways.



   (a)   “Parkway” definition: the portion of the public
right-of-way which lies between the curb and gutter, and the adjacent
property line, or if no curb and gutter is present, it is the portion of the
public right-of-way which lies between the edge of the paved street and the
adjacent property line.



   (b)   It shall be the responsibility hereafter and required of all
property owners whose driveway connects to an existing paved street, paved
alley, or crosses over a public parkway to install a nonporous concrete or
bituminous driveway surface. The following are exceptions to this requirement:



      i.   In locations where the existing street or alleyway
providing access to the property is unpaved, the driveway shall be surfaced
with asphalt, concrete, gravel, asphalt millings, or similar loose material.



      ii.   For property zoned Rural Large Lot Single Family or
Agricultural, a paved surface is only required when the existing street
providing access to the property is paved, in which case the paving of the
driveway shall be required to extend only to the front setback and with a
minimum width of 12 feet. Beyond the front setback, gravel, asphalt millings,
or similar loose material is permitted.



   (c)   It shall be the responsibility hereafter and required of all
property owners whose driveway crosses over any portion of any public
sidewalk or public parkway to provide the costs for all materials,
construction and installation involved in surfacing the driveway with
nonporous concrete or bituminous material.



   (d)   Where a driveway of any kind of material is constructed across
the public sidewalk or public parkway, it shall conform to the sidewalk
grades as established and designated by the official grades of the sidewalks
of the city and the profiles on file in the office of the public works
administrator.



   (e)   All driveways shall be so graded between the gutter and the
sidewalk that it will not be necessary to change the established grade of
either and will not elevate or depress any portion of either. No part of such
driveway shall extend beyond the curbline in such manner as to change the
grade of such gutter or obstruct the free flow of water in such gutter. Where
elevations or depressions are necessary in the parkway strip adjoining the
curb and walks, the parkway shall be graded on both sides of the driveway to
a distance sufficient to create a gradual ascent or descent. Where driveways
cross open ditches in the parkways, adequate culverts shall be installed.



   (f)   In the event any person fails to comply with the provisions of
this section, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00).



(Code 1982, § 18-150; Ord. No. 1165, 11-19-12; Ord. No. 1231, 1-19-16)



Sec. 14-31.  Surfacing of areas as behind lay-down curbs.



   (a)   It shall be the responsibility hereafter and required of the
property owner whose property adjoins or abuts lay-down curbing to install
within six (6) months a nonporous concrete or bituminous surface upon the
area behind the lay-down curbing which is used for parking, loading,
unloading or delivery purposes.



   (b)   It shall be the responsibility hereafter and required of such
property owner to provide the costs for all materials, construction and
installation involved in laying the nonporous concrete or bituminous surface.



   (c)   In the event any person fails to comply with the provisions of
this section, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Code 1982, § 18-160)



Sec. 14-32.  Moving of buildings through streets, etc.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move a building of any
kind over the streets or alleys of this city without first paying a fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) and obtaining a permit to do so from the public works
department.



   (b)   When a permit shall be granted for the purpose of moving a
building over the streets of the city it shall be the duty of the public
works department to verify that the moving person or company has been
licensed by the city and submitted a certified check in the amount of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to cover any damages to the city property which
might result from such use of the streets and alleys under the operation of
such permit.



   (c)   When the building has been moved as contemplated and allowed
by a permit under this section, it shall be the duty of the public works
administrator to carefully examine the route over which such building was
moved. If the person to whom such permit was granted repairs forthwith any
damages to the full satisfaction of the public works administrator, the
certified check collected as herein provided shall be refunded. Otherwise the
public works administrator shall cause such damages to be repaired and pay
for the same out of the certified check so collected and held by him, and
refund the remainder, if there be any, to the person from whom collected.



(Code 1982, §§ 18-400—18-402; Ord. No. 844, 6-1-98)



Sec. 14-33.  Location of street lights.



   (a)   Residential street lights, within the city, may be placed at
intersections. If there is a distance of over four hundred (400) feet between
intersections or on a dead-end street over four hundred (400) feet with a
cul-de-sac, the public works department shall determine the need and best
location for a light and make such recommendation to the public works
committee.



   (b)   The locations or spacing of street lights in commercial or
major thoroughfares shall be determined by the public works department. Such
location shall be based upon recommendation of the applicable electric
company as to candle power and coverage of light and shall be the most
efficient and economical to the city.



(Ord. No. 601, §§ 18-500, 18-501, 9-15-86)



Sec. 14-34.  Riding on toy vehicles prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any coaster, sled,
roller skates or any toy vehicle to ride upon any street in the city.



(Code 1982, § 23-103)



Sec. 14-35.  Reserved.



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 817, adopted Feb. 18, 1997, repealed § 14-35,
which pertained to snow removal. See the Code Comparative Table.



Sec. 14-36.  Policy.



   It is hereby declared to be in the public interest to regulate and
restrict the parking and operation of vehicles on public streets during snow
removal efforts.



(Ord. No. 817, 2-18-97)



Sec. 14-37.  Snow storm information and advisory guide.



   The city administrator is hereby required to establish and maintain an
administrative policy entitled the City of Spearfish Snow Information and
Advisory Guide which describes how the city will address snow removal and
regulate such things as parking in snow conditions.  The policy has the
weight of law.



(Ord. No. 817, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 1112, 11-2-09)



Sec. 14-38.  Interference or obstruction of snow removal operations.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, or operator of any vehicle, to
interfere with or obstruct, or cause interference with or obstruction, of the
snow removal operations undertaken by the city and its employees. It shall
also be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in a manner not
reasonable or prudent, thereby creating a safety risk in relation to snow
removal operations.



(Ord. No. 817, 2-18-97)



Sec. 14-39.  Placement of snow.



   Residents and businesses shall not be allowed to place snow on public
boulevards and public streets. Exception: Property owners in the Downtown
Business Improvement District who have no ability to store snow on site will
be allowed to push snow onto the street if done before the city plows or
removes snow.  Any snow placed on the right-of-way along with snow already
on the street cannot exceed three (3) feet in height.



(Ord. No. 817, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 1112, 11-2-09)



Sec. 14-40.  Responsibility for snow removal on private driveways.



   The city will not plow snow from private property and will not open any
private driveways whether closed by city street plowing or other means.
Property owners will be responsible for snow removal of sidewalks in
compliance of section 14-80.



(Ord. No. 817, 2-18-97)



Sec. 14-41.  Additional power of administrative staff.



   The administrative staff shall have the power, during extreme snow
removal circumstances, to close any street or portion of street which is
under the jurisdiction of the city to all traffic and parking, if necessary,
for public safety and efficient removal of snow.



(Ord. No. 817, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 1112, 11-2-09)



Sec. 14-42.  Penalties.



   Violation of any provisions of this division, in addition to the
penalties contained herein, may be punished by a fine in accordance to a
Class 2 Misdemeanor. Illegally parked vehicles may be ticketed, towed and
impounded at owner's expense. Enforcement of any provisions of this division
will be in compliance of sections 17-51 to 17-64.



(Ord. No. 817, 2-18-97)



Secs. 14-43—14-50.    Reserved.



DIVISION 2. OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS



Sec. 14-51.  Definition.



   The word "encroachment," when used in this division, shall mean and
include any sign, awning, canopy, or marquee, billboard or other advertising
device, merchandise stand or display, building or other structure or other
use for private purposes of any character which exists in or rests upon or
projects above the right-of-way or any portion thereof of a public street.



(Code 1982, § 18-200)



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



Sec. 14-52.  Restricted.



   It shall be unlawful, except as hereinafter provided, for any person to
erect, construct, install, place, maintain or allow to remain, or to permit
the erection, construction, installation, placing, maintenance or remaining
of any encroachment upon or above the right-of-way, or any portion thereof,
over street or other public way in the city.



(Code 1982, § 18-201)



Sec. 14-53.  Nonconforming encroachments.



   Any encroachment existing on the effective date of the ordinance from
which this division was derived, as heretofore permitted by the city, may be
continued for a period of ninety (90) days from and after such effective date
unless discontinued, or unless the same shall become defective and unsafe
prior to the expiration of such period, in which case the same shall be
removed by the owner or person permitting the erection, construction,
installation, placing or maintenance of the same; provided, however, that in
established business districts on such streets where the buildings are at the
property line and are continuous or very closely spaced, overhanging
encroachments are permitted under the following conditions:



   (1)   Awnings, canopies, marquees and similar installations
supported wholly from the face of the building shall be permitted, providing
that the edge of such encroachment be not less than three (3) feet back of
the face of the curb.



   (2)   Advertising or other similar signs supported wholly from the
front of the building shall be permitted to remain in place until such time
that they become functionally or structurally obsolete; such signs shall then
be removed.



   (3)   The replacements of encroachments, as allowed in (2) above,
will not be permitted.



(Code 1982, § 18-210)



Sec. 14-54.  Obstruction of traffic devices.



   In the event the encroachments referred to in section 14-53 by reason
of color or placement, obscure or in any way detract from the effectiveness
of highway signs or traffic signals, the city may cause the removal of such
encroachments in the manner hereinafter provided for the removal of any
encroachment in violation of this division.



(Code 1982, § 18-220)



Sec. 14-55.  Use of right-of-way.



   The use of the right-of-way by owners or lessees of abutting property
for the storage of vehicles, placement of portable signs or other private
use, is hereby prohibited on public streets or alleys.



(Code 1982, § 18-230)



Sec. 14-56.  Display of goods prohibited.



   The use of sidewalks or other areas of the right-of-way for the storage
or display of merchandise is prohibited on public streets.



(Code 1982, § 18-240)



Sec. 14-57.  Removal.



   Whenever any encroachment exists in violation of the provisions of this
division, the common council shall direct the city finance officer to
forthwith issue notice requiring the removal of such encroachment within a
time specified in such notice. If the owner of such encroachment, or his
agent, is known, such notice shall be a written notice served in person or by
mail upon such owner or agent. If the owner or agent is unknown, such notice
shall be published once in the official city paper. If the owner or his agent
shall fail or refuse to remove the encroachment within the time fixed in the
notice, the city shall cause the encroachment to be removed.



(Code 1982, § 18-250)



Sec. 14-58.  Reserved.



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 921, adopted Apr. 1, 2002, repealed § 14-58,
which pertained to permit for sign, marquee. See the Code Comparative Table.



Sec. 14-59.  Reserved.



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 921, adopted Apr. 1, 2002, repealed § 14-59,
which pertained to specifications for permitted signs, marquees. See the Code
Comparative Table.



Sec. 14-60.  Permission for artwork.



   Any person desiring to place sculpture, statuary, fountains, or other
artwork of any kind on or over public property shall first obtain permission
from the common council, which shall approve the artwork and location
thereof. Such artwork may not constitute a safety or traffic hazard.



(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-01)



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 901, adopted Sept. 17, 2001, amended the Code
by adding provisions designated as § 14-59. Inasmuch as there already exists
provisions so designated, the provisions of Ord. No. 901 have been included
herein as § 14-60 at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative
Table.



Sec. 14-61.  Certain church signs permitted.



   Notwithstanding any ordinance or zoning regulation to the contrary,
each church located within the city shall be allowed to use the public
right-of-way to place two (2) directional and informational signs not
exceeding seven hundred twenty (720) square inches per sign on each side.
Both sides of a sign may be used if the sign is hung by a bracket. No fee or
permit is required for such sign.



(Ord. No. 958, 6-16-03)



Secs. 14-62—14-75.    Reserved.



ARTICLE III. SIDEWALKS*



   *Cross references—Consuming, blending, possessing, alcoholic
beverages in public places prohibited and the disposal of containers
containing alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17; animals running at large
prohibited, § 5-1; peddlers' regulations, § 10-196 et seq.; solid waste,
Ch. 13; sidewalk requirements in subdivisions, § 15A-88.



   State law reference—Sidewalks, SDCL § 9-46-1 et seq.



Sec. 14-76.  Installation required.



   (a)   Unless exempt under Chapter 15 [15A] or Appendix A, it shall
be the responsibility hereafter and required of all property owners of vacant
lots, that sidewalks be installed whenever a new building or dwelling be
constructed upon such vacant lots.



   (b)   Such sidewalks shall be completed at or before the time the
new building or dwelling is completed and shall be constructed and installed
according to city plans and specifications on file in the office of the
public works administrator.



(Code 1982, § 12-500; Ord. No. 922, 4-1-02)



Sec. 14-77.  Location of sidewalks.



   (a)   Sidewalks constructed in the city shall be located in
conformity with existing sidewalk locations, except the replacement of
sidewalks abutting the curb, whenever possible, shall conform to the
standards of this section.



   (b)   In the event no existing sidewalk location and in the case of
new subdivisions, sidewalk location shall be as follows:



   (1)   Five (5) feet from and parallel to the back of the curb.



   (2)   If no curb exists, parallel to and adjacent to the lot line.



The common council may permit exceptions where special conditions warrant.



(Code 1982, § 12-501; Ord. No. 697, 3-4-91)



Sec. 14-78.  Specifications.



   All sidewalks within this city shall be constructed and maintained in
compliance with specifications therefor promulgated in the city.



(Code 1982, § 12-502)



Sec. 14-79.  Discharge of rainwater.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the rainwater from any
building discharge on and over the sidewalks.



(Code 1982, § 12-510)



Sec. 14-80.  Reserved.



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 951, adopted Apr. 21, 2003, repealed § 14-80,
which pertained to the duty to keep sidewalks clear of snow, and derived from
Code 1982, § 12-520; and Ord. No. 589, § 520, adopted Feb. 3, 1986. For
similar provisions see subsection 9-27(4).



Sec. 14-81.  Sidewalk snow and ice control.



   Property owners are responsible for controlling snow and ice buildup on
sidewalks.



(Code 1982, § 12-521)  (Ord. No. 1112, 11-2-09)



Sec. 14-82.  Building permits required prior to building of sidewalks and
driveways.



   (a)   A building permit shall be required with the requisite fees
associated therewith prior to the construction of sidewalks and driveways
required by the city.



   (b)   Section 301(b)(7) of the Uniform Building Code adopted in
section 6-26 adopted by the city is repealed and all other provisions of such
Code inconsistent with this section are likewise repealed.



   (c)   Unless changed by ordinance of the city, the provision
exempting sidewalks and driveways in any future edition of the Uniform
Building Code which may hereafter be adopted by the city, will likewise be
repealed and ineffective.



(Code 1982, § 12-532)



Sec. 14-83.  Restricted.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, install,
place, or to permit the erection, construction, installation, placing of any
encroachment upon or above any portion of any residential sidewalk in the
city.



(Ord. No. 703, 6-3-91)



Sec. 14-84.  Removal.



   Whenever any encroachment exists in violation of these provisions,
written notice shall be given the owner of record requiring removal within
fourteen (14) days. If the owner of record fails to remove the encroachment
within the time specified in the notice, the city shall remove the
encroachment at the owner's expense.



(Ord. No. 703, 6-3-91)



Sec. 14-85.   Public sidewalk maintenance.



   The maintenance of sidewalks located in city right-of-way including,
but not limited to, the area between the property line and street curb shall
be the responsibility of the owner, manager or lessee of the abutting
property.



   Such persons are jointly and severally liable for the maintenance and
replacement when required by the City of Spearfish according to the criteria
pertaining to sidewalk replacement.



(Ord. No. 1165, 11-19-12)



Secs. 14-86—14-100.     Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. ASSEMBLIES, PARADES, PROCESSIONS*



   *Cross reference—Consuming, blending, possessing, alcoholic beverages
in public places prohibited and the disposal of containers containing
alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17.



Sec. 14-101.  Permit required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize or hold or participate
in any parade, meeting, assembly, outdoor concert or procession of persons
and/or vehicles on the streets, sidewalks or public parks of this city unless
such activity shall have first been authorized by a written permit issued by
the chief of police therefor.



(Code 1982, § 7-100; Ord. No. 746, 10-4-93; Ord. No. 835, 11-17-97)



Sec. 14-102.  Application for permit.



   The application for a permit required by this article shall contain the
following:



   (1)   The name and address of the applicant.



   (2)   The name and address of the person the applicant represents.



   (3)   The exact time and date of commencement and termination of
each act or activity desired.



   (4)   The purpose, location and route of such act or activity, if
applicable.



   (5)   The person, group, association or body to be authorized under
the permit to do such act or activity and the number of persons to
participate.



   (6)   The age of any minors who may participate in such activity,
and the name of the person who will be responsible for such minors.



   (7)   Such other relevant information as the chief of police may
require for the investigation of the applicant.



(Code 1982, § 7-101)



Sec. 14-103.  Contents of permit.



   Upon issuance of a permit required by this article, the same shall
contain therein all information contained in the application therefor and be
signed by the chief of police and a signed copy of the same shall be kept
with the application, both on file in the office of the chief of police.



(Code 1982, § 7-102)



Sec. 14-104.  Matters considered in determining issuance of permit.



   In deciding whether to issue a permit under the provisions of this
article, the chief of police shall consider:



   (1)   Number of persons to participate.



   (2)   Anticipated traffic conditions at the time and date proposed
for the activity.



   (3)   Schedule of other similar activities for which permits may
have been issued.



   (4)   Adequacy of adult supervision for any minors scheduled to
participate.



   (5)   Availability of city personnel whose presence on duty may be
required by the activity and by the necessity to protect the general public.



   (6)   Adequacy of public facilities in the location proposed for the
activity to accommodate the proposed activity and the normal public use of
public facilities in the proposed location.



(Code 1982, § 7-103)



Sec. 14-105.  Issuance.



   The permit required by the provisions of this article shall be issued
by the chief of police upon application therefor; provided, however, that
such permit may be denied or refused if it shall appear that the applicant
therefor or the act or activity requested by such application shall violate
any applicable provision of the Code, state law or city ordinance.



(Code 1982, § 7-104)



Sec. 14-106.  Time lapse between application, activity.



   It shall be unlawful for any activity authorized under this article to
commence within five (5) days from the date of the application therefor.



(Code 1982, § 7-105)



Sec. 14-107.  Deviation from permit.



   It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any act or
activity for which a permit has been granted under the provisions of this
article to deviate from or alter any of the terms or contents of such permit.



(Code 1982, § 7-106)



Sec. 14-108.  Display of permit.



   Every person having a permit issued under the provisions of this
article shall have such permit in his possession during the activity
permitted thereby, and shall display such permit upon the request of any law
enforcement officer. Failure to display such permit shall be deemed a
misdemeanor.



(Code 1982, § 7-107)



Sec. 14-109.  Revocation of permit.



   Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked
by the chief of police for the violation by the permittee of any applicable
provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance.



(Code 1982, § 7-108)



Sec. 14-110.  Dispersal of activity.



   Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall
be obstructed by a crowd, congregation, parade, meeting, assembly or
procession, or the conduct of two (2) or more persons, except as authorized
by any permit issued pursuant to this article, the persons comprising such
group shall disperse or move when directed to do so by a police officer. It
shall be unlawful for any person to refuse and such refusal shall be a
violation of this article.



(Code 1982, § 7-109)



Sec. 14-111.  Enforcement.



   Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the authority of any
officer to arrest a person engaged in any act or activity granted a permit
under this article, if the conduct of such person violates the laws of the
state, provisions of this Code or ordinances of this city, or unreasonably
obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of this city, or engages in acts
that cause, or would tend to cause, a breach of the peace.



(Code 1982, § 7-110)



Sec. 14-112.  Outdoor concerts regulated.



   (a)   Any outdoor concert consisting of live or recorded music held
in a public park or other public area shall end by 9:30 p.m. and shall be
conducted in such a manner as to not disturb the peace of the city.



   (b)   This section shall not apply to community designated events.



(Ord. No. 746, 10-4-93; Ord. No. 1134, 4-4-11)



Secs. 14-113—14-130.  Reserved.



ARTICLE V. USE OF MUNICIPAL RIGHTS-OF-WAY (ROW)
AND OTHER PROPERTIES*



   *Cross reference—Utilities, Ch. 18.



Sec. 14-131.  Supervision.



   The city engineer, or his or her designee, shall supervise all
excavations made for any purpose in the streets, alleys or public ground, and
shall require compliance with all the requirements of this article.



(Code 1982, § 18-300; Ord. 1221, 12-21-15)



Sec. 14-132.  Permit required.



   (a)   No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation in or
under any street, parking, sidewalk, alley or public ground without first
having obtained a ROW permit and a contractor’s license from the building
and development department. The permit will not be required to start
emergency work as may be necessary to protect existing structures. However,
the permit shall be obtained the morning of the first working day after such
work has commenced.



   (b)   Any person, other than a person holding a special event
permit, desiring to block, partially occupy, or interrupt the traffic flow of
any ROW for 30 minutes or more for any reason, shall be required to have a
ROW permit.



   (c)   The construction of driveways and sidewalks within the city's
corporate limits pursuant to a City of Spearfish building permit will include
a ROW permit at no extra charge.



   (d)   Any person starting any work in a municipal ROW without a ROW
permit shall be subject to fines set forth in section 1-14.



(Code 1982, § 18-310; Ord. No. 880, 4-17-00; Ord. 1221, 12-21-15)



Sec. 14-133.  Application for permit.



   (a)   Any person requesting a ROW permit shall make application to
the city engineer, or his or her designee.



   (b)   At a minimum, the application shall include the exact location
of the excavation, a detailed description of the work to be performed, the
purpose for the excavation, an illustration of the areas to be disturbed or
removed, and a timeline for the replacement of all materials. The city
engineer may approve temporary repairs in the event of inclement weather.



   (c)   Additional submittal documents, such as traffic control plans
and utility plans or profiles, may be required as determined by the city
engineer, based on the size or complexity of the project or other factors.



   (d)   Only licensed contractors may perform curb or street repairs.



(Code 1982, § 18-311; Ord. 1221, 12-21-15)



Sec. 14-134.  Permit fee.



   The fee for a ROW permit shall be the minimum base charge set by
resolution, per excavation, up to and including 400 feet. Beyond 400 feet,
the permit fee will be charged by the foot, commensurate with the base charge
listed above. A service repair permit shall be obtained in lieu of a ROW
permit for repair of water or sewer service lines. The permit fee for the
repair of city water and sewer service lines shall be waived.



(Code 1982, § 18-312; Ord. 1221, 12-21-15)



Sec. 14-135.  Condition of issuance.



   (a)   Every application for a ROW permit that involves excavation in
or under any street, parking area, or sidewalk shall be accompanied by:



      (1)   A certificate of insurance showing that the applicant
has in effect a statutory workmen's compensation insurance policy in the
amount of limits applicable for the State of South Dakota;



      (2)   A certificate of insurance showing that the applicant
has occurrence-based commercial general liability insurance or equivalent
form, with a limit of not less than $1,000,000 for each occurrence. If such
insurance contains a general aggregate limit, it shall apply separately to
this ROW permit or be no less than two times the occurrence limit. Such
insurance shall add the City of Spearfish and its employees as additional
insureds. Such certificate shall contain a statement to the effect that the
policy cannot be canceled or substantially altered without ten (10) days
prior written notice to the city; and



      (3)   A certificate of insurance showing that the applicant
has automobile liability insurance, with a limit of not less than $1,000,000
each accident. Such insurance shall include coverage for owned, hired, and
non-owned vehicles. Such certificate shall contain a statement to the effect
that the policy cannot be canceled or substantially altered without ten (10)
days prior written notice to the city.



   (b)   Each ROW permit issued shall contain a statement and shall be
issued only upon the express condition that the permittee shall refill the
excavation in accordance with the instructions of the city engineer, and
restore the pavement or surfacing, as the case may be, to its former
condition, and maintain it in such condition for a period of three (3) years
from the time of completion of the work authorized by the ROW permit.



(Code 1982, § 18-313; Ord. No. 780, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 880, 4-17-00; Ord.
1221, 12-21-15)



Sec. 14-136.  Refilling excavations.



   The city engineer shall adopt, amend and enforce a code of rules and
regulations which shall set forth the manner in which various types of
excavations shall be replaced.



(Code 1982, § 18-314; Ord. 1221, 12-21-15)



Sec. 14-137.  Restoring pavements or street surfacing to meet city
specifications.



   It shall be the duty of the city engineer to keep on file a copy of all
ROW permits, and to conduct periodic inspections of pavements or other street
surfacing disturbed pursuant to such permits. If a pavement or surface is not
restored to current city specifications, notice thereof shall be sent to the
permittee. The permittee shall return the pavement or surface to an approved
condition within a time period as specified by the city engineer. If the
permittee fails to restore and maintain such pavement or the surfacing
thereof, the city engineer shall arrange for the completion of the necessary
repairs. The original permittee shall pay a penalty to the city equal to one
and one-half (1.5) times the cost of the repairs. No other permit shall be
issued to an individual, or any person in his or her behalf, until
satisfaction of the penalty provided by this section has occurred. The city
engineer shall be consulted for typical street patching requirements.



(Code 1982, § 18-315; Ord. No. 1044, 1-2-07; Ord. 1221, 12-21-15)



Sec. 14-138.  Protection of public and surrounding properties.



   (a)   Any person receiving a permit to make excavations in or upon
any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground shall, during the progress and
continuance of the work, erect and maintain around the project area, both by
day and night, suitable guards, fences, lanterns and signals so as to prevent
injury to persons, animals orvehicles on account of such excavations. Such
lanterns shall be kept lighted from sundown until sunrise. Traffic control
will be determined by the city engineer, based on the specific project and
its proximity to roadways. If a traffic control plan is required, the
contractor will be required to use South Dakota Department of Transportation
(SDDOT) standard traffic control plates, which will be filed with the ROW
permit application. Larger projects may require traffic control plans
implemented by a SDDOT-approved contractor.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or occupant of any
lot to make or cause to be made any excavation adjacent to any street, alley,
public ground, sidewalk, or traveled road or roadway, unless appropriate
measures are implemented to prevent the injury of any person or animal.



   (c)   Any person making an excavation shall use all appropriate
control measure to prevent pollutants from entering neighboring properties
and waters of the state, including municipal storm drain conveyances and
natural drainage ways



(Code 1982, § 18-316; Ord. 1221, 12-21-15)



Sec. 14-139.  Reserved.



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 1221, adopted Dec. 21, 2015, repealed §
14-139, which pertained to the duty to safely guard excavations near
rights-of-way and derived from Code 1982, § 18-317. For similar provision
see subsection 14-138(b).



Sec. 14-140.  Ditch compaction.



   The city will not allow water soaking for compaction of trenches
resulting from utility placement or repairs. All trenches will be
mechanically tamped and compacted to a compaction factor of ninety-five
percent (95%) or greater. Testing of the trench compaction may be required,
at the discretion of the city engineer. Any person violating this article
shall be subject to fines set forth in section 1-14.



(Ord. No. 602, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 1044, 1-2-07; Ord. 1221, 12-21-15)



Secs. 14-141—14-155.    Reserved.



ARTICLE VI. CEMETERIES*



   *Cross references—Consuming, blending, possessing, alcoholic
beverages in public places prohibited and the disposal of containers
containing alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17; animals running at large
prohibited, § 5-1.



   State law references—Cemeteries generally, SDCL Ch. 34-27; authority
of city relative to cemeteries, SDCL § 9-32-13.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 14-156.  Scope of article.



   The cemetery owned and operated by the city and known as Rose Hill
Cemetery shall be governed, managed, and operated under the provisions of
this article. A cemetery advisory board may be appointed by the mayor to give
input to the city on procedures and policies of the cemetery.



(Code 1982, § 6-200; Ord. No. 599, § 6-200, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-157.  Employment of parks, recreation and forestry technician.



   The common council shall employ a parks, recreation and forestry
technician and such other help as may be necessary to properly tend and care
for the cemetery.



(Code 1982, § 6-210; Ord. No. 599, § 6-210, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-158.  Parks, recreation, and forestry technician's duties generally.



   It shall be the duty of the parks, recreation, and forestry technician
to oversee the digging of graves; to properly care for and irrigate all
trees, shrubbery, flowers, and grass growing in the cemetery; to keep the
driveways, walks, and fences in good condition; to see that all markers and
monuments are not defaced or destroyed; to protect the property of the
cemetery; and to see that the provisions of this article, rules and
regulations of the council governing the cemetery are complied with in every
way.



(Code 1982, § 6-211; Ord. No. 599, § 6-211, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-159.  Records generally.



   The public works office shall keep all records of the cemetery and
shall procure suitable books, blank forms, or other records, written and
electronic for the purpose. A map of the cemetery shall be kept in the public
works office and at the cemetery. The public works administrator shall
designate a public works employee to sell all lots and sign the permit for
disposition of dead human remains.



(Code 1982, § 6-212; Ord. No. 599, § 6-212, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-160.  Rules, regulations.



   The administration and operation of the cemetery shall be under the
public works administrator, who may make such rules and regulations, which
shall be subject to the approval of the common council and kept on file in
the public works office.



(Code 1982, § 6-233; Ord. No. 599, § 6-213, 9-1586; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-161.  Handling of funds.



   All money received for the sale of cemetery lots, digging of graves,
special care, and other services about the cemetery shall be paid directly to
the city who shall give the proper receipts therefore, and shall be placed in
the general fund, which funds shall be used for the payment of the purchase
price of grounds, maintenance and improvements of the cemetery.



(Code 1982, § 6-242; Ord. No. 599, § 6-220, 9-1586; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-162.  Special conditions for blocks F and G of the cemetery.



   The following rules will be followed:



   (1)   All markers in these designated areas of the cemetery shall be
placed on the west side of the space facing east. Footstones shall be flush
with the surface of the ground.



   (2)   Concrete borders will not be allowed. Corner markers, if
desired, may be placed at the property owner's expense, and shall be flush
with the ground and no larger than four (4) square inches in surface area.



   (3)   No planting of any living trees, shrubs, flowers or plants is
allowed upon grave units, lots or in alleyways.



   (4)   Fences or hedges around or on grave units or around lots are
prohibited.



(Code 1982, § 6-235; Ord. No. 599, § 6-235, 9-1586; Ord. No. 799, 4-15-96;
Ord. No. 860, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-163.  Plantings of trees, shrubs, flowers or plants.



   The planting of trees, shrubs, flowers or plants shall be prohibited at
the cemetery including gravespaces and the Rose Garden. As existing plantings
located on graves or in alleyways die, they shall not be replaced. Trees may
be planted as authorized by the parks, recreation, and forestry technician.



(Code 1982, § 6-236; Ord. No. 599, § 6-236, 9-1586; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-164.  Permanent headstone.



   A permanent headstone/marker should be placed within two (2) years of
burial.



(Ord. No. 799, 4-15-96; Ord. No. 1295, 11-19-18)



Sec. 14-165.  Concrete borders.



   Concrete borders around graves will not be allowed. Corner markers, if
desired, may be placed at the property owner's expense, and shall be flush
with the ground and no larger than four (4) square inches in surface area.
Any concrete border repair, when impracticable to be flush with the ground,
is grandfathered. If the curbing becomes unsightly, the family will be
responsible to repair the curbing. A reasonable attempt shall be made to
contact the family to repair the curbing. If there is no response from the
family or they are unable to be contacted, the city may remove the curbing
and replace the area with grass.



(Ord. No. 860, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-166.  Permanent vases.



   Permanent vases shall only be placed within the grave space on the
sides of the concrete monument bases.



(Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-167.  Removal of grave markers prior to burial.



   A grave marker may be removed before grave digging and then the marker
replaced once the grave has been prepared. The cost for marker removal and
replacement will be at the owner's expense.



(Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 1295, 11-19-18)



Sec. 14-168.  Grave markers.



   One (1) upright marker shall be allowed per space. Additional markers
and footstones shall be placed flush with the ground.  The location of
markers on all graves shall be determined and at the discretion of the
cemetery staff.



(Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 988, 7-23-04)



Sec. 14-169.  Monument permit.



   A permit shall be required before placement, repair, engraving, etc. of
monuments. The permit shall be obtained through the cemetery office when the
following information has been furnished:



   (1)   Name of deceased.



   (2)   Block, section, lot and space ID of which monument placement
or work is to be done.



   (3)   Name of the monument company doing the placement or work.



   (4)   Type of work to be done and date placement or work is to be
completed.



   (5)   A diagram of the grave space(s) showing exact placement of the
monument(s).



(Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 1295, 11-19-18)



Secs. 14-170—14-180.  Reserved.



DIVISION 2. LOTS



Sec. 14-181.  Fees.



   All cemetery fees are set by Resolution and on file with the City
Finance Office.



(Code 1982, § 6-231; Ord. No. 595, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 599, § 6-240, 9-15-86;
Ord. No. 700, 4-15-91; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02; Ord. No. 1295, 11-19-18)



Sec. 14-182.  Settlement of sales transaction.



   All cemetery lots or graves spaces shall be settled for at the time of
purchase. No burials shall be made upon a lot for which the city has not
received settlement. Upon receipt of full payment, a perpetual care
certificate will be issued. Should there be an interment on a cemetery space
for which full payment has not been made, the city reserves the right to
disinter the remains and remove the burial, together with any monument or
other structure thereon, to some other portion of the cemetery equal in price
to the amount paid on such space, after the actual cost of removal has been
deducted.



(Code 1982, § 6-240; Ord. No. 599, § 6-241, 9-1586)



Sec. 14-183.  Resale of lots restricted.



   All cemetery lots or grave spaces shall be used for burial purposes
only and shall not be resold without the consent of the designated city
employee(s).



(Code 1982, § 6-241; Ord. No. 599, § 6-242, 9-1586; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-184.  Purchase of spaces at the Rose Garden.



   Spaces at the Rose Garden for burial and spreading of ashes shall be
purchased only in designated areas. Those areas shall be determined by the
designated city employee(s).



(Code 1982, § 6-250; Ord. No. 599, § 6-250, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-185.  Care of ashes.



   When the ashes of a cremated body are to be interred in the cemetery or
Rose Garden, the ashes must be in a durable urn or in a strong metal or
concrete case. When burying in the Rose Garden, the container shall be no
larger than one (1) foot by one (1) foot.



(Code 1982, § 6-251; Ord. No. 599, § 6-251, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-186.  Nameplates in Rose Garden.



   All five-inch by eight-inch nameplates at the Rose Garden shall have
the deceased's name, date of birth and date of death printed on them. The
five-inch by eight-inch plates shall be purchased through the cemetery office.



(Code 1982, § 6-252; Ord. No. 599, § 6-252, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02;
Ord. No. 1295, 11-19-18)



Sec. 14-187.  Reserved.



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 1038, adopted Oct. 2, 2006, repealed §
14-187, which pertained to fees for burial in Rose Garden. See the Code
Comparative Table.



Sec. 14-188.  Items placed on graves.



   (a)   Wreaths and artificial flowers may be allowed on graves from
October 1 through April 1. Items will be allowed on graves three (3) days
prior to the observed Memorial Day holiday and ten (10) days following the
observed Memorial Day holiday. Items will be allowed on graves the Thursday
before until Sunday on Easter, Mother's Day, and Father's Day. From April 1
to October 1, no items may be placed on the graves with the exception of cone
vases, which may be placed with fresh cut flowers. Items may be placed on
grave markers and bases as long as they do not protrude past the marker base.
Items that are located on grave markers or bases will be removed if they
protrude past the marker base. Flowers will be allowed in permanent vases
year round. All flags and other decorations, funeral designs, cut flowers,
and all other items placed on lots or graves will be removed by the parks,
recreation, and forestry technician when the same become unsightly, damaged,
or are not placed in compliance with these sections.



   (b)   Artificial flowers and wreaths shall be removed at the
expiration of time limits. If not, such decorations will be removed by the
parks, recreation, and forestry technician and held for fourteen (14) days.
If not then reclaimed, the decorations may be discarded.



   (c)   No glass containers or items of any type will be permitted in
the cemetery. All glass containers or items located in the cemetery will be
removed.



   (d)   In no case shall the city employees be responsible for
articles which may be left on any lot or grave. In all cases, the right is
given to the city to remove from any lot or grave any article which is
unsightly or otherwise objectionable.



(Code 1982, § 6-236.1; Ord. No. 613, § 6-236.1, 4-6-87; Ord. No. 927,
8-5-02; Ord. No. 1295, 11-19-18)



Secs. 14-189—14-205.  Reserved.



DIVISION 3. INTERMENT



Sec. 14-206.  Burial applications.



   No burial in Rose Hill Cemetery or the Rose Garden Cemetery will be
allowed until a burial application is completed by the designated city
employee with the following information:



   (1)   Name and address of applicant.



   (2)   Applicant's relationship to the deceased.



   (3)   Name, date of birth, and date of death of the person to be
buried.



   (4)   Block, section, lot, and space number of which burial is to be
made.



   (5)   Name of the mortician in charge of the body.



   (6)   Date and time of graveside service.



(Code 1982, § 6-230; Ord. No. 599, § 6-231, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-210.  Vault covers.



   Vault covers shall not be allowed on graves.



(Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Secs. 14-211—14-230.  Reserved.



Sec. 14-207.  Issuance of burial permit; procedures.



   The designated city employee within the public works department shall
approve the burial application setting forth the grave, lot, and block number
upon which the burial is to be made. After procuring the burial application,
the city will stake and inspect the grave space. Double burials will be
allowed if prior arrangements have been made with the public works office.
Temporary grave markers must be used by all mortuaries. The city will not be
held responsible for any temporary markers. Under normal circumstances, the
city will not be responsible for actual digging of the graves.



(Code 1982, §§ 6-230, 6-232; Ord. No. 599, §§ 6-231, 6-232, 9-15-86; Ord.
No. 700, 4-15-91; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-208.  Casket enclosures.



   No person four (4) years of age and over shall be buried in the
cemetery, unless the casket is enclosed in a concrete or steel container. No
wooden or fiberglass outside containers shall be allowed.



(Code 1982, § 6-233; Ord. No. 599, § 6-233, 9-15-86)



Sec. 14-209.  Inadvertent burial or damage.



   Any person who purchases any cemetery lot shall, by such purchase, be
deemed to have agreed, on behalf of himself and his heirs and assigns, to
hold the city harmless for any damages resulting from an inadvertent burial
on the wrong lot or for any damage to any stone, marker or other improvement
placed on the lot so purchased.



(Code 1982, § 6-234; Ord. No. 599, § 6-234, 9-15-86)



DIVISION 4. PERPETUAL CARE



Sec. 14-231.  Perpetual care fund created.



   The common council shall create and maintain a permanent fund from the
gifts or bequests made by any person by will or otherwise, from all sums
derived from the sale of perpetual care, and from sums that may be from time
to time added thereto by the common council, and shall use the income
therefrom for the improvement and care of the cemetery.



(Code 1982, § 6-234; Ord. No. 599, § 6-221, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-232.  Investment of fund.



   The perpetual care fund shall be invested with interest in such amounts
as may be determined by the finance officer and upon security as acceptable
according to state law.



(Ord. No. 599, § 6-222, 9-15-86)



Sec. 14-233.  Records and accounts of finance officer.



   The city finance officer shall keep a permanent record of all moneys
received for the perpetual care fund, and the amounts paid in or set aside
for general improvement, and shall keep an accurate account of the interest
received and collected and how expended.



(Code 1982, § 6-236; Ord. No. 599, § 6-223, 9-15-86)



Sec. 14-234.  Audit.



   The books and accounts of the finance officer and the securities on
which the perpetual care fund is loaned shall be audited as required for all
accounts of the city by the South Dakota Legislative Audit.



(Code 1982, § 6-237; Ord. No. 599, § 6-224, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Sec. 14-235.  Extent of care.



   Perpetual care consists of watering the lot, mowing, trimming, raking,
refilling as necessary, reseeding as needed, and all care necessary to
maintain the property to the best of the ability of the city.



(Code 1982, § 6-230; Ord. No. 599, § 6-230, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 927, 8-5-02)



Secs. 14-236—14-250.  Reserved.



ARTICLE VII. PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS*



   *Cross references—Consuming, blending, possessing, alcoholic
beverages in public places prohibited and the disposal of containers
containing alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17; animals running at large
prohibited, § 5-1; subdivisions, Ch. 15A; street and park trees, § 19-71 et
seq.; zoning, App. A.



   State law reference—Municipal parks and recreational facilities, SDCL
Ch. 9-38.



Sec. 14-251.  System established.



   There is hereby established in the city a system of public recreation
and playgrounds, and for such purpose the city may acquire, equip and
maintain land, buildings, or other recreational facilities, and expand its
funds therefor.



(Code 1982, § 6-100)



Sec. 14-252.  Parks designated.



   The city's parks and campground, together with all structures,
buildings, improvements and equipment thereon, are the property of the city
and shall be and constitute the city parks.



(Code 1982, § 6-101)



Sec. 14-253.  Management.



   Until and unless otherwise provided for, the management of the city
parks shall be in the hands of the public works administrator and the
supervision shall rest with the common council.



(Code 1982, § 6-102)



Sec. 14-254.  Closure authorized.



   Upon determination that it would be in the best interests of the city
that the city parks or any part thereof be closed to the public for any
reason, the common council shall, without further notice, have the authority
to close all or any part of any city park to public use.



(Code 1982, § 6-103)



ARTICLE VIII. ART IN PUBLIC PLACES



Sec. 14-301.  Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to provide a means to fund the
acquisition of artwork by the City of Spearfish, which shall become the
city's collection; to provide a means to select artwork for the collection;
to provide for the display of the collection and to provide for the
maintenance and repair of the artwork in the collection.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-302.  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   City means the City of Spearfish.



   Committee means the art in public places committee created and codified
in § 14-304 of this article.



   Construction project means the construction, rehabilitation,
renovation, remodeling, equipping or improvement of any building, street,
park, utility line or other improvement, either private or for or by the city
commenced after September 1, 2005,  including all associated landscaping,
parking and the like, but excluding any improvements excepted by the city
council after a public hearing thereon.



   Commercial development means a discrete construction project other than
an individual residential unit, a residential development, or a public
facility.



   Individual residential unit means a discrete construction project
resulting in not more than one (1) single family dwelling.



   Public facility means a discrete construction project designed for use
by the general public.



   Residential development means a discrete construction project other
than an individual residential unit designed to be used primarily for human
habitation, including two (2) or more single family dwellings being built
concurrently in the same tract by the same owner or contractor.



   Artwork



      (1)   Includes, but is not limited to, a sculpture, monument,
mural, fresco, relief, painting, fountain, banner, mosaic, ceramic,
weaving,  carving and stained glass. Artwork would normally not include 
landscaping, paving, architectural ornamentation or signs; and



      (2)   Has been, or is intended to be, displayed for more than
two (2) weeks (i) in an open city-owned facility or property, (ii) on the
exterior of any city-owned facility, (iii) inside any city-owed facility in
areas designated as public areas, (iv) on any non-city property if the work
is owned by the city, installed in whole or in part with city funds, or (v)
on any non-city property if the owner has applied for its placement on
private property pursuant to § 14-311 and § 14-312 of this article.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-303.  Applicability of article.



   All entities purchasing building permits from the City of Spearfish
shall be subject to the provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-304.  Establishment of the Art in Public Places Committee.



   There is established an art in public places committee. It shall
consist of seven members appointed by the city council who shall serve
without compensation. The members shall serve for periods of three (3) years
each, except that the initial terms of two (2) of such members shall expire
on December 31, 2007, the initial terms of two such members shall expire on
December 31, 2008, and the initial terms of three (3) such members shall
expire on December 31, 2009. All members shall be eligible for reappointment.
The members shall be citizens who are actively interested in the visual arts
and civic improvement.  The function of such committee shall be to perform
the duties set forth in this article.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-305.  Establishment of the Art in Public Places Fund.



   There is established a fund known as the "art in public places fund"
which shall be credited with funds obtained as art in public places
allocations, secured through grants, as donations, or as otherwise obtained
or determined by the city council.  This fund shall be maintained by the
city finance officer and shall be used for the acquisition, installation,
improvement, and maintenance of artwork to be displayed in the city, the
administration of the art in public places program, and for community public
art education programs not to exceed five percent (5%) of the annual budget.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec.  14-306.  Requirements of entities subject to this article.



   (a)   Before the city issues a valid building permit pursuant to §
6-29 to any entity subject to this article, the entity shall fulfill one of
the following:



      (1)   An application for placement of artwork on private
property has been submitted to the committee and approved by the city council
pursuant to § 14-311 and § 14-312 of this article; or



      (2)   An application for acceptance of artwork to be donated
to the city has been submitted to the committee and approved by the city
council pursuant to § 14-313 and § 14-314 of this article; or



      (3)   The art in public places allocation has been paid.



   (b)   If an entity does not fulfill subpart (1) of this section
prior to the completion of the construction project, the city may assess the
art in public places allocation pursuant to § 14-307 of this article and
this assessment therefore shall become a lien against the real property.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-307.  Art in Public Places Allocation.



   The art in public places allocation shall be 5% of the building permit
cost which is set aside for the city's art in public places program pursuant
to § 14-306(1)(c) of this article and shall be as follows:



   (1)   The total building valuation upon which the permit cost is set
shall be computed using the latest building valuation data as set forth by
the International Building Code unless, in the opinion of the building
official, a different valuation should be used.



   (2)   If any project is partially funded from any source which
precludes art as an object of expenditure of funds, then this section shall
apply only to the amount of funds not so restricted.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-308.  Administration.



   The committee shall administer the provisions of this article relating
to acquisition and display of artwork. The committee shall submit to the city
council, not later than March of each year, a report of its activities for
the prior year.  The committee shall also prepare and submit to the city
council, no later than March of each year, an annual plan for the art in
public places program. 



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-309.  Guidelines.



   The committee shall adopt guidelines:



   (1)    To identify suitable artwork for city buildings;



   (2)   To facilitate the preservation of artwork;



   (3)    To prescribe a method or methods for competitive selection of
artwork for display;



   (4)   To prescribe procedures for the selection, acquisition and
display of artwork;



   (5)   To prescribe procedures for the maintenance  of artwork; and



   (6)    To set forth any other matter appropriate to the
administration of this article.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-310.  Selection and display standards.



   In performing its duties with respect to artwork, the committee shall
give special attention to the following matters:



   (1)   Conceptual compatibility of the design with the immediate
environment of the site;



   (2)   Appropriateness of the design to the function of the site;



   (3)   Compatibility of the design and location with a unified design
character or historical character of the site;



   (4)   Creation of an internal sense of order and desirable
environment for the general community by the design and location of the
artwork;



   (5)   Accessibility to the viewing and appreciation by the public;



   (6)   Preservation and integration of natural features for the
project;



   (7)   Appropriateness of the materials, textures, colors and design
to the expression of the design concept; and



   (8)   Representation of a broad variety of tastes within the
community and the provision of a balanced inventory of artwork to insure a
variety of style, design and media throughout the community.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-311.  Application procedure for placement of artwork on private
property.



   An application for placement of artwork on private property shall be
submitted to the committee and shall include:



   (1)   Preliminary sketches, photographs, or other documentation of
sufficient nature to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork;



   (2)   An appraisal or other evidence of value of the proposed
artwork, including acquisition and installation costs;



   (3)   Preliminary plans containing such detailed information as may
be required by the committee to adequately evaluate the location of the
artwork in relation to the proposed development, and its compatibility with
the proposed development, including compatibility with the character of
adjacent conforming development parcels and existing neighborhood if
necessary to evaluate the proposal; and



   (4)   A narrative statement to be submitted to the committee to
demonstrate that the artwork will be displayed in an area open and freely
available to the general public, or otherwise provide public accessibility in
an equivalent manner based on the characteristics of the artwork or its
placement on the site.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-312.  Review of application for placement of artwork on private
property.



   Completed applications shall be submitted to the committee for review
and approval of the artwork.  The committee's recommendation as to the
approval or disapproval of the application shall be forwarded to the city
council which shall have the sole authority to accept or reject or
conditionally accept the application.  Unapproved applications may be
resubmitted to the committee.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-313.  Application procedure for acceptance of artwork donated to the
city.



   An application for acceptance of artwork to be donated to the city
shall be submitted to the committee and shall include:



   (1)   Preliminary sketches, photographs, models or other
documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the
proposed artwork;



   (2)   An appraisal or other evidence of the value of the proposed
artwork, including acquisition and installation costs.



   (3)   Other information as may be required by the committee to
adequately evaluate the proposed donation of artwork.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05) 



Sec. 14-314.  Review of application for acceptance of artwork donated to the
city.



   Completed applications shall be submitted to the committee for review
and approval of the donation.  The committee's recommendation as to the
approval or disapproval of the donation shall be forwarded to the city
council which shall have the sole authority to accept or reject or
conditionally accept the donation.  Unapproved applications may be
resubmitted to the committee.



(Ord. No. 1015, passed 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-315.  Artwork purchased with public funds.



   The committee may recommend to the city council the purchase of artwork
with funds from the "art in public places fund," with city funds, or with
grants procured by the city.  A recommendation shall include the type of
artwork considered, an analysis of the constraints applicable to placement of
the artwork, and the costs of acquisition and installation of the artwork.



Ord. 1015, passed 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-316.  Installation of artwork financed with city funds of private
property.



   The committee may install artwork financed or installed either wholly
or in part with funds from the "art in public places fund," with city funds,
or with grants procured by the city, on privately owned property, but only
pursuant to a written agreement between the committee, acting on behalf of
the city, and the owner specifying the proprietary interests in the artwork
and specifying other provisions deemed necessary or desirable by the city
attorney. In addition, such written agreement shall specify that the private
property owner shall assure:



   (1)   That the installation of the artwork will be done in a manner
which will protect the artwork and the public;



   (2)    That the artwork will be maintained in good condition; and



   (3)   That insurance and indemnification will be provided as is
appropriate.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-317.  Display of art in public places.



   (a)   Artwork selected and implemented pursuant to the provisions of
this article may be placed in, on or about any public place or, by agreement
with the owner thereof, any private property with substantial public exposure
in and around the city.  Artwork owned by the city may also be loaned for
exhibition elsewhere, upon such terms and conditions as deemed necessary by
the committee.



   (b)   City officials responsible for the design and construction of
public improvements in the city shall make appropriate space available for
the placement of artwork, in consultation with the committee. The committee
shall advise the department responsible for the particular public improvement
of the committee's decision regarding the design, execution and placement of
artwork in connection with such project. For any proposed artwork requiring
an extraordinary operation or maintenance expense, the committee shall obtain
prior written approval of the department head responsible for such operation
or maintenance before approving the same.



   (c)    Whenever feasible, installation, maintenance, alteration,
refinishing and moving of artwork shall be done in consultation with the
artist.



   (d)    The committee shall maintain a detailed record of all
artwork, including site drawings, photographs, designs, names of artists and
names of architects whenever feasible.  The committee shall attempt to give
appropriate recognition to the artists and publicity and promotion regarding
artwork.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-318.  Ownership and maintenance of artwork.



   (a)   All artwork acquired with funds from the "art in public places
fund," with city funds, or with grants procured by the city, or by donation
pursuant to this article pursuant to § 14-313 and § 14-314 shall be
acquired in the name of, and title shall be held by, the city.



   (b)   All artwork placed on the private property pursuant to §
14-311 and § 14-312 shall remain the property of the applicant; the
obligation to provide all maintenance necessary to preserve the artwork in
good condition shall remain with the owner of the site. 



      (1)   Maintenance of artwork shall include without limitation:
preservation of the artwork in good condition to the satisfaction of the
committee, protection of the artwork against physical defacement, mutilation
or alteration, and securing and maintaining insurance to be determined by the
City of Spearfish. 



      (2)   In addition to all other remedies provided by law, in
the event the owner fails to maintain the artwork, upon reasonable notice,
the city may perform all necessary repairs, maintenance, or secure insurance,
and the costs therefor shall become a lien against the real property.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-319.  Removal or alteration of artwork.



   Artwork installed on or integrated into a construction project pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall not be removed or altered without the
approval of the city council.  If such artwork is knowingly removed or
altered without prior approval, the City of Spearfish may pursue any
available civil or criminal remedies or penalties.



(Ord. No. 1015, passed 8-15-05)



Sec. 14-320.  Exemptions.



   The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:



   (1)    All artwork in the collections of, or on display at, or under
the auspices of, the High Plains Heritage Center, Spearfish Public Library,
or Black Hills State University; and



   (2)    All artwork in display in private city offices or other areas
of city-owned facilities which are not generally frequented by the public.



(Ord. No. 1015, 8-15-05)



CHAPTER 15 RESERVED*



   *Editor's note—Ord. No. 914, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 2002, repealed
Ch. 15, in its entirety, which pertained to subdivisions. Section 2 of said
ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 15A. See the Code
Comparative Table for a detailed analysis.



CHAPTER 15A SUBDIVISIONS*




   Art. I.   In General, §§ 15A-1—15A-20





   Art. II.   Procedure, §§ 15A-22—15A-40





   Art. III.   Requirements for Documents to Be Submitted, §§
15A-41—15A-60





   Art. IV.   Variances, §§ 15A41—15A-80





   Art. V.   General Requirements and Minimum Standards of Design and
Development, §§ 15A-81—15A-97




   *Editor's note—Ord. No. 914, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 2002, repealed
former Ch. 15, in its entirety, which pertained to subdivisions. Section 2 of
said ordinance enacted provisions to be designated as a new Ch. 15A. See the
Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion.



   Note—The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city adopted in
ordinance number 507 on June 7, 1982 as amended is on file in the office of
the finance officer.



   Cross references—Consuming, blending, possessing, alcoholic beverages
in public places prohibited and the disposal of containers containing
alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17; animals, Ch. 5; keeping of fowl,
rabbits, etc., restricted, § 5-6; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6;
barbed wire and electrified fences prohibited, § 6-1; uniform abatement of
dangerous buildings code adopted, § 6-31; pole buildings prohibited in
certain areas, § 6-32; numbering of buildings, § 6-76 et seq.; fire
protection and prevention, Ch. 7; burning of trash, leaves and any other
material or product prohibited, § 7-1; fire prevention code adopted, §
7-46; routes established for vehicles transporting houses and chemicals, §
7-51 et seq.; fire lanes established by the fire chief and chief of police,
§ 7-52; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; development permit required,
§ 8-31; flood protection and prevention requirements in subdivision
proposals, § 8-55; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; peddlers'
regulations, § 10-196 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and
other public places, Ch. 14; parks and recreation areas, § 14-251 et seq.;
traffic and vehicles, Ch. 17; abandoned vehicles, § 17-501 et seq.;
vegetation, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A; utilities, Ch. 18; building sewers and
sanitary sewer system connection requirements, § 18-131 et seq.; trees on
private property, § 19-73 et seq.; sign regulations, App. A, Art. V, § 6.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 15A-1. Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Administrative official shall mean the officer appointed by the city to
administer these regulations.



   Bond shall mean security consisting of a cash deposit, surety bond,
personal guarantee, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an
amount and form satisfactory to and approved by the common council whenever a
bond is required by these regulations.



   City engineer shall mean the person designated by the common council to
furnish engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations.



   Cul-de-sac shall mean a local street with only one (1) outlet and
having an appropriate turn-around at its terminus for the safe and convenient
reversal of traffic movement.



   Dedication shall mean the designation and formal transfer of land to
the governing body for use by the public.



   Easement shall mean a grant of the right to use land for specific
purposes.



   Final plat shall mean the map, plan, or record of subdivision and any
accompanying material, as described in these regulations.



   Lot shall mean a tract, plot, or portion of subdivision or other parcel
of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or of building development.



   Lot line revision shall mean the re-subdivision of an existing platted
lot for the purpose of adjusting boundary lines.



   Low density shall mean subdivisions having an average density of one
and one-half (1.5) lots per acre or less.



   Major street plan shall mean the map showing the streets & highways
laid out, adopted or established by law, any amendments or additions thereto
resulting from the approval of subdivision plats and the subsequent filing of
such approved plats.



   Major subdivision shall mean all subdivisions of four (4) or more lots.



   Minor subdivision shall mean any subdivision containing not more than
three (3) lots.



   Preliminary plat shall mean the map, plan or record of proposed
subdivision and any accompanying material approved by the common council in
advance of the submission of a final plat.



   Sketch plan shall mean the preliminary drawing or drawings, referenced
in these regulations, indicating the proposed manner and layout of the
subdivision to be submitted for approval.



   Street, collector shall mean a road intended to move traffic from
residential streets to minor arterials.



   Street, major arterial shall mean a road of considerable continuity,
which is primarily a through-traffic artery for interconnection among large
areas.



   Street, minor arterial shall mean a road supplementary to the major
streets and primarily a means of interconnection between minor
traffic-generating areas. These streets carry traffic from collector streets
to the major arterial streets.



   Street, residential shall mean lane, minor, major or low-density
residential street intended to provide access to other roads from abutting
properties.



   Subdivision shall mean any land, vacant or improved, which is divided
or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units,
plots, or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or development,
including re-subdivision. Subdivision includes the division of land, whether
by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat,
or other recorded instrument.



   Time shall mean days for public notice and shall include the day of
notice but not the day of hearing and shall include weekends and holidays.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. I), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-2. Purpose.



   The regulations in this chapter are adopted to establish reasonable
standards of design and procedures for subdivision to protect and provide for
the public health, safety and general welfare of the city, to promote
aesthetically attractive subdivisions, and to achieve economies in the
construction and long-term maintenance of the city street system.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. II A.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-3. Conflicting regulations.



   Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations, or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever
provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement or restriction.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. II B.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-4. Jurisdiction.



   This chapter shall govern all subdivisions of land within the corporate
boundaries of the city.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. II C.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-5. Fees.



   The application fee for preliminary and final plat approval shall be
according to the planning and zoning department fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the city council.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. II D.), 2-19-02; Ord. No. 1159, 7-16-12)



Sec. 15A-6. Preparation.



   All plats shall be prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor
licensed to practice in the State of South Dakota.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. II E.), 2-19-02)



Secs. 15A-7—15A-20.  Reserved.



ARTICLE II. PROCEDURE



Sec. 15A-21.  General.



   The applicant or a designated agent shall attend each meeting where
action is requested. If represented by an agent, such designation shall be in
writing and filed with the application.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. III), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-22.  Administrative approval of plats.



   Pursuant to the authority granted in SDCL 11-3-6, the administrative
official of the City of Spearfish may approve final plats in lieu of approval
by the governing body subject to the following regulations:



   (1)   Minor subdivisions (three (3) lots or less) may be approved by
the administrative official. Major subdivisions (four (4) lots and more) may
be approved by the administrative official under the following circumstances.



      a.   A preliminary plat of the subdivision has been approved
by the common council and the final plat is in conformance with the same;



      b.   A planned unit development has been approved by the
common council and the final plat is in conformance with the same;



      c.   (i) lot line revisions or (ii) subdivision of existing
lots result in a major subdivision, so long as the subdivision conforms to
the density requirements of the applicable zoning district.



   (2)   Adjoining property owners shall be notified five (5) days in
advance of the hearing by certified mail as to the date, place and time of
the administrative official's hearing, except for (1)a., b., and c.(i).



   (3)   Any party of interest may appeal the administrative official's
decision to the common council within five (5) days after the hearing
approving the plat. The fee for filing an appeal shall be equal to the fee
paid by the applicant seeking subdivision plat approval.



   (4)   Upon expiration of appeal period, if any, administrative
official records plat.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. III A.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-23.  Governing body approval of plats.



   (a)   Minor subdivision:



   (1)   Application, fee and, for all properties where changes in the
floodplain are proposed, written verification from FEMA that the Letter of
Map Change has been approved.



   (2)   Sketch plan approval by administrative official;



   (3)   Prepare final plat and submit mylar, one (1) full-size copy
(to scale), one (1) 11x17 copy and electronic format compatible with the city
system.  The electronic format requirement may be waived for any firm that
does not have electronic drafting equipment.



   (4)   Public hearing by planning commission, five (5) days notice;



   (5)   Recommendation to the common council;



   (6)   Approval or disapproval by the common council;



   (7)   Recording.



   (b)   Major subdivision:



   (1)   Application, fee, and, for all properties where changes in the
floodplain are proposed, written verification from FEMA that the Letter of
Map Change has been approved.



   (2)   Sketch plan approval by administrative official;



   (3)   Prepare preliminary plat and submit seven (7) copies;



   (4)   Public hearing by planning commission, five (5) days notice;



   (5)   Recommendation to the common council;



   (6)   Approval or disapproval by the common council;



   (7)   Prepare final plat and submit mylar, one (1) full-size copy
(to scale), one (1) 11x17 copy and electronic format compatible with the city
system. The electronic format requirement may be waived for any firm that
does not have electronic drafting equipment.



   (8)   If no substantial changes, plat shall be forwarded by the
administrative official to the planning commission chair and mayor for
signatures, subject to requirements for bond, dedication and form.



   (9)   Recording.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. III B.), 2-19-02; Ord. 1009, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 1053,
3-5-07)



Sec. 15A-24.  Infrastructure completion prior to recording final plat.



   (a)   No final plat may be recorded for any lot within a subdivision
before the installation, dedication, and acceptance of all public
improvements including, but not limited to: paved streets, curb, gutter,
sidewalk, water lines, sewer lines and drainage improvements.  The city
council may grant a special exception to allow a delay in the completion of
any improvements by agreement secured by a letter of credit, bond, cash
escrow deposit, or other guarantee of such improvements.



   (b)   Exceptions for plats recorded before July 5, 2005.



      (1)   Where no street improvements exist but a final plat is
recorded, these provisions shall not prohibit the city from issuing a
building permit, provided that the permit is issued with notice to the
contractor/owner that no garbage collection or plowing of the street can take
place until final street improvements are installed.



(Ord. 1009, 7-5-05; Ord. 1222, 12-21-15)



Secs. 15A-25—15A-40.  Reserved.



ARTICLE III. REQUIREMENTS FOR DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED



Sec. 15A-41.  Preliminary plat.



   (a)   Vicinity map, street names.



   (1)   A vicinity map or key map shall accompany or be shown on the
preliminary plan or sketch plan at a legible scale showing all existing
subdivision streets, tract lines or acreage parcels adjoining the proposed
subdivision. It shall show how streets in the proposed subdivision connect
with existing and proposed streets in adjoining subdivisions and future
street openings to undeveloped property, to produce the most advantageous
development of the adjoining area.



   (2)   The subdivider shall submit proposed street names for E-911
approval with the preliminary plat or sketch plan.



   (b)   Minor subdivision. A sketch plan may be submitted as a
preliminary plat for a minor subdivision. If the property proposed for
development involves areas where it would be desirable to impose additional
requirements, the administrative official may require some or all the data
contained in the requirements for preliminary plat, major subdivisions.



   (c)   Major subdivision. The plat submitted shall be of such scale
that all survey, mathematical information, and all other details are clearly
and legibly shown. Each lot and block shall be lettered or numbered. The area
in square feet and dimensions of all boundaries of each lot shall be shown.
The plat shall also show:



   (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision.



   (2)   North arrow, scale.



   (3)   Proposed legal description.



   (4)   The boundary line (accurate in scale) of the tract to be
subdivided.



   (5)   Topographic map with minimum five-foot contours.



   (6)   Drainage plan and, if applicable, a FEMA floodplain map
overlay.



   (7)   The names of adjacent property owners and lot descriptions.



   (8)   The location, widths and names of all existing or platted
streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract.



   (9)   All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or
reserved in the deeds for use of all property owners in the proposed
subdivision, together with the purpose of conditions or limitations of such
reservation, if any.



   (10)   The layout, names (if previously approved), and widths of
existing and pro-posed streets and easements.



   (11)   When required by the planning commission, the preliminary
plat shall be accompanied by:



      a.   The profile of each street with tentative grades for a
reasonable distance beyond the limits of the subdivision.



      b.   The cross section of proposed streets showing the width
of roadways, lo-cations and width of sidewalks. All elevations shall be based
upon mean sea level datum.



   (12)   Where a replat of an existing plat is being submitted for
consideration, the location of the existing plat shall be indicated by
insertion of broken lines and a statement, where appropriate, vacating the
former plat.



   (d)   Floodplain revisions.  At the time of preliminary plat
submittal, the applicant shall provide a copy of the Letter of Map Change
request as submitted to the Flood Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).  If
there is no floodplain on the subject property, this requirement may be
waived if not applicable.  The city may refuse to accept a preliminary plat
without this letter and may also refuse to accept a preliminary plat where a
flood plain may exist and the Floodplain Administrator has made a written
determination that a Letter of Map Change is required.  All floodplain
revisions shall comply with Chapter 8, Article III Section 8-55 of the Code
of Ordinances of the City of Spearfish.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. IV A.), 2-19-02; Ord. No. 1009, 7-5-05)



Sec. 15A-42.  Final plat.



   The final plat shall be submitted in the form of one (1) mylar, one (1)
full-size copy (to scale), one (1) 11x17 copy and electronic format
compatible with the city system.  The electronic format requirement may be
waived for any firm that does not have electronic drafting equipment.  The
final plat shall be drawn to scale of not more than one (1) inch equals one
hundred (100) feet and shall show:



   (1)   Name and legal description of subdivision.



   (2)   Name and address of the owner.



   (3)   North arrow, scale.



   (4)   The boundary lines with accurate distances and bearings, the
exact location and widths of all existing or recorded streets and ways
intersecting the boundary of the tract.



   (5)   True bearings and distances to the nearest established street
lines or official monuments, which shall be accurately described on the plat;
municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of
the subdivision by distances and bearings.



   (6)   An accurate vicinity map of the subdivision in reference to
the real estate records of the county including names of adjacent recorded
owners of property.



   (7)   Streets and alleys together with approved names.



   (8)   The length of all arcs, radii, internal angles and points of
curvature.



   (9)   All existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way provided
for public services, utilities or access and any limitations of the easements.



   (10)   All block indications, lot numbers and lot lines with
accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths, and bearings or angles in
degrees, minutes and seconds.



   (11)   The accurate location, material and approximate size of all
monuments.



   (12)   The designation of easements and rightsof-way and all
property which is offered for dedication for the public use, with the purpose
indicated thereon, and of all property that may be reserved by deed covenant
for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision.



   (13)   Monuments shall be located and/or set at each angle and curve
point on the outside boundary lines of the plat, at all block corners and at
all intermediate points on the block lines indicating a change of direction
in the lines. The plat shall indicate that the monuments have been set or
found.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. IV B.), 2-19-02; Ord. No. 1053, 3-5-07)



Secs. 15A-43—15A-60.  Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. VARIANCES



Sec. 15A-61.  Hardship.



   An applicant who is able to show an extraordinary hardship arising from
the location, topography, or other physical characteristic, which would make
it difficult or impossible to conform strictly to these regulations, may
apply for a variance. The common council, upon finding that such conditions
do exist and that the public interest shall be secured and that such project
will be beneficial to the community and not nullify the intent and purposes
of the comprehensive plan or these regulations, may vary the regulations so
that substantial justice may be done.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. V A.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-62. Conditions.



   In granting variances and modifications, the common council may require
such conditions as will secure substantially the objectives of the standards
or requirements so varied or modified.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. V B.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-63.  Procedure.



   Application for a variance shall be made concurrently with the
submission of the preliminary plat.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. V C.), 2-19-02)



Secs. 15A-64—15A-80.  Reserved.



ARTICLE V. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND
DEVELOPMENT



Sec. 15A-81.  [Minimum standards.]



   The following requirements of design and development are to be
considered as minimum standards.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-82.  Duties of subdivider.



   All of the following improvements are to be constructed by the
subdivider. A statement by the public works department that the following
requirements have been met and approved shall accompany the final plat:



   (1)   Typical sections and profiles of the proposed streets showing
widths and grades of roadways, types of surfacing, curb locations and width
and location of sidewalks.



   (2)   Preliminary layout plan and profiles of proposed sanitary and
storm sewers, with tentative grades, pipe sizes and the location of
appurtenances.



   (3)   Preliminary layout plan and profiles of the proposed water
distribution system showing tentative pipe sizes and location of
appurtenances.



   (4)   Lighting plan.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI A.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-83.  Relation to adjoining street system.



   (a)   A subdivision shall provide for the continuation of the
principal streets existing in the adjoining subdivisions or of their proper
projection when adjoining property is not subdivided, and such streets shall
be of a width not less than the minimum requirements for streets set forth in
the regulations of this chapter.



   (b)   Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the
subdivider's tract, drawing of the prospective future street system of the
entire tract shall be furnished and the street system of the part submitted
shall be considered in light of conformity to the street system of the entire
tract.



   (c)   Where a tract is subdivided into lots of an acre or more, the
planning commission may require an arrangement of lots and streets such as to
permit a later subdivision in conformity to the street requirements and other
requirements contained in this chapter.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI B.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-84.  Access.



   The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot, by
means of public street or way, with satisfactory access to an existing public
street or to a thoroughfare as shown in the major street plan, or an official
map.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI C.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-85.  Street widths.



   In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width, and
improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access
to emergency services, snow removal, sanitation, and road maintenance
equipment and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and
avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following minimum design
standards for roads are hereby required.



   MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS



Residential streets



 



 

Lane

 

Rural1

 

Minor Residential

 

Major Residential*

 

Low Density Residential





Volume (ADT)
 

100

 

Up to 150

 

Up to 300

 

Up to 1,000

 




Design Speed
 

15 mph

 

20 mph

 

20 mph

 

25 mph

 

30 mph



ROW Width
 

40'

 

50'

 

50'

 

60'

 

60'



Traveled Width
 

20'

 

24'**; 2' shoulders

 

29'

 

38'

 

24', 2-ft paved shoulders



Parking
 

No

 

No

 

One side

 

Both sides

 

No



Curb/Gutter  (See Note 6.)
 

No

 

No

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No



Sidewalk (5')
 

No

 

No

 

One side

 

Both sides

 

No





 



   1   Only for use in conjunction with the Rural Large Lot Single
Family Zoning District, and a maximum of fifteen (15) single family
residential lots.



   *   Minimum standard for multi-family zoning districts and PUDs with
average density greater than five (5) lots per acre.



   **   Asphalt roadway surface is required where the existing road or
street access to the property being platted is paved; otherwise, four (4)
inch gravel with two-foot (2') shoulders is permitted.



Cul-de-sac:



   Minimum property line radius—Fifty (50) feet.



   Traveled surface radius—Forty (40) feet.



Hammerhead: Allowed only on lanes



   Traveled width—Twelve (12) feet, thirty (30) feet to centerline.



   ROW—Ten (10) feet all sides.



   Radius—Sixteen (16) feet.



Arterial streets



 

 
Residential Collector
 
Major Arterial
 
Minor Arterial




Volume (ADT)
 
up to 3,000
 
up to 5,000
 
up to 3,000


Design Speed
 
25 mph
 
35 mph+
 
35 mph


ROW Width
 
60'
 
70'
 
60'


Traveled Width
 
40'
 
48' *
 
36' *


Parking
 
Optional*
 
No
 
No


Curb/Gutter
 
Yes
 
Yes
 
Yes


Sidewalk (5')
 
Both sides
 
Both sides
 
Both sides


*12' moving lanes
 
*Parking may or may not be allowed, on a case-by-case basis, upon
recommendation by the street superintendant and chief of police.




 



Industrial Roads



 

Design Speed
 
30 mph


ROW Width
 
60'


Traveled Width
 
36', 2-ft. paved shoulders


Parking
 
No


Curb/gutter (see Note 6.)
 
No


Sidewalk (5')
 
No



 



NOTES:



   1.   Residential traveled street width is based on moving lanes of
ten (10) feet, parking lanes of nine (9) feet.



   2.   Traveled width does not include gutter, when required. Gutter
width is included in width of parking lanes.



   3.   Where required, sidewalk width shall be five (5) feet, setback
five (5) feet from curb or edge of pavement. Wheelchair ramps shall be
provided at all intersections.



   4.   ADT (average daily traffic) is based on ten (10) trips per
single-family residential dwelling unit, per day.



   5.   All streets shall be improved with a wearing surface approved
by the city.



   6.   Curb/gutter is not required only when a drainage plan for
surface water discharge has been approved by the public works administrator.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI D.), 2-19-02; Ord. No. 1165, 11-19-12)



Sec. 15A-86.  Street grades and condition.



   (a)   The grades of streets shall not exceed ten (10) percent,
except under unavoidable conditions approved by the planning commission at
the time of preliminary plat approval.



   (b)   All streets shall have at least a three-tenths (0.3) percent
grade.



   (c)   All streets shall be improved with a wearing surface approved
by the city.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI E.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-87.  Street curves.



   Minimum centerlines of curvature, tangents, curb radiuses and sight
distances shall be based on design speed as per the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, Traffic Engineering Handbook, current edition.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI F.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-88.  Alleys.



   Alley rights-of-way, if provided, shall not be less than twenty (20)
feet in width. The corners of all alley intersections with other alleys or
streets shall have a radius of not less than ten (10) feet.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI G.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-89.  Half streets.



   No half streets shall be included in a subdivision plan except where
necessary on the boundary of the subdivision tract where the extension of an
existing dedicated street must be provided for and the boundary line of the
tract is the centerline of the necessary street.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI H.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-90.  Easements.



   Accessible and unobstructed utility easements of not less than five (5)
feet in width shall be provided on each side of the rear and side lot lines.
Easements of the same or greater width may be required along lot lines or
across lots or land parcels when required by the administrative official.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI I.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-91.  Blocks.



   (a)   No blocks shall be longer than one thousand two hundred
(1,200) feet between street lines. In blocks over eight hundred (800) feet in
length, there shall be a cross walkway easement of not less than ten (10)
feet in width, near the middle of the block.



   (b)   The width of blocks shall be such as to allow two (2) tiers of
lots, unless exceptional conditions are, in the opinion of the planning
commission, such as to render this requirement undesirable.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI J.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-92.  Lots.



   (a)   Every lot shall abut on a street improved to the standards
required by this chapter.



   (b)   The minimum dimensions of residential lots on any plat shall
be in conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI K.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-93.  Curb and gutter.



   Concrete curb and gutter shall be provided as required in section
15A-85 and may be required on all residential streets to accommodate drainage.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI L.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-94.  Right-of-way width.



   Widths of rights-of-way shall be as required by section 15A-85.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI M.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-95.  Water and sewer facilities.



   (a)   The subdivider shall be required to connect to the municipal
water and sewerage systems and shall install all facilities according to the
specifications of the public works department. Service lines shall be stubbed
to every lot abutting a street prior to the surfacing of the street.



   (b)   For lots eight (8) acres and larger, connection to the
municipal water and sewer system is not required.  Private/shared wells and
private disposal systems are permitted per city code Chapter 18, Article III
Division 3 and shall be designed and stamped by a registered professional
engineer.



   (c)   Wires for locating water and sewer services will be installed
(attached to outside of line) with new or replacement lines from the main to
the outside of the structure it serves. (This will not be required on
existing lines until the line is replaced).



   (d)   Stubbed water lines will include curb stop, curb box, and rod
extension from curb valve to top of the curb box.



   (e)   Water and sewer services stubbed into properties will be
marked at top of curb with a "W" and an "S" respectively.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI N.), 2-19-02; Ord. No. 1045, 4-2-07; Ord. No.
1165, 11-19-12)



Sec. 15A-96. Utilities.



   All utilities shall be located underground throughout the subdivision
unless the planning commission waives this requirement because of hardship.
If there are existing utility facilities aboveground, such facilities may
qualify for hardship treatment. Underground service connections to every
platted lot shall be installed.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI O.), 2-19-02)



Sec. 15A-97. Drainage facilities.



   A subdivision which does not make provision for storm or floodwater
runoff, during and after construction, may not be approved. Rights-of-way may
be required where it is deemed necessary to provide adequate drainage, to
accommodate upstream drainage, to minimize the effects of downstream
drainage, and to adequately interface with the existing stormwater drainage
system of the city. Drainage plans shall be in compliance with the master
drainage plan, where applicable.



   The property owner ultimately assumes all responsibility for drainage
off individual lots.



(Ord. No. 914, § 2(Art. VI P.), 2-19-02)



CHAPTER 16 TAXATION*



   Art. I.      Rural Service District, §§ 16-1—16-25



   Art. II.      Sales, Service, Use and Gross Receipts Tax, §§
16-26—16-84



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 16-26—16-50



      Div. 2.   Sales, Service and Use Tax Generally, §§
16-51—16-75



      Div. 3.   Gross Receipts on Certain Items, §§ 16-76—16-84



   *Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4;
alcoholic beverage licenses required, § 4-21 et seq.



ARTICLE I. RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT'S*



   *Cross references—Building and building regulations, Ch. 6; streets,
sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14.



Sec. 16-1.  Purpose.



   South Dakota Compiled Laws 9-21A provides that lands that are rural in
character, are used or usable for agriculture, and are not developed for
commercial, industrial or residential purposes, are not benefited to the same
degree as other lands by municipal services financed by general taxation.
Such land may be placed in a rural service district, and will not be subject
to municipal property tax until removed.



(Ord. No. 936, 10-21-02)



Sec. 16-2.  Authority.



   This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by SDCL
9-21A. Land placed in a rural service district shall benefit from such
designation until removed under the criteria set forth in section 16-4.



(Ord. No. 936, 10-21-02)



Sec. 16-3.  Definitions.



   Commercial shall be given its ordinary meaning. Industrial shall be
given its ordinary meaning. Residential development shall mean a major
subdivision of more than three (3) lots, having a density equal to or greater
than one (1) lot per two (2) acres.



(Ord. No. 936, 10-21-02)



Sec. 16-4.  Criteria for removal from district.



   If any of the following criteria are met, the common council, by order,
shall remove the property, in whole or in affected part, from the district:



   (1)   When a parcel in a rural service district is platted and
developed or used for the purpose of commercial, industrial or residential
development.



   (2)   When a planned unit development final plan is approved for all
or part of the district, the portion approved for such development shall be
removed from the district upon the issuance of a building permit.



   (3)   When municipal water and/or sewer service is extended to the
district, that platted portion served by such service shall be removed from
the district.



   (4)   When access to or within the district is from a street
dedicated to and accepted by the city, that platted portion directly served
by such street shall be removed from the district.



   (5)   After removing the property from the district the remaining
portion, if comprised of twenty (20) acres or more, may remain in the
district.



   A copy of the council's order shall be given to the Lawrence County
Director of Equalization and the property owner.



(Ord. No. 936, 10-21-02)



Secs. 16-5—16-25.    Reserved.



ARTICLE II. SALES, SERVICE, USE AND GROSS RECEIPTS TAX†



   † Cross reference—Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch.
10.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Secs.    16-26-16-50.    Reserved.



DIVISION 2. SALES, SERVICE AND USE TAX GENERALLY††



   †† Editor's note—Ord. No. 961, § 2, adopted July 21, 2003.
amended Div. 2, §§ 16-51—16-60, in its entirety to read as herein set
out. Former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord.
No. 576, §§ 1-6, adopted Aug. 8, 1985; Ord. No. 712, adopted Oct. 21, 1991;
and Ord. No. 929, adopted Aug. 19, 2002.



   State law references—State sales tax, SDCL Ch. 10-45; non-ad valorem
tax law, SDCL 10-52-1 et seq.



Sec. 16-51.  Purpose.



   The purpose of this division is to provide additional needed revenue
for the city by imposing a municipal retail sales and use tax pursuant to the
powers granted to the municipality by the state by SDCL Ch. 10-52 entitled
Uniform Municipal Non-Ad Valorem Tax Law and acts amendatory thereto.



(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 7-21-03)



Sec. 16-52.  Levied.



   From and after the January 1, 2004, there is hereby imposed a municipal
retail occupational sales and service tax upon the privilege of engaging in
business a tax measured by two (2) percent on the gross receipts of all
persons engaged in the business within the jurisdiction of the city who are
subject to ,the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL
Ch. 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto.



(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 7-21-03)



Sec. 16-54.  Collection.



   The tax levied under this division is pursuant to authorization granted
by SDCL Ch. 10-52 and acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the
state department of revenue in accordance with the same rules and regulations
applicable to the state sales tax and under such additional rules and
regulations as the state secretary of revenue and regulation shall lawfully
prescribe.



(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 7-21-03)



Sec. 16-55.  Use tax.



   In addition there is hereby imposed an excise tax on the privilege of
use, storage and consumption within the jurisdiction of the city of tangible
personal property or services purchased from and after January 1, 2004, at
the same rate as the municipal sales and service tax upon all transactions or
use, storage and consumption which are subject to the South Dakota Use Tax
Act, SDCL Ch. 10-46 and acts amendatory thereto.



(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 7-21-03)



   State law reference—Use tax, SDCL Ch. 10-46.



Sec. 16-56.  Interpretation.



   It is declared to be the intention of this division and the taxes
levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same
manner as all sections of the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and
Service Act, SDCL Ch. 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto and the South Dakota
Use Tax, Ch. SDCL 10-46 and acts amendatory thereto, and that this shall be
considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax.



(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 7-21-03)



Sec. 16-57.  Penalty.



   Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed
by this division and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment
and collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
In addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL Ch. 10-45, and
acts amendatory thereto, and SDCL Ch. 10-46, and acts amendatory thereto, are
hereby authorized for the collection of these excise taxes by the department
of revenue and regulation.



(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 7-21-03)



Sec. 16-58.  Use of revenue.



   Any revenue received in excess of the amount received if the rate of
tax is one (1) percent may be used only for the following purposes: capital
improvement, land acquisition, the funding of  public ambulances and medical
emergency response vehicles, nonprofit hospitals with fifty (50) or fewer
licensed beds, or nonprofit healthcare facilities with fifty (50) or fewer
licensed beds, the transfer to the special 911 fund authorized by SDCL
34-45-12, the purchasing of firefighting vehicles and equipment, public
safety vehicles and equipment, heavy equipment, debt retirement, the minor or
major rehabilitation or reconstruction of streets, economic development
purposes, and distribution to other political subdivisions of the State of
South Dakota for an authorized public purpose under SDCL § 6-5-5, including
the operational costs thereof or for capital expenditures. These expenditures
may be financed through a sale-leaseback agreement.



(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 7-21-03)



Sec. 16-59.  Separability.



   If any provision of this division is declared unconstitutional or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances held invalid the
constitutionality of the remainder of the ordinance and applicability thereof
of other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.



(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 7-21-03)



Secs. 16-60—16-75.    Reserved.



DIVISION 3. GROSS RECEIPTS TAX ON CERTAIN ITEMS*



   *State law reference—Authority, SDCL § 10-52-8.



Sec. 16-76.  Purpose.



   The purpose of this division is to provide additional needed revenue
for the city by imposing a municipal non-ad valorem tax on lodgings,
alcoholic beverages, and prepared food and admissions, all as described
below, pursuant to the powers granted to the municipality by the state by
SDCL Ch. 10-52A and specifically SDCL 10-52A-2, the Uniform Municipal Non-Ad
Valorem Tax Law and acts amendatory thereto.



(Ord. No. 634, § 1(2C), 3-21-88; Ord. No. 929, 8-19-02)



Sec. 16-77.  Use of receipts.



   All monies received and collected on behalf of the city pursuant to
this division shall be used for the purpose of land acquisition,
architectural fees, construction costs, payments for civic center, auditorium
or athletic facility buildings, including the maintenance, staffing and
operation of such facilities, and the promotion and advertising of the city,
its facilities, attractions and activities.



(Ord. No. 634, § 1(2C), 3-21-88)



Sec. 16-78.  One percent tax on rental accommodations, alcoholic beverage
sales, etc.



   Notwithstanding the rate of tax established in section 16-32, from and
after January 1, 2003, there is hereby imposed a municipal gross receipts tax
of one (1) percent upon the gross receipts of all leases or rentals of hotel,
motel, campsites or other lodging accommodations within the municipality for
periods of less than twenty-eight (28) consecutive days; the sales of
alcoholic beverages as defined at SDCL 35-1-1; establishments where the
public is invited to eat, dine, or purchase and carry out prepared food for
immediate consumption, or ticket sales or admissions to places of amusement,
athletic and cultural events, or any combination thereof. The tax applies to
the gross receipts of all persons engaged in business within the jurisdiction
of the city, who are subject to the South Dakota retail occupational sales
and service tax, SDCL 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto.



(Ord. No. 634, § 1, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 721, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 929, 8-19-02)



Sec. 16-79.  Reserved.



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 929, adopted Aug. 19, 2002, repealed § 16-79,
which pertained to exemptions from the gross receipts tax and derived from
Ord. No. 634, § 1(2E), adopted Mar. 21, 1988 and Ord. No. 721, adopted Apr.
6, 1992.



Sec. 16-80.  Use of revenue.



   All revenue received and collected by the tax levied on behalf of the
city shall be used as stated in SDCL 10-52A-2 for the purpose of land
acquisition, architectural fees, construction costs, payments for civic
center, auditorium or athletic facility buildings, including the maintenance,
staffing and operations of such facilities and the promotion and advertising
of the city, its facilities, attractions and activities.



(Ord. No. 634, § 1(2F), 3-21-88; Ord. No. 721, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 929, 8-19-02)



Sec. 16-81.  Collection, distribution, interpretation, penalty.



   Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL 10-52A and
acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the South Dakota
Department of Revenue in accordance with the same rules and regulations
applicable to the state sales tax and under such additional rules and
regulations as the Secretary of Revenue of the State of South Dakota shall
lawfully prescribe. It is declared to be the intention of this division and
the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed
in the same manner as all sections of the State Retail Occupational Sales and
Service Act, SDCL Ch. 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto, and that this shall
be considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax. Any
person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed by this
division and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and
collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). In
addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL 10-45, and acts
amendatory thereto, are hereby authorized for the collection of these excise
taxes by the department of revenue.



(Ord. No. 634, § 1(2G), 3-21-88; Ord. No. 721, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 929, 8-19-02)



Sec. 16-82.  Implementation date.



   Notwithstanding SDCL § 9-19-13, any new ordinance or amendment to an
ordinance enacted under the authority of this chapter and any tax rate
affected thereby, can only be effective on January 1 or July 1 of a calendar
year. The ordinance or amendment shall be effective on the earlier of January
1 or July 1 following at least ninety (90) days' notification by the city to
the secretary of revenue that the ordinance or amendment has been enacted.



(Ord. No. 634, § 1(2H), 3-21-88; Ord. No. 721, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 929, 8-19-02)



Sec. 16-83.  Separability



   If any provision of this division is declared unconstitutional or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances held invalid the
constitutionality of the remainder of the division and applicability thereof
of other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.



(Ord. No. 929, 8-19-02)



Sec. 16-84.  Compliance with SDCL 10-52A-10.



   This division continues a tax which was in effect on July 1, 2002 and
is continued under the provisions of SDCL 10-52A and specifically SDCL
10-52A-10, the common council having reviewed the existing tax ordinance to
determine compliance with the provision of chapter 10-52A and this division
is adopted to comply with the provisions of SDCL 10-52A and to continue the
tax under SDCL 10-52A.



(Ord. No. 929, 8-19-02)



CHAPTER 17 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES*




   Art. I.    In General, §§ 17-1—17-25





   Art. II.    Administration, §§ 17-26—17-105





      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 17-26—17-50





      Div. 2.   Enforcement, §§ 17-51—17-80





      Div. 3.   Accidents, §§ 17-81—17-105





   Art. III.    Traffic-Control Signs, Signals and Devices, §§
17-106—17-130





   Art. IV.    Operation of Vehicles, §§ 17-131—17-185





   Art. V.    Specific Street Regulations, §§ 17-186—17-280





      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 17-186—17-210





      Div. 2.   Speed Restrictions, §§ 17-211—17-235





      Div. 3.   One-Way Streets and Alleys, §§ 17-236—17-255





      Div. 4.   Stop and Yield Regulations, §§ 17-256—17-280





   Art. VI.    Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 17-281—17-360





      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 17-281—17-305





      Div. 2.   Parking Restricted or Limited, §§ 17-306—17-330





      Div. 3.   Central Core Commercial - 2 Hour Downtown Public
Parking District, §§ 17-331—17-360





   Art. VII.    Pedestrians, §§ 17-361—17-385





   Art. VIII.    School Buses, §§ 17-386—17-405





   Art. IX.    Trucks, §§ 17-406—17-425





   Art. X.    Motor Vehicle Equipment, §§ 17-426—17-445





   Art. XI.    Snowmobiles, §§ 17-446—17-475





   Art. XII.    Bicycles, §§ 17-476—17-500





   Art. XIII.    Abandoned Vehicles, §§ 17-501—17-510




   *Cross references—Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; consuming, blending,
possessing, alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited and the disposal
of containers containing alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17; animals,
Ch. 5; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7; routes for vehicles
transporting explosives, § 7-50; routes established for vehicles
transporting houses and chemicals, § 7-51 et seq.; fire lanes established by
the fire chief and chief of police, § 7-52; health, sanitation and
nuisances, Ch. 9; peddlers' regulations, § 10-196 et seq.; streets,
sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; subdivisions, Ch. 15; zoning, App.
A.



   State law references—Motor vehicles, SDCL Title 32; municipal
regulation of traffic, SDCL Ch. 9-31, §§ 9-30-4, 32-14-3, 32-25-16, 32-29-2.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 17-1.  Definitions.



   Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:



   Authorized emergency vehicle shall mean vehicles of the fire
department, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of
municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or
authorized by the state department of commerce and regulation.



   Business district shall mean the territory contiguous to a highway when
fifty (50) percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three
hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by buildings used for business.



   Crosswalk shall mean that part of a roadway at an intersection included
within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite
sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs,
from the edges of the traversable roadway; or any portion of a roadway at an
intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other markings on the surface.



   Department shall mean the police department of the city.



   Intersection shall mean the area embraced within the prolongation of
the lateral curblines; if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two (2) or
more streets or highways which join one another at an angle whether or not
one (1) such street or highway crosses the other; but such area in the case
of the point where an alley and a street meet shall not be deemed an
intersection.



   Laned street shall mean a street, the roadway of which is divided into
two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   Loading zone shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.



   Motorcycle shall mean every motor vehicle designed to travel on not
more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, except any such
vehicle as may be included within the term "tractor."



   Motor vehicles shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled.



   Official traffic signals shall mean all signals, not inconsistent with
this chapter, place or erected by authority of a public body or official
having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing, warning or regulating
traffic.



   Official traffic signs shall mean all signs and markings, other than
signals, not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding, directing,
warning, or regulating traffic.



   Operator shall mean any person who is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   Parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not,
upon a roadway or street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading or in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs or signals.



   Pedestrian shall mean any person on foot.



   Police officer shall mean every officer of the city police department
or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests
for violations of traffic regulations.



   Private road or driveway shall mean every road or driveway not open to
the use of the public for purpose of vehicular traffic.



   Residence district shall mean the territory contiguous to a highway not
comprising a business district when the frontage of such highway for a
distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings
or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.



   Right-of-way shall mean the right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to
proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian
approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to
give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to another.



   Roadway shall mean that portion of a highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In
the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term
"roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such
roadways collectively.



   Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines, or
the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for
the use of pedestrians.



   Street or highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary
lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel.



   Traffic shall mean pedestrians, ridden animals, herded animals and
vehicles while using any street for purpose of travel.



   Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks, provided that for the purposes of this chapter, a bicycle or a ridden
animal shall be deemed to be a vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 23-100)



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



   State law reference—Traffic definitions, SDCL § 32-14-1.



Secs. 17-2—17-25.    Reserved.



ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Secs. 17-26—17-50.    Reserved.



DIVISION 2. ENFORCEMENT



Sec. 17-51.  Generally.



   The city police department, under the direction of the chief of police,
is hereby authorized to direct and control traffic and parking within the
city.



(Code 1982, § 23-200)



Sec. 17-52.  Drivers' files to be maintained.



   (a)   The police department shall maintain a suitable record of all
traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions, and complaints reported
for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the
driver concerned.



   (b)   Such records shall accumulate and shall be maintained complete
for at least the most recent five-year period.



(Code 1982, § 23-201)



Sec. 17-53.  Records of traffic violations.



   The police department shall keep a record of all violations of the
traffic ordinances of this city or of the state vehicle laws of which any
person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of
all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all
types of violations and the cumulative total of each type of violation. The
record shall accumulate for at least the most recent five-year period.



(Code 1982, § 23-202)



Sec. 17-54.  Emergency and experimental regulations.



   The chief of police, by and with the approval of the common council is
hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the
provisions of this chapter and the traffic ordinances of this city and to
make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies
or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall
remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days.



(Code 1982, § 23-203)



Sec. 17-55.  Duty of police department.



   It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the traffic
regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the
division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of this city.



(Code 1982, § 23-300)



Sec. 17-56.  Persons propelling pushcarts or riding animals to obey traffic
regulations.



   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have
no application.



(Code 1982, § 23-301)



Sec. 17-57.  Public employees to obey traffic regulations.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state,
county, or city. It shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.



(Code 1982, § 23-302)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-14-2.



Sec. 17-58.  Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted.



   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while
set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the city.



(Code 1982, § 23-301)



Sec. 17-59.  Manner of arrest.



   Except as otherwise provided in SDCL § 32-33-2, and except when
reasonably necessary to secure appearance, a person charged with violation of
a provision of this chapter or a traffic ordinance of the city by a police
officer, need not be arrested in the regular manner but may first be given an
opportunity, after notice, to appear voluntarily to answer for such traffic
violation. This procedure shall not apply to any person charged with an
offense causing or contributing to an accident resulting in property damage,
or injury or death to any person charged with driving vehicle under the
influence of alcoholic beverages or narcotic drugs.



(Code 1982, § 23-400)



   State law reference—Apprehension and prosecution of violators, SDCL
Ch. 32-33.



Sec. 17-60.  Notice to appear.



   A person charged with violation of a provision of this chapter or a
traffic ordinance shall be given a notice to appear before the municipal
court of the city at the time stated in such notice which shall be within
five (5) days from the time of the offense, and that in the event of failure
to do so, a warrant will be issued for his arrest. The notice shall state the
name and address of the offender, if known, the license number and make of
the vehicle involved in the violation, the nature, date and location of the
offense, and the time and place where the offender is to appear to answer the
charge. The notice shall be signed by the police officer executing it.



(Code 1982, § 23-401)



Sec. 17-61.  Appearance.



   A person who has received a notice of traffic violation shall appear at
the time and place specified in such notice. In cases of parking violations,
the person charged shall appear at the office of the chief of police and upon
making the deposit for the fine and a statement authorizing the chief of
police to enter his plea of guilty to the offense, he shall not be required
to appear in court.



(Code 1982, § 23-402)



Sec. 17-62.  Failure to appear.



   Upon failure of a person to appear in response to a traffic violation
as herein provided, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest.



(Code 1982, § 23-403)



Sec. 17-63.  Warning tickets.



   A member of the department upon reasonable belief that any vehicle is
being operated in violation of any provision of state law or is in such
unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property may require the driver
to stop and submit to an inspection of the vehicle and its equipment, license
plates and registration card. The department is hereby authorized to issue a
warning ticket to any driver whose vehicle is in violation of any of the
provisions of state law or this code or city ordinance. The form and contents
of the warning ticket shall be at the discretion of the chief of police. The
warning ticket shall clearly designate the provision of the law which is
being violated and shall provide for notification to the issuing officer when
such violation is corrected. Such correction shall be made not later than ten
(10) days after the date of issue of the warning ticket at the discretion of
the issuing officer. It shall be a misdemeanor for any driver to wilfully
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction of any
police officer or to fail to comply with the provisions and requirements of
any warning ticket issued by the department under this section.



(Code 1982, § 23-404)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL §§ 32-21-28, 32-21-29.



Sec. 17-64.  Removal of cars illegally parked.



   Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter or a traffic ordinance
of this city may be removed from the streets by the police department and
placed in public storage, and the owner thereof, in addition to the fines and
penalties which may be imposed for such violation, shall pay the charges for
towing and storage of such vehicle so removed by the police department. All
money so collected by the police department shall be immediately deposited
with the city finance officer.



(Code 1982, § 23-405)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-3.



Secs. 17-65—17-80.    Reserved.



DIVISION 3. ACCIDENTS*



   *State law reference—Accidents and accident reports, SDCL Ch. 32-34.



Sec. 17-81.  Investigation generally.



   It shall be the duty of the police officers to investigate traffic
accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons
charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.



(Code 1982, § 23-500)



Sec. 17-82.  Duty to give information, render aid.



   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or
attended by any person shall give his name and address or the name and
address of the owner and the license number of the vehicle he is driving, and
shall upon request exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license to the
person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle
collided with. He shall render to any person injured in such accident
reasonable assistance, including the carrying or making of arrangements for
the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical
or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or
if such carrying is requested by the injured person.



(Code 1982, § 23-501)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-34-3.



Sec. 17-83.  Personal injury.



   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of
such accident and shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has
fulfilled the requirements of section 17-82. Every such stop shall be made
without obstructing traffic more than necessary.



(Code 1982, § 23-502)



Sec. 17-84.  Property damage.



   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in
damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close
thereto as possible but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall
remain at the scene of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements
of this section. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic
more than is necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with said
requirements under such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Code 1982, § 23-503)



Sec. 17-85.  Unattended vehicle or other property.



   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle or other
property which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there
either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle or other
property of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle and
the license number of the vehicle he is driving which struck the unattended
vehicle or shall attach securely in a conspicuous place in or on the vehicle
or other property struck a written notice giving name and address of the
driver and of the owner and license number of the vehicle doing the striking
and a statement of the circumstances thereof. Such driver shall without
unnecessary delay notify the police department of such accident. Every such
stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than necessary.



(Code 1982, §§ 23-504, 23-505)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-34-4.



Sec. 17-86.  Immediate notice of accident.



   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in bodily
injury or death to any person or property damage to an apparent extent of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more to any one (1) person's property or
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per accident shall immediately by the
quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the police
department.



(Code 1982, § 23-506)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-34-7.



Sec. 17-87.  Garage keeper to report damaged vehicles.



   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought
any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a serious
accident or struck by any bullet which does not bear the notice provided in
SDCL § 32-34-10 shall report it to the police department within twenty-four
(24) hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number and
the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 23-507)



   State law references—Notice affixed to damaged vehicle, SDCL §
32-34-10; repair of damaged vehicle prohibited unless notice affixed, SDCL §
32-34-23.



Secs. 17-88—17-105.  Reserved.



ARTICLE III. TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES*



Sec. 17-106.  Specifications.



   The design, construction and use of all signs and traffic-control
devices within the city or under its jurisdiction shall conform as near as
possible to the South Dakota Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices for
streets and highways, as prepared by the state department of transportation
which manual is hereby adopted, by reference, with the same full force and
effect as though set forth at length herein. A copy of the manual is on file
in the office of the public works administrator.



(Code 1982, § 23-800)



Sec. 17-107.  Conformity.



   All traffic signs and signals erected and in operation within the city
are hereby designated official traffic signs and signals and upon
replacements or additions thereto shall conform to the manual on Uniform
Traffic-Control Devices herein adopted by reference.



(Code 1982, § 23-801)



Sec. 17-108.  Obedience.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this article or other city ordinance unless otherwise directed
by a traffic or police officer, and subject to the exceptions granted the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 23-802)



   *State law reference—Traffic-control devices, SDCL Ch. 32-28.



Sec. 17-109.  Necessity of signs.



   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against all alleged violators if at the time and place of the
alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be
effective even though no signs are erected or in place.



(Code 1982, § 23-803)



Sec. 17-110.  Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.



   (a)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device
or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.



   (b)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public
authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising.



   (c)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.



   (d)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the common council is hereby empowered
to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.



(Code 1982, § 23-804)



Sec. 17-111.  Traffic-control signal legend.



   (a)   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals
exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or "Stop" or exhibiting different
colored lights successively one (1) at a time or with arrows, the following
colors only shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply
to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:



   (1)   Green alone or "Go."



      a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may turn right or
left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular
traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.



      b.   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (2)   Steady yellow alone.



      a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned
that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and
such vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection when the red or
"Stop" signal is exhibited.



      b.   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that
there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then
starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.



   (3)   Steady red alone, or "Stop."



      a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then
before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or
"Go" is shown alone, except as hereinafter provided.



      b.   The driver of any vehicle which is stopped as close as
practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk and to the far right side of the
roadway and at the entrance to an intersection in obedience to a red or
"Stop" may make a right turn, but shall first yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at such
intersection; provided, that such right turn shall be permitted and effected
unless a clearly visible sign prohibiting such turn shall be erected at such
intersection giving notice thereof. The chief of police is hereby authorized
and directed to cause such signs to be erected and maintained on and at such
intersections as the governing body may establish and designate.



   (4)   Steady red with green arrow.



      a.   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter
the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but only
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to
other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



      b.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway
unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.



   (b)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at an
intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to
those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop
required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where
the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the
stop shall be made at the signal.



(Code 1982, § 23-805)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL §§ 32-28-1—32-28-5.



Sec. 17-112.  Flashing signals.



   (a)   When a red lens is illuminated with intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection or a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before entering
the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.



   (b)   When a yellow lens is illuminated with intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal
with caution.



(Code 1982, § 23-806)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL §§ 32-28-6—32-28-8.



Sec. 17-113.  Play streets.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such
street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.



(Code 1982, § 23-807)



Secs. 17-114—17-130.  Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. OPERATION OF VEHICLES*



   *State law reference—Driving under the influence, SDCL § 32-23-1 et
seq.



Sec. 17-131.  Drive on right side of street—Generally.



   Upon all streets, except upon one-way streets, the operator of a
vehicle shall drive the same upon the right half of the street and shall
drive a slow-moving vehicle as closely as possible to the right-hand edge or
curb of a street unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of the
street and except when overtaking and passing another vehicle subject to
limitations applicable to overtaking and passing set for in this chapter.
This section shall not be deemed to prevent the marking of lanes for traffic
upon any street and the allocation of designated lanes to traffic moving in a
particular direction or at designated speeds.



(Code 1982, § 23-600)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-1.



Sec. 17-132.  Same—At intersections.



   In crossing an intersection of highways or the intersection of a
highway by a railroad right-of-way, except upon one-way streets, the operator
of a vehicle shall at all times cause such vehicle to travel on the right
half of the highway unless such right half is obstructed or impassable.



(Code 1982, § 23-601)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-2.



Sec. 17-133.  Passing of vehicles.



   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each
other to the right, each giving to the other at least one-half of the main
traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.



(Code 1982, § 23-602)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-3.



Sec. 17-134.  Driving on laned roadways.



   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others
consistent herewith shall apply:



   (1)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely
within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.



   (2)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to
use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving
in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers
of the vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.



(Code 1982, § 23-603)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-5 et seq.



Sec. 17-135.  Designation of traffic lanes.



   The public works administrator is hereby authorized to mark lanes for
traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable,
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.



(Code 1982, § 23-604)



Sec. 17-136.  Driving on divided highways.



   Whenever any highway has been divided into two (2) roadways by leaving
an intervening dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular
traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway and
no vehicle shall be driven over, across, or within any such dividing space,
barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or
dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection established by
public authority.



(Code 1982, § 23-605)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-9.



Sec. 17-137.  Driving on left of other vehicles.



   It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor vehicle to
drive or operate his vehicle on the left-hand side of another motor vehicle
moving in the same direction in a single traffic lane, unless the driver or
operator on the left is in the process of passing or overtaking another motor
vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 23-606)



Sec. 17-138.  Driving on left at intersections.



   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway when
approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad crossing, or when the view is obstructed upon approaching within
one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel.



(Code 1982, § 23-607)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-36.



Sec. 17-139.  Driving on left at curves.



   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway when
approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the
driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the
event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.



(Code 1982, § 23-608)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-35.



Sec. 17-140.  Overtaking—Generally.



   The operator of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left side as is
clearly visible and is free from oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance
ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety and shall
not cut in front of the overtaken vehicle until safely clear of same.



(Code 1982, § 23-609)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32.26.26.



Sec. 17-141.  When vision obstructed.



   The operator of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of a
centerline of the traversable roadway in overtaking and passing another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly
visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to
permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety.



(Code 1982, § 23-610)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-34.



Sec. 17-142.  No-passing zones, designation.



   The operator of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other vehicle
proceeding in the same direction in any "no passing zone." The public works
administrator is hereby authorized to designate such no-passing zones by the
painting or placing of signs or double lines in the center of the street. Any
zone or any street in the city where double lines, button or lanes have been
painted or placed in the center of such street, shall be and is hereby
designated as no-passing zones. No operator of any vehicle shall pass any
other vehicle proceeding in the same direction, in such zone.



(Code 1982, § 23-611)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-37.



Sec. 17-143.  Duty of overtaking operator.



   (a)   The operator of a vehicle on a street shall not deviate from
his direct line of travel without ascertaining that such movement can be made
with safety to other vehicles approaching from the rear and about to overtake
and pass such first-mentioned vehicle.



   (b)   The operator of a vehicle upon a street about to be overtaken
and passed by another vehicle approaching from the rear shall give way
consistent with safety upon suitable and audible signal being given by the
operator of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 23-612)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-31.



Sec. 17-144.  Left turn.



   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded and having
given a signal when and as required, may make such left turn and the drivers
of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite
direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.



(Code 1982, § 23-701)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-19.



Sec. 17-145.  Emergency vehicles.



   The operator of a vehicle entering or driving upon a public street
shall yield the right-of-way to authorized emergency vehicles when the latter
are operated upon official business and the operators thereof sound audible
signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This provision shall not relieve
the operator of an emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
of the safety of all persons using the street, nor shall it protect the
operator of any such vehicle from the consequence of an arbitrary exercise of
such right-of-way.



(Code 1982, § 23-702)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-15.



Sec. 17-146.  Turns generally.



   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is
in proper position upon the roadway or turn a vehicle to enter a private road
or driveway or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or
left upon a roadway, unless and until such movement can be made with
reasonable safety.



(Code 1982, § 23-1100)



Sec. 17-147.  Right turn.



   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at an
intersection or into an alley or driveway shall approach the point of turning
in the line of traffic nearest the right-hand edge or curb of the street, and
in turning shall keep as closely as practicable to the right-hand curb or
edge of the street.



(Code 1982, § 23-1101)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-17.



Sec. 17-148.  Turning left.



   Except where otherwise directed by turning markers, the operator of a
vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection shall approach the
intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection in
a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the
roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.



(Code 1982, § 23-1102)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-18.



Sec. 17-149.  Turning markers.



   The common council may modify the method of turning at intersections
provided by this article by clearly indicating by buttons, markings, or other
direction signs installed within an intersection the course to be followed by
vehicles turning thereat. It shall be unlawful for any driver to fail to turn
in a manner as so directed. No such signs or buttons shall be placed upon any
state highway without approval of the state department of transportation.



(Code 1982, § 23-1103)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-20.



Sec. 17-150.  U-turns prohibited on certain streets.



   Drivers of all vehicles are prohibited from making what is commonly
known as U-turns; that is, turning vehicles from the direction in which
traveling to go in the opposite direction on the same street, on the
following streets:



   (1)   All of Main Street;



   (2)   All of Jackson Boulevard from University Avenue East;



   (3)   On Fifth and Seventh Streets from Jackson Boulevard to Grant
Street;



   (4)   On Grant, Hudson and Illinois Streets between Fifth and
Seventh Streets;



   (5)   Any controlled intersection.



(Code 1982, § 23-1104)



Sec. 17-151.  Signals generally.



   No person shall turn any vehicle without first giving an appropriate
signal in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement.



(Code 1982, § 23-1200)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-22.1.



Sec. 17-152.  Signals by hand and arm or signal devices.



   Any stop or turn signal when required by this article shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm or by an approved mechanical or
electrical signal device. When a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that
hand-and-arm signals would not be visible both to the front and rear of such
vehicle such signals must be given by such device as approved by the state
department of commerce and regulation.



(Code 1982, § 23-1202)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-23.



Sec. 17-153.  Method of giving hand-and-arm signals.



   All signals herein required by this article given by hand-and-arm shall
be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such
signals shall indicate as follows:



   (1)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally.



   (2)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward.



   (3)   Stop or decreased speed Hand and arm extended downward.



(Code 1982, § 23-1203)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-24.



Sec. 17-154.  Careless driving.



   Any person who drives any vehicle carelessly and without due caution,
at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger any person or property, not
amounting to reckless driving as defined in section 17-156 shall be guilty of
careless driving.



(Code 1982, § 23-1400)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-24-8.



Sec. 17-155.  Exhibition driving.



   Any person who drives a vehicle within the city in such a manner that
creates or causes unnecessary engine noise, tire squeal, skid or slide upon
acceleration or stopping or that stimulates a temporary race or that causes
the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway; shall be guilty of
exhibition driving.



(Code 1982, § 23-1401)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-24-9.



Sec. 17-158.  Load to be secured.



   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or highway in the
city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its
contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom.



(Code 1982, § 23-1411)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-15-18.



Sec. 17-159.  Corner cutting.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle upon or
across any sidewalk, driveway, filling station or other commercial driveway
or other similar surface located at the corner of any intersection protected
by a traffic light or other traffic signal or sign, for the purpose of
evading the regulations governing the turning of motor vehicles at
intersections.



(Code 1982, § 23-1412)



Sec. 17-156.  Reckless driving.



   Any person who drives a vehicle upon a public street carelessly and
heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others or without due
caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or
be likely to endanger any person or property shall be guilty of reckless
driving.



(Code 1982, § 23-1402)



   State law reference—Reckless and unsafe driving, SDCL § 32-24-1.



Sec. 17-157.  When signals required.



   (a)   A signal of intention to turn a vehicle right or left when
required shall be given continuously during not less than the last one
hundred (100) feet of travel by the vehicle before turning.



   (b)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a
vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided
herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give such signal.



(Code 1982, § 23-1201)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-18.1.



Sec. 17-160.  Unsafe backing.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement
can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(Code 1982, § 23-1413)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-20.



Sec. 17-161.  Driving on sidewalks.



   The operator of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area
except at a permanent or temporary driveway.



(Code 1982, § 23-1414)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-21.1.



Sec. 17-162.  Following too closely.



   The driver of a motor vehicle upon the public highways, streets or
alley or parkways of the city shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such
vehicle and the traffic and condition of the highway, streets or alleys or
park-ways.



(Code 1982, § 23-1415)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-40.



Sec. 17-163.  Following fire apparatus.



   It shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle other than one on
official business to follow any emergency vehicle traveling in response to a
fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet or to drive into or park such
vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a
fire alarm or any public emergency.



(Code 1982, § 23-1416)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-31-7.



Sec. 17-164.  Crossing fire hose.



   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire
department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any
fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire marshal or fire
department official in command.



(Code 1982, § 23-1417)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-31-8.



Sec. 17-165.  Maximum passengers.



   No person shall drive a vehicle so loaded, or when there are in the
front seat such a number of persons exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 23-1418)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-43.



Sec. 17-167.  Interference with view, mechanism.



   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 23-1420)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-26-44.



Sec. 17-168.  Driving through processions.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between
the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or other authorized procession
while they are in motion. This provision shall not apply to intersections
where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.



(Code 1982, § 23-1421)



   State law reference—Authority to regulate processions, SDCL §
32-14-5.



Sec. 17-169.  Clinging to moving vehicles.



   It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle,
motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle to cling to, or
attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving vehicle upon any street in
the city.



(Code 1972, § 30-6)



Sec. 17-166.  Motorcycle operator and passengers restricted to permanent and
regular seats.



   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and such operator may not carry any other
person nor may any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle
is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which event a passenger may
ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or
upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of
the operator.



(Code 1982, § 23-1419)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-20-6.1.



Sec. 17-170.  Opening doors into traffic.



   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be
done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic
for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.



(Code 1982, § 23-104)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-2.5.



Secs. 17-171-17-185.   Reserved.



ARTICLE V. SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS*



   *Cross references—Fire lanes established by the fire chief and chief
of police, § 7-52; streets and public rights-of-way, § 14-26 et seq.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Secs. 17-186—17-210.  Reserved.



DIVISION 2. SPEED RESTRICTIONS*



   *State law reference—Speed regulation, SDCL Ch. 32-25.



Sec. 17-211.  General restrictions.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on a street or
highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing or at a speed in excess of those fixed by this
division or established by the city council, whichever is less.



(Code 1982, § 23-900)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-25-3.



Sec. 17-212.  Establishment of speed zones.



   (a)   The common council is authorized and empowered to determine
and establish upon any street or highway within the city or any part thereof,
limited speed zones which speed limit shall constitute the maximum speed at
which any person may drive or operate any vehicle upon zone, street or
highway or portion thereof so zoned, and on which highway the maximum speed
permissible in said zone has been conspicuously posted by signs adopted by
the council.



   (b)   The beginning and end of such limited speed zones shall be
indicated by signs showing the speed limits.



   (c)   The council may change the speed limit or extent of any such
limited speed zone at any time it may deem necessary.



   (d)   The common council is hereby authorized in its discretion to
increase the speed which shall be prima facie lawful upon certain portions of
federal highways as required by federal regulations, provided that there
shall be placed adequate signs giving notice of such special regulations.



(Code 1982, §§ 23-901, 23-902)



Sec. 17-213.  Maximum speed generally.



   It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be driven upon the public
or private streets or public ground in the city at the greater rate of speed
than twenty-five (25) miles an hour, unless otherwise posted.



(Code 1982, § 23-903)



Sec. 17-214.  School zones.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle faster than
fifteen (15) miles an hour when in a school zone during opening and closing
hours or when children are present.



(Code 1982, § 23-904)



   State law reference–Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-25-14.



Sec. 17-215.  Exceeding limits.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle at a rate of
speed in excess of the maximum speed limits established within the city
pursuant to the provisions of this article. Any speed in excess of such
limits shall be prima facie evidence than the speed is not reasonable or
prudent.



(Code 1982, § 23-905)



Sec. 17-216.  Speed limits inapplicable under specified conditions.



   The speed limit set out in this division and SDCL § § 32-25-1 to
32-25-17 does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles when responding to
emergency calls provided the drivers thereof sound audible signals by siren
or horn and two (2) lighted red lights are displayed to the front, or one (1)
beacon light visible three hundred sixty (360) degrees or to authorized
emergency vehicles operated by peace officers who are measuring the speed of
other vehicles by use of the emergency vehicle speedometer.



(Code 1982, § 23-906)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-31-4.



Sec. 17-217.  Slow speed.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a reduced speed as to
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.



(Code 1982, § 23-907)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-25-5A.



Sec. 17-218.  Racing.



   No person shall drive any vehicle in any race on a highway, speed
competition or contest, drag race or acceleration contest, test of physical
endurance, exhibition of speed or acceleration or for the purpose of making a
speed record. No person shall in any manner participate in any such race,
competition, contest or exhibition.



(Code 1982, § 23-908)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-25-23.



Secs. 17-219—17-235.  Reserved.



DIVISION 3. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS*



   *State law reference—Authority to designate, SDCL § 32-14-5.



Sec. 17-236.  Designation.



   Whenever any ordinance passed by the common council designates any
one-way street or alley, the public works administrator shall place and
maintain signs giving notice thereof. The signs shall conform to the state
uniform traffic-control devices and shall read "One Way, Do Not Enter." Such
signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at
every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is
prohibited.



(Code 1982, § 23-1000)



Sec. 17-237.  Obedience.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation
of the markings, signs, barriers, or other devices placed in accordance with
the provisions of this division.



(Code 1982, § 23-1001)



Secs. 17-238—17-255.  Reserved.



DIVISION 4. STOP AND YIELD REGULATIONS*



   *State law reference—Required stops, SDCL Ch. 32-29.



Sec. 17-256.  Designation of through streets.



   Whenever the common council shall designate by ordinance any street or
any portion of a street as a through street, the provisions of this article
shall be applicable thereto. The schedule of stop streets and through streets
is on file in the office of the finance officer.



(Code 1982, § 23-1300)



   State law reference—Authority to designate, SDCL § 32-29-2.



Sec. 17-257.  Signs required at through streets.



   Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through
street it shall be the duty of the public works administrator to place and
maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation at any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street
intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is
controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; provided, however, that
at the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of
a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs
shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets as may be
determined by the common council.



(Code 1982, § 23-1301)



Sec. 17-258.  Other intersections where stop or yield required.



   The common council is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazards exist upon other than through streets
and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to
any such intersection, in which event it shall cause to be erected a stop
sign at every such place where a stop is required, or whether vehicles shall
yield the right-of-way to vehicle on a different street at such intersection
as prescribed by the council.



(Code 1982, § 23-1302)



Sec. 17-259.  Action required at stop sign, place of stopping.



   Unless directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated
by a stop sign shall come to a full stop at a clearly marked stop line, but
if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection,
or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering the intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered or is approaching the
intersection from another highway and may not proceed into the intersection
until certain that such intersecting roadway is free from oncoming traffic
which may affect safe passage.



(Code 1982, § 23-1303(B))



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-292.1.



Sec. 17-260.  Duty when approaching yield sign.



   (a)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in
obedience to the sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions, or shall stop if necessary in a similar manner as provided in
section 17-259, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally
crossing the roadway on which he is driving, and to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard. The driver, having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers
of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle
so proceeding.



   (b)   If the driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian in
a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign
without stopping, the collision is prima facie evidence of his failure to
yield the right-of-way.



(Code 1982, § 23-1305)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 3229-3.



Sec. 17-261.  Alley, driveway entrance.



   The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, private
road, or building shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and in a
business orr esidence district shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto the sidewalk area extending across any such way if there is no
sidewalk shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the
driver has a view of the approaching traffic.



(Code 1982, § 23-1306)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL §§ 32-2614, 23-29-2.2.



Sec. 17-262.  Stop when traffic obstructed.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.



(Code 1982, § 23-1307)



Secs. 17-263—17-280.  Reserved.



ARTICLE VI. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*



   *Cross references—Fire lanes established by the fire chief and chief
of police, § 7-52; streets and public rights-of-way, § 14-26 et seq.



   State law reference—Stopping and parking restrictions, SDCL Ch. 32-30.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 17-281.  Unattended vehicles.



   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to
stand unattended without first stopping the engine, effectively setting the
brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheel to
the curb or side of the highway.



(Code 1982, § 23-1500)



   State law reference— Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-5.



Sec. 17-282.  Manner of parking generally.



   No vehicle shall be parked on any street unless such vehicle be parked
parallel to the curb headed in the direction of traffic, with the curbside
wheels of the vehicle within twelve (12) inches of the curb, except upon
those streets designated or marked for angle parking where vehicles shall be
parked at an angle to the curb indicated by such markers or signs, with the
front wheel touching the curb.



(Code 1982, § 23-1501)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-2.1.



Sec. 17-283.  Places where prohibited.



   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official
traffic-control device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle:



   (1)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.



   (2)   On a sidewalk.



   (3)   Within an intersection.



   (4)   On a crosswalk.



   (5)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
(30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.



   (6)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.



   (7)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.



   (8)   On any railroad tracks.



   (9)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.



(Code 1982, § 23-1502)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-6.1.



Sec. 17-284.  Places where restricted.



   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official
trafficcontrol device, no person shall stand or park a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or
passengers:



   (1)   In front of a public or private driveway.



   (2)   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.



   (3)   Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.



   (4)   Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing
signals, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side
of a roadway.



   (5)   Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance when properly sign posted.



   (6)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.



(Code 1982, § 23-1503)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-6.



Sec. 17-285.  Parking in excess of twenty-four hours.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver, operator or owner of any motor
vehicle, trailer or implement to park or leave standing, or permit to be
parked or left standing, any motor vehicle, trailer or implement on any
street, avenue or alley in the city for a continuous period of twenty-four
(24) hours or longer. Any motor vehicle, trailer or implement found to be in
violation of this section shall be towed away at the owners' expense. The
owner shall also be charged for storage if required and any parking tickets
which might have accrued to such vehicle, trailer or implement.



(Code 1982, § 23-1504)



Sec. 17-286.  Unauthorized movement of another vehicle into prohibited area.



   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful.



(Code 1982, § 23-1505)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-6.3.



Sec. 17-287.  Overnight camping and motor home parking limited.



   No camping trailer, tent, travel trailer or motor home may be occupied
in a place other than a commercial campground  except in residential zones.
In residential zones, off street camping trailers, tents, travel trailers and
motor homes may be occupied for no more than ten (10) consecutive days if the
public health, safety or welfare is not endangered.



(Ord. No. 802, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 984, 6-11-04)



Sec. 17-288.  Mid street motorcycle parking allowed.



   During those periods of time and on those streets designated by motion
of the common council, motorcycles may be parked between the white lines in
the middle of the street on those streets signed and marked for mid street
motorcycle parking subject to such restrictions as may be on the official
signs designating such mid street parking areas.



(Ord. No. 881, 5-1-00)



Secs. 17-289—17-305.  Reserved.



DIVISION 2. PARKING RESTRICTED OR LIMITED



Sec. 17-306.  Application.



   The provisions of this division prohibiting the standing or parking of
a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as
indicated or official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control device.



(Code 1982, § 23-1520)



Sec. 17-307.  Regulations not exclusive.



   The provisions of this division imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.



(Code 1982, § 23-1521)



Sec. 17-308.  Designation of prohibited parking.



   Wherever in any street or avenue in the city the curb is painted with a
solid yellow stripe by or under the direction of the traffic engineer, such
stripe or marking shall indicate a "No Parking" area or zone. It shall be
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle adjacent to such marking.



(Code 1982, § 23-1522)



Sec. 17-309.  Designation of limited parking.



   Wherever in any street or avenue the curb is painted with a broken
stripe by or under the direction of the traffic engineer, such broken stripe
or marking shall indicate a limited parking area or zone, the extent of such
limitation to be indicated by signs at the end of each such limited area or
zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle adjacent to such
limited parking zone for longer period than indicated upon signs.



(Code 1982, § 23-1523)



Sec. 17-310.  Penalty for violation.



   The fine charges for illegal parking under the provisions of divisions
1 and 2 of this chapter shall be:



   (1)   Fifteen dollars ($15) for each violation of the fine is paid
in full within ten (10) days from the date of the violation.



   (2)   Thirty dollars ($30) for each violation if the fine is paid in
full within thirty (30) days from the date of the violation.



   (3)   Forty-five dollars ($45) for each violation if the fine is
paid in full within sixty (60) days from the date of the violation.



(Code 1982, § 23-1524)  (Ord. No. 1014, 8-1-05)



Sec. 17-311.  Parking in spaces reserved for handicapped.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle not equipped with
official license plates bearing a handicapped insignia to park on the public
thoroughfares in spaces signed and reserved for handicapped parking.



   (b)   The penalty for illegal parking under the provisions of this
section shall be determined by resolution of the common council from time to
time.



(Ord. No. 486, §§ 30-258, 30-259, 7-20-81)



   State law reference—Physically handicapped person parking, SDCL §
32-30-11.1.



Sec. 17-312.  Failure to pay parking tickets unlawful.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay parking tickets,
notices or warrants for parking violations the fees and fines for which total
more than forty-five dollars ($45.00).  Violation of this section may be
enforced by complaint in the magistrate division of the Fourth Judicial
Circuit, Lawrence County, South Dakota, and the issuance of a summons by the
magistrate judge.  Violation of this provision shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any fines or fees
owed for parking violations set forth in this chapter.  In the alternative,
violation of this section may be enforced by civil action in said court.



(Ord. No. 1029, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 1060, 7-2-07)



Sec. 17-313.  Immobilization or impoundment of vehicle for outstanding
parking violations.



   (a)   A motor vehicle parked upon the public way or public place at
any time may by and under the direction of an officer or member of the
Spearfish Police Department, be immobilized or impounded if there are
forty-five dollars ($45) in unpaid parking violation notices, tickets or
warrants issued for violations pending against the registered owner of the
motor vehicle.



   (b)   The owner of the immobilized or impounded vehicle may be
permitted to secure release of the vehicle upon:



      (1)   Depositing the amount of the fine or penalty for each
violation for which there is an outstanding or otherwise unsettled parking
violation, notice or warrant; and



      (2)   The payment of the fees as required by this section.



   (c)   The owner of an immobilized or impounded vehicle, or other
authorized person, shall have the right to a post-impoundment or
post-immobilization hearing to determine the validity of the impoundment or
immobilization towing and any towing or storage charges.  The hearing must
be requested within fifteen (15) days after the vehicle is immobilized or
impounded and shall be scheduled by the Clerk of Courts for the Magistrate
Court, Fourth Judicial Circuit, Lawrence County, South Dakota.



   (d)   The post-immobilization or post-impoundment hearing will not
be determinative of or adjudicate any citation issued relative to any
immobilized or impounded vehicle.



   (e)   The immobilizing device or mechanism shall remain in place for
forty-eight (48) hours unless the owner has complied with this section by
paying fines and penalties and fees set forth herein.  If the compliance has
not occurred within forty-eight (48) hours, the vehicle shall be towed or
impounded.  Towing and storage fees shall be paid along with fees specified
herein before the owner of the vehicle or authorized person shall be
permitted to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle.  The owner or
other authorized person of an immobilized vehicle shall pay a fee of
forty-five dollars ($45) for the immobilization.  The owner of an impounded
vehicle shall be subject to a towing fee and storage fee charged by the
towing service.



   (f)   If an immobilizing device or mechanism is not used, a vehicle
may still be towed and impounded as specified herein and released upon
payment of the fees set forth in this section.



(Ord. No. 1029, 6-19-06)



Secs. 17-314-17-330.  Reserved.



DIVISION 3. CENTRAL CORE COMMERCIAL - 2 HOUR DOWNTOWN PUBLIC PARKING DISTRICT*



Sec. 17-331.  Application.



   The provisions of this division shall apply to the parking facilities
and parking spaces located within the boundaries of the public parking
district for the area of the city zoned Central Core Commercial as set out
and defined by resolution of the common council which is on file in the
office of the finance officer and shall be in effect at all times or at those
times specified in this division.



(Code 1982, § 23-1530; Ord. No. 1188, 3-3-14)



Sec. 17-332.  Designation.



   Regulated parking spaces are those included within the boundaries of
the following described area:  the south side of Jackson Blvd. from 5th
Street to 7th Street, the east side of 7th Street from Jackson Blvd. to
Hudson Street, the north side of Grant Street from 7th Street to Main Street,
and the west side of 5th Street from Hudson Street to Jackson Blvd.  All
parking areas, both physically on street and boulevard, contained within this
area will be enforced.



(Code 1982, § 23-1531; Ord. No. 1188, 3-3-14; Ord. 1226, 12-21-15)



   *State law reference—Municipal parking facilities, SDCL § 9-51-1 et
seq.



Sec. 17-333.  Markings.



   Lines shall be painted upon the street, designating each parking space
and each vehicle shall park in such lines. It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle across any such line, or to park a vehicle in such a position that it
will not be entirely within the space designated by such lines. Each block
shall be clearly marked so as to indicate the legal parking limit therein.



(Code 1982, § 23-1537; Ord. No. 1188, 3-3-14)



Sec. 17-334.  Unlawful parking.



   No person shall park any vehicle within the boundaries described in
section 17-332 for longer than two (2) hours on any enforcement day as
specified in section 17-335.



(Code 1982, § 23-1538; Ord. No. 1188, 3-3-14; Ord. 1226, 12-21-15)



Sec. 17-335.  Hours of operation.



   The hours of regulation of the public parking district pursuant to the
provisions of this division shall be 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. of all
weekdays (Monday - Friday), holidays excepted.



(Code 1982, § 23-1539; Ord. No. 1188, 3-3-14)



Sec. 17-336.  Regulation of parking.



   Enforcement of parking violations within the public parking district
shall be controlled by the chief of police.



(Code 1982, § 23-1540; Ord. No. 1188, 3-3-14)



Sec. 17-337.  Notice of violation.



   When it is determined that any vehicle is illegally parked, the chief
of police shall have attached to such vehicle a notice stating that such
vehicle has been parked in violation of this division and the fine imposed
for such violation. Thereafter, a notice shall be attached to such vehicle
for each parking period violated. The notice of



violation may be in the form of a courtesy warning at the discretion of the
enforcement officer.



(Code 1982, § 23-1543; Ord. No. 1188, 3-3-14)



Sec. 17-338.  Record of violation.



   The police department shall keep records of all violations of this
division.  The records shall contain the following information.  Date,
time, and location of violation and license plate, make, and model of the
vehicle.  The record may also contain a brief description of circumstances
surrounding the violation.



(Code 1982, § 23-1544; Ord. No. 1188, 3-3-14)



Sec. 17-339.  Fine for violation.



   The fine for violation for any illegal parking under the provisions of
this division shall be $5.00 per occurrence.



(Code 1982, § 23-1545; Ord. No. 1188, 3-3-14)



Sec. 17-340.  Disposition of receipts.



   The monies received from those fines collected as provided in this
division are to provide for the proper regulation, control, and inspection of
parking upon the facilities and public streets located within the public
parking district. Such monies are to be collected and delivered to the
finance officer to be placed in the parking fund.



(Code 1982, § 23-1546; Ord. No. 1188, 3-3-14)



Secs. 17-341-17-360.  Reserved.



ARTICLE VII. PEDESTRIANS*



   *State law reference—Pedestrian's rights and duties, SDCL Ch. 32-27.



Sec. 17-361.  Designation of crosswalks.



   The public works administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to
establish and to designate and shall thereafter maintain, by appropriate
devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks
approximately equal in width to the adjacent sidewalk at all intersections
where in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway.



(Code 1982, § 23-1600)



Sec. 17-362.  Designation of safety zones.



   The public works administrator is hereby empowered to establish safety
zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary
for the protection of pedestrians.



(Code 1982, § 23-1601)



Sec. 17-363.  Right-of-way generally.



   (a)   The operator of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any
unmarked crosswalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the
movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers or traffic-control
signals.



   (b)   Wherever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 23-1602)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-27-1.



Sec. 17-364.  Rights, duties at controlled intersections.



   (a)   Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at
an intersection or a marked crosswalk between intersections the pedestrian
shall have the right-of-way over the drivers of vehicles and at such marked
places drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk
and any pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the
roadway shall have the right-of-way over any vehicle so stopped.



   (b)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any
crosswalk when any vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at
such crosswalk for the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.



(Code 1982, § 23-1603)



   State law reference—Authority to regulate, SDCL § 32-27-3.



Sec. 17-365.  Jaywalking.



   Every pedestrian crossing a highway within a business or residence
district at any point other than a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk or
intersection shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles upon the highway.



(Code 1982, § 23-1604)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-27-4.



Sec. 17-366.  Obey traffic signals.



   At intersections where traffic is directed by police officer or
stop-and-go signals, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the
roadway other than with released traffic and pedestrians shall obey all
traffic signals and directions.



(Code 1982, § 23-1605)



Sec. 17-367.  Soliciting rides.



   It shall be unlawful for any persons to stand in a roadway for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the operator of any private vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 23-1606)



Secs. 17-368—17-385.  Reserved.



ARTICLE VIII. SCHOOL BUSES*



   *State law reference—School buses, SDCL § 32-32-1 et seq.



Sec. 17-386.  Definition.



   For the purposes of this article the term "school bus" shall mean every
vehicle with a capacity of ten (10) or more pupils excluding the driver owned
or operated by or for a school or school district used for the purpose of
transporting school children to and from school or used in connection with
school activities.



(Code 1982, § 23-1700)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-32-1.



Sec. 17-387.  Designation of vehicle.



   Every school bus owned or operated by or for a school or school
district shall bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible signs
containing the words "school bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches
in height. When any such vehicle is being operated upon a highway for
purposes other than the actual transportation of children either to or from
school or in connection with school activities all markings thereon
indicating "school bus" shall be covered or concealed.



(Code 1982, § 23-1701)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-32-2.



Sec. 17-388.  Flashing red and amber lights required; exception; removal
from buses formerly used.



   Any school bus with a capacity for ten (10) or more students, used to
transport children to and from a public or nonpublic school, shall be
equipped on the front and rear with alternately flashing amber caution lights
and alternately flashing red signal lights. However, this section does not
apply to those buses owned by a school district which are used for
transporting children to and from school activities and which are not used to
transport children from home to school and back. Flashing red signal lights
and flashing amber caution lights shall be of a type approved by the state
secretary of commerce and regulation. These signals shall be a complete
system meeting minimum standards as prescribed by state board of education
rules. When a school bus loses its identity as a school bus pursuant to SDCL
§ 32-32-4, the flashing red and amber lights shall be removed.



(Code 1982, § 23-1702)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-32-5.



Sec. 17-389.  Duty of motorists to slow or stop in obedience to amber or red
signal; exception for specified highways.



   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle on a two-lane highway or a
private road meeting or overtaking a school bus on which the amber warning
lights are flashing shall reduce the speed of his vehicle to not more than
twenty (20) miles per hour and proceed past the school bus with caution. The
operator of a motor vehicle when he meets or overtakes a school bus on which
the red signal lights are flashing shall bring his vehicle to a complete stop
not closer than fifteen (15) feet from the school bus and shall remain
stopped until the flashing red signal lights are extinguished.



   (b)   The operator of a motor vehicle on a highway providing two (2)
or more lanes in each direction need not stop when he meets a school bus
which is traveling in the opposite direction even though the school bus is
stopped and its red signal lights flashing. The operator of a motor vehicle
on a highway providing two (2) or more lanes in each direction shall stop
when he overtakes a school bus going in the same direction when the school
bus is stopped and its red lights are flashing.



(Code 1982, § 23-1703)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-32-6.



Sec. 17-390.  When stop not required.



   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not
stop upon meeting or passing a vehicle used and designated as a school bus
which is on a different roadway or when upon a limited or controlled access
highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or
adjacent to such highway or where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the
roadway.



(Code 1982, § 23-1704)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-32-7.



Secs. 17-391—17-405.  Reserved.



ARTICLE IX. TRUCKS*



   *Cross references—Routes for vehicles transporting explosives, §
7-50; routes established for vehicles transporting houses and chemicals, §
7-51 et seq.; streets and public rights-of-way, § 14-26 et seq.



Sec. 17-406.  Truck routes.



   (a)   Definition. As used in this section, the word "truck" shall
mean and include truck, trailer and semi-trailer.



   (b)   Authority to establish. The common council is hereby
authorized to establish truck routes and delivery routes within the corporate
limits of the city by resolution upon receiving the recommendation of the
public works administrator or his designee.



   (c)   Identification. Truck routes and delivery routes established
pursuant to this section shall be identified by signs or markings erected and
maintained by the public works administrator.



   (d)   Use required, deviation. When truck routes have been
established and identified as provided in this section, any person driving a
truck having a total weight of three (3) tons or more shall drive the truck
on truck routes and none other except when the truck is making deliveries at
which time the truck may use established and identified delivery routes. When
using delivery routes the truck shall depart from the truck route upon the
delivery route nearest its destination, leave the delivery route by the
shortest possible route and make its delivery, return to the delivery route
by the shortest possible route and then return to the nearest truck route by
means of the nearest possible delivery route. The delivery routes shall at no
time be used by through trucks which make no deliveries on the route. A truck
may deviate from the established and identified truck route or delivery route
for the purpose of towing a disabled or damaged motor vehicle to or from
public or private property, and then only such deviation from the nearest
truck route or delivery route as is reasonably possible.



   (e)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
emergency vehicles of the police department or fire department, nor to any
public utility vehicles, where actually engaged in the performance of
emergency duties necessary to be performed by such public departments or
public utilities, nor to any vehicle owned by the United States of America,
the state or the city.



   (f)   Deviation permits. The public works administrator shall have
the authority, for cause or upon request, to issue temporary permits for
trucks to operate over routes not established as truck routes or to otherwise
deviate from the provisions of this section. Such action by the public works
administrator shall be subject to review and modification or cancellation by
the common council.



(Ord. No. 644, §§ 23-1801-23-1805, 11-21-88)



Sec. 17-407.  Truck parking restrictions.



   No truck, tractor, trailer, or other motorized cargo vehicle exceeding
eighteen (18) feet in length shall be parked in a residential zone of the
city, except where such parking is required for the loading or unloading of
cargo or freight and delivery of the same, and such parking shall be limited
to the period of time reasonably required to accomplish the purpose thereof.
A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty
dollars ($50.00) and shall be imposable against the owner, operator or driver
of such truck, tractor, and/or trailer.



(Ord. No. 572, § 23-1525, 6-17-85)



Sec. 17-408.  Standing or parking of trucks and commercial vehicles with the
engine running restricted.



   No truck or other commercial vehicle shall be parked or left standing
with the motor running for a period exceeding twenty (20) minutes at any
place within the city limits unless the running of the motor is necessary to
carry out the purpose for which the vehicle is parked or standing. A
violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars
($50.00) and may be imposed against the owner, operator and/or driver of the
vehicle.



(Ord. No. 572, § 23-1526, 6-17-85)



Secs. 17-409—17-425.  Reserved.



ARTICLE X. MOTOR VEHICLE EQUIPMENT*



   *Cross reference—Equipment required on snowmobiles, § 17-450 et seq.



   State law reference—Vehicle equipment, SDCL § 32-15-1 et seq.



Sec. 17-426.  Lights displayed.



   A motor vehicle operated within the city shall, during the period from
a half hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise and any other time
when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any person
on the highway at a distance of two hundred (200) feet ahead shall display at
least two (2) lighted headlamps, one (1) on each side of the front of such
motor vehicle. It shall not be necessary to have lights burning when the
motor vehicle is parked.



(Code 1982, § 24-100)



   State law reference—Vehicle lights, SDCL §§ 32-17-1, 32-17-4.



Sec. 17-427.  Brake requirements.



   Every motor vehicle operated within the city shall be provided with
adequate brakes in good working order and sufficient to control such motor
vehicle at all times when same is in use pursuant to SDCL § 32-18-1 et seq.



(Code 1982, § 24-101)



   State law reference—Brakes and brake fluid, SDCL § 32-18-1 et seq.



Sec. 17-428.  Horn required.



   Every motor vehicle when operated within the city shall be equipped
with a horn in good working order capable of emitting sound audible under
normal conditions from a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet.



(Code 1982, § 24-102)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-15-10.



Sec. 17-429.  Mufflers.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets or highways in the
city unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noises and an
exhaust system pursuant to SDCL § 32-15-17 to prevent annoying smoke. It
shall be unlawful for any person to use a muffler cutout on any motor vehicle
upon the streets, alleys, or highways in the city.



(Code 1982, § 24-103)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-15-17.



Secs. 17-430—17-445.  Reserved.



ARTICLE XI. SNOWMOBILES*



   *State law reference—Snowmobiles, SDCL § 32-20A-1 et seq.



Sec. 17-446.  Definition.



   For the purposes of this article, the word "snowmobile" shall mean and
include any engine-driven vehicle of a type which utilizes sled-type runners,
wheels or skis with an endless belt tread or similar means of contact with
the surface upon which it is operated.



(Code 1982, § 24-300)



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-20A-1(7).



Sec. 17-447.  Compliance required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the
city except in compliance with the provisions of this article.



(Code 1982, § 24-301)



Sec. 17-448.  Operator's license.



   No snowmobile shall be operated within the city until the driver
thereof shall have in his possession a valid driver's or chauffeur's license
issued under the motor vehicle law of the state.



(Code 1982, § 24-302)



Sec. 17-449.  Permitting unauthorized person to drive.



   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a snowmobile owned by him
or under his control to be driven on any public highway in violation of any
of the provisions of this article.



(Code 1982, § 24-303)



Sec. 17-450.  Safety equipment and inspections.



   No snowmobile shall be driven on the roadway, street or alley when such
snowmobile is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property.
The city police department may at any time upon reasonable cause to believe
that a snowmobile is unsafe or not equipped as required by this article,
require the driver of such vehicle to stop and submit such vehicle to an
inspection and test with reference thereto as may be appropriate. No person
shall operate any vehicle which has been found unsafe except to return such
snowmobile to his residence, place of business or to a garage until the
snowmobile has been placed in proper repair.



(Code 1982, § 24-304)



   Cross reference—Equipment required on vehicles, § 17-426 et seq.



Sec. 17-451.  Flagging.



   All snowmobiles shall exhibit a red flag or cloth not less than twelve
(12) inches square and hung or suspended five (5) feet above ground level so
that the entire area thereof is visible from all directions while on any
roadway, street or alley.



(Code 1982, § 24-305)



Sec. 17-452.  Brakes.



   Every snowmobile shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement in good working order and in constant operation and equipped to
prevent excessive or unusual noise or annoying smoke.



(Code 1982, § 24-306)



Sec. 17-453.  Mufflers.



   Every snowmobile shall be at all times equipped with muffler in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise
or annoying smoke.



(Code 1982, § 24-307)



   State law reference—Muffler required, SDCL § 32-20A-2.



Sec. 17-454.  Lights.



   A snowmobile in motion during the period of one-half hour after sunset
to one-half hour before sunrise shall display at least one (1) lighted lamp
on the front and one (1) on the rear of the snowmobile; which headlight and
taillight shall be in conformity with the standards set by state law.



(Code 1982, § 24-308)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-20A-10.



Sec. 17-455.  Permitted operations.



   It shall be unlawful to operate snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles on
city property (except where allowed under section 17-455). This includes
public parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, city campground, and parking
lots. Notwithstanding, the city council can authorize special permission for
an event on city property. This section does notprohibit the use of
snowmobiles or all-terrain vehicles by city officials in the normal course of
their official duties.



(Code 1982, § 24-309; Ord. No. 800, 5-6-96)



Sec. 17-456.  Speed restricted.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the
city at a rate of speed faster than five (5) miles per hour less than the
posted speed limit applicable to other motor vehicles.



(Code 1982, § 24-310)



Sec. 17-457.  Hours of permitted operation.



   No snowmobile shall be operated within the city between the hours of
9:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except that a driver may drive during this restricted
time when he is coming into town to his residence or is leaving town to go to
his residence or when driving from work to his residence.



(Code 1982, § 24-311)



Sec. 17-458.  Rules of the road.



   Every operator of a snowmobile shall observe all of the rules of the
road pertaining to vehicles and in addition shall yield the right-of-way to
motor vehicles.



(Code 1982, § 24-312)



Secs. 17-459—17-475.  Reserved.



ARTICLE XII. BICYCLES*



   *State law reference— Bicycles, SDCL § 32-20B-1 et seq.



Sec. 17-476.  Lights required.



   No bicycle shall be permitted on any street, highway or boulevard of
the city between thirty (30) minutes after sunset and thirty (30) minutes
before sunrise without a headlight visible from the front thereof for not
less than three hundred (300) feet, nor without a red taillight or in lieu
thereof a reflector attached to and visible from the rear of such bicycle for
a distance of not less than two hundred (200) feet.



(Code 1982, § 25-100)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-17-25.



Sec. 17-477.  Unauthorized use.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to take any bicycle for the purpose
of riding or propelling the same within the city without consent of the owner.



(Code 1982, § 25-110)



Sec. 17-478.  Traffic regulations generally.



   Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other
public highway in the city shall observe all traffic rules and regulations
applicable thereto; and shall turn only at intersections, signal for all
turns, ride at the right-hand side of the street or highway, pass to the left
when passing overtaken vehicles and individuals that are slower moving and
shall pass vehicles to the right when meeting.



(Code 1982, § 25-200)



   State law reference—Operation on roadway, SDCL § 32-20B-5.



Sec. 17-479.  Traffic-control devices.



   Person riding or propelling any bicycle shall observe all traffic signs
and stop at all stop signs.



(Code 1982, § 25-201)



Sec. 17-480.  Passengers prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any bicycle upon a public street
of the city to carry or permit to be carried any other person upon such
bicycle, unless the bicycle has been designed or modified for the carriage of
an additional person.



(Code 1982, § 25-202)



Sec. 17-481.  Riding on sidewalks.



   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public sidewalk
within the city in such a manner as to interfere with any pedestrian thereon.



(Code 1982, § 25-203)



Sec. 17-482.  Speed.



   No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper, but
every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the
operator and other persons upon the sidewalks, streets and other public
highways of the city.



(Code 1982, § 25-204)



Sec. 17-483.  Riding abreast.



   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or other
public highway in the city abreast of or to the left of more than one (1)
other person riding or propelling a bicycle.



(Code 1982, § 25-205)



Sec. 17-484.  Clinging to vehicles.



   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle by holding on, clinging to or
attaching such bicycle in any manner to any other vehicle on any public
highway or street.



(Code 1982, § 25-206)



   State law reference—Clinging from motorcycle prohibited, § 32-20-6.5.



Secs. 17-485—17-500.  Reserved.



ARTICLE XIII. ABANDONED VEHICLES*



   *Cross references— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9;
nuisances, § 9-26 et seq.; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; solid
waste, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; streets
and public rights-of-way, § 14-26 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 15; zoning,
App. A.



   State law references—Abandoned vehicles, SDCL § 32-30-12 et seq.;
abandoned vehicles, authority to modify procedure, SDCL § 32-30-12.1.



Sec. 17-501.  Determination of abandonment.



   Whenever any vehicle is left unattended on any public street, alley
way, or parking lot within the city for a longer period than twenty-four (24)
hours without notifying the chief of police where such vehicle is parked, it
shall be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle and subject to the provisions of
this article.



(Code 1982, § 24-200)



Sec. 17-502.  Vehicles blocking traffic, wrecked vehicles.



   A vehicle found unattended upon a bridge or causeway or on the traveled
portion of any street where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction and
hazard to traffic or a vehicle which appears to have sustained reportable
accident damage may be removed at any time and without regard to the
twenty-four-hour period provided for in this article.



(Code 1982, § 24-201)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-14.



Sec. 17-503.  Removal.



   Whenever any police officer finds an abandoned vehicle within the city,
he is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the
nearest garage or place of safety.



(Code 1982, § 24-202)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-13.



Sec. 17-504.  Notice to owner.



   It shall be the duty of the police department to notify by certified
mail the registered owner and if encumbered, the lien holder shall also be
notified of the removal and storage of any vehicle under the provisions of
this article and where such vehicle has been stored and that the registered
owner of the vehicle may recover the vehicle upon the payment of all costs
incident to the removal and storage of such vehicle.



(Code 1982, §§ 24-203, 24-204)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-15.



Sec. 17-505.  Sale of unclaimed vehicle.



   If after three (3) months from the date of mailing the notice of
removal and storage provided for by this article the vehicle shall remain
unclaimed, such vehicle may be sold by the police department at public
auction upon notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the county not less than once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks.



(Code 1982, § 24-205)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-16.



Sec. 17-506.  Notice of sale.



   The notice of sale provided for by this article shall contain a
description of the removed and stored vehicle, including the year, make,
model, serial number, color, license number, if any, a statement that the
vehicle was found abandoned,the date thereof, and the place, date, and time
at which such vehicle shall be sold, which date shall not be sooner than one
(1) week following the date of the last publication of notice.



(Code 1982, § 24-206)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-16.



Sec. 17-507.  Disposition of funds from sale.



   After the costs of removing, storing, advertising and selling a vehicle
under the provisions of this article are deducted, the balance of the funds
derived from the sale of such vehicle under this article shall be held for
the owner of such vehicle for a period of ninety (90) days. If such proceeds
are not claimed at the expiration of such ninety-day period, such proceeds
shall be paid into the general fund of the city.



(Code 1982, § 24-207)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-17.



Sec. 17-508.  Lien for costs.



   The police department shall have a possessory lien upon any vehicle
removed under the provisions of this article for the costs in taking custody
of and storing such vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 24-208)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-18.



Sec. 17-509.  Title may vest in city.



   If, after six (6) months from the date of mailing the notice of removal
and storage provided for by this article, the vehicle shall remain unclaimed,
the title to such vehicle shall be vested in the city, and such vehicle may
be disposed of in any manner as may be provided by the common council. The
proceeds of any such disposal shall first be applied to the costs incurred in
the enforcement of this article with the balance to be deposited to the
general fund of the city.



(Code 1982, § 24-209)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-16.1.



Sec. 17-510.  Notice to commissioner of vehicles.



   Within thirty (30) days after acquiring title to any vehicle under the
provisions of this article, the common council shall notify the department of
commerce and regulation thereof and shall provide the department of commerce
and regulation on such form as it may prescribe, all facts and information
relevant thereto as it may require. Upon receipt thereof, the department of
commerce and regulation shall notify the owner of record at his last known
address of the actions taken.



(Code 1982, § 24-210)



   State law reference—Similar provisions, SDCL § 32-30-16.1.



CHAPTER 18 UTILITIES*




   Art. I.   In General, §§ 18-1—18-35





   Art. II.   Water Service, §§ 18-36—18-60





   Art. III.    Sanitary Sewer Service, §§ 18-61—18-215





      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 18-61—18-85





      Div. 2.   Administration, §§ 18-86—18-105





      Div. 3.   Private Disposal Systems, §§ 18-106—18-130





      Div. 4.   Building Sewers and Sanitary Sewer System
Connections, §§ 18-131—18-155





      Div. 5.   Sanitary Sewer System Use Regulations, §§
18-156—18-185





      Div. 6.   Rate Determination System, §§ 18-186—18-215





   Art. IV.    Rates and Charges and Billing Procedure, §§
18-216—18-300





      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 18-216—18-235





      Div. 2.   Water, §§ 18-236—18-260





      Div. 3.   Sanitary Sewer, §§ 18-261—18-280





      Div. 4.   Billing Procedure, §§ 18-281—18-300





   Art. V.    Utility Trunkline Cost Recapture Agreements, § 18-301




   *Cross references—Administration, Ch. 2; finance, § 2-161 et seq.;
buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; building construction standards,
§ 6-26 et seq.; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7; flood prevention and
protection, Ch. 8; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; plumber's license
required, § 10-231 et seq.; license required for solid waste collectors and
haulers, § 10-251 et seq.; water supply in mobile home parks, § 12-141;
sewer service in mobile home parks, § 12-152; solid waste, Ch. 13; streets,
sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; excavations in the streets, alleys
or public grounds requirements, § 14-131 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 15A;
water and sewer facility requirements in subdivisions, § 15A-89 et seq.;
zoning, App. A.



   State law reference—Utilities, SDCL 9-47-1 et seq.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 18-1.  Definition.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the word "utility" shall be construed
to mean and include water, sewer, garbage collection and/or any other utility
service furnished by the city to consumers thereof.



(Code 1982, § 19-100)



Sec. 18-2.  Scope of chapter provisions.



   All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the
terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to
any person; or whereby the city shall make any utility connection or perform
any work of any kind in connection with the furnishings of any utility
service. The city may for its convenience install metering devices in
connection with any utility service.



(Code 1982, § 19-102)



Sec. 18-3.  Service to comply with technical regulations.



   Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter
shall be in accordance with and in compliance with all applicable technical
provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations.



(Code 1982, § 19-103)



Sec. 18-4.  Inspections outside city.



   In order to protect the city's utility systems, the city shall not make
any taps or connections to such systems outside the city limits until the
proposed customer's facilities and premises have been inspected and approved
by the appropriate inspector of the city which inspection shall be made only
after deposit of the stipulated fee for such inspection.



(Code 1982, § 19-105)



Sec. 18-5.  Termination of service authorized.



   The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or
reconnect any utility service for the following reasons:



   (1)   Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law.



   (2)   Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility
service.



   (3)   Nonpayment of bills.



   (4)   Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or
imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise.



   (5)   Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or
regulating the supply of utility service.



   (6)   Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment
therefor.



   (7)   Vacancy of premises.



(Code 1982, § 19-106)



Sec. 18-6.  Application required.



   Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall
make application for the same to the city auditor. Such application shall
contain the applicant's name, address and the uses for which such service is
desired. A separate application shall be made for each premises to be
serviced. The applicant shall abide by the rules and regulations established
by the city relative to utility service in effect at the time of his
application and as they may be revised from time to time.



(Code 1982, § 19-107)



Sec. 18-7.  Use of service assumed.



   All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be
assumed to be using such service and the owner or occupant shall be charged
therefor so long as such service shall remain connected with the utility
service. In the event premises, commercial, residential or other, are not
served by independent service lines capable of being shut off, the charges
for the services to such residences or premises shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the property.



(Code 1982, § 19-109; Ord. No. 561, § 19-109, 3-19-84)



Sec. 18-8.  Right of entry.



   Any authorized inspector of the city shall have free access at any
reasonable time to all premises supplied with any utility service by the city
for the purpose of examination in order to protect the utility service from
abusive use. All service meters must be installed/located for easy
accessibility by any authorized inspector or maintenance personnel.  All
meters in new and remodel construction shall be installed so a minimum
clearance of twelve (12) inches from the inlet port, twelve (12) inches from
the outlet port and thirty-six (36) inches from one side of the meter is
maintained for maintenance access.



(Code 1982, § 19-110; Ord. No. 868, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 1163, 10-15-12)



Sec. 18-9.  Damage, trespass of equipment.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to
do so, to open any water hydrant or tamper with any utility service furnished
by the city to consumers or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass
upon any equipment or premises belonging to the city connected with any
utility service.



   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater
facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to a charge
of disorderly conduct.



(Code 1982, § 19-111; Ord. No. 511, art. VI, § 1, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-10.  Unlawful use.



   No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to
connect, turn on, turn off or disconnect any utility service offered by the
city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such
utility service unless such person has received permission from the public
works department to do so.



(Code 1982, § 19-112; Ord. No. 1046, 1-2-07).



Sec. 18-11.  Interruption of service.



   Consumers of any utility service furnished by the city are hereby
notified that the supply of such utility may be temporarily shut off at any
time. Notice shall be given, if feasible, of the contemplated shutoff, but
accidents may render this impossible; hence the city hereby warns those
dependent upon the utility service or any purpose of this hazard. Immediately
upon finding the supply shutoff, it becomes the duty of the occupant of the
premises to take prompt precautions to prevent damages.



(Code 1982, § 19-113)



Sec. 18-12.  Sale of service by customer.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to resell any utility service
obtained from the city to others except upon written agreement with the
common council.



(Code 1982, § 19-114)



Sec. 18-13.  Connections to service.



   Connections, disconnections, repairs, replacements or removals for any
public utility service shall be inspected by the public works department.



(Code 1982, § 19-115; Ord. No. 1046, 1-2-07)



Sec. 18-14.  Petroleum products prohibited in stormwater or sanitary sewer
systems.



   The use of the sewer system of the city, including the sanitary sewer
system and the storm sewer system, for the disposal of crude oil, refined oil
or any and all other petroleum products, is hereby prohibited.



(Code 1982, § 19-120)



Sec. 18-15.  Utility user classifications.



   (a)   Class 1, residential. A residential utility user is defined as
a single-family unit. Trailers, mobile homes, units in multiple-family
dwellings up to and including four-plex units are considered residential
units when each unit is metered separately.



   (b)   Class 2, commercial. Commercial utility user units are defined
as those units offering goods or services to general public. Some users
include but are not limited to restaurants, merchandise store, filling
stations, motels, hotels, apartments, rental units, and trailer parks.



   (c)   Class 3, industrial. Industrial utility users are defined as
those involved in manufacturing or wholesaling. Industrial users are
commercial users not involved in the distribution or sale of goods and
services to the general public.



   (d)   Class 4, excessive use units. Excessive use units are defined
as those commercial or industrial units whose consumption of water exceeds
two hundred twenty-five thousand (225,000) gallons per month.



(Code 1982, § 19-122; Ord. No. 714, 12-2-91)



Sec. 18-16.  Extension of lines.



   The city shall run water or sewer lines outside the municipal limits
solely at the city's discretion. Any person, corporation, partnership,
association, governmental agency, or any division or subdivision of
government which desires to construct water or sewer lines outside the
corporate limits of the city and desires to connect the water or sewer lines
to the city's water and/or sewer system shall submit a copy of the plans and
specifications for the lines to the common council for approval. Such plans
and specifications must be approved by the common council before construction
can begin. All parties connected onto such lines shall be regulated and
charged connection fees and other fees as set forth and regulated by the city.



(Code 1982, § 19-121)



Sec. 18-17.  Multi-unit residential property.



   From and after the first day of December 1999, all multi-unit
residential properties that are serviced by a single metered service line,
(i.e. one (1) water service meter for more than one (1) individual unit) must
be held in the name of the property owner.



(Ord. No. 868, 9-7-99)



Sec. 18-18.  Service line maintenance.



   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain water
and sanitary sewer service lines from and including the tapping saddle or
boot to the structure or property served.



   If curb stop is not in working order, the City will notify property
owner by certified mail. If not repaired within two weeks, the city will
repair and bill the cost to the property owner. Written agreement will also
be accepted between City and property owner to repair within adequate
arranged time.



   In the event water turn off access is needed, the customer will have 24
hours to move vehicles or other obstructions from the curb stop. Failure to
do so will result in a Curb Stop Obstruction Fine and the City reserves the
right to have the vehicle or other obstruction removed at the owner’s
expense.



(Ord. No. 996, 11-5-04; Ord. 1147, 11-21-11)



Sec. 18-19.   Cost of service line maintenance.



   The Water/Sewer Utilities Superintendent shall establish a policy, with
the consent of the Common Council, for cost associated with repair and
maintenance of water and sewer service lines, repair coordination, payment of
contractors and timelines for repairs of leaks. The policy shall clearly
state costs which are the responsibility of the property owner and those
costs that will remain the responsibility of the city.



(Ord. No. 1163, 10-15-12)



Sec. 18-20.   Contractors required to be certified.



   Any person who installs, does maintenance on, makes connections to, or
replaces water or sewer services or lines to the city's system shall hold a
city contractor's license and be licensed by the South Dakota Plumbing
Commission or certified by South Dakota Department of Environment and Natural
Resources:



   Plumbing Contractor



   Plumbing Journeyman



   Sewer & Water Contractor



   Sewer & Water Installer



   Water Distribution Operator.



(Ord. No. 1163, 10-15-12)



Secs. 18-21—18-35. Reserved.



ARTICLE II. WATER SERVICE*



   *Cross-reference— Water supply in mobile home parks, & § 12-141.



   State law reference— Water supply systems, SDCL § 9-47-1 et seq.



Sec. 18-36.  Water service lines.



   Each residential unit or commercial unit within the city shall have a
service line connected with the municipal water system in accordance with
this section. Such service lines shall be of material meeting the
specifications as set forth by the Water/Wastewater Utilities Superintendent
and approved by the City Engineer, and of such size as to meet the minimum
requirements of the South Dakota Plumbing Code and the requirements set forth
in the Standard Specifications for Installation and Repair of Water and Sewer
Service Lines, as adopted by the City of Spearfish, and as may be amended
from time to time.



(Code 1982, § 19-123; Ord. No. 561, § 19-123, 3-19-84; Ord. No. 797,
3-18-96; Ord. No. 1180, 7-1-13; Ord. No. 1181, 9-3-13)



Sec. 18-37.  Public hydrants restricted.



   All hydrants erected in this city for fire purposes are hereby declared
to be public hydrants and no persons other than members of the fire
department or the city water department shall open any of the hydrants or
attempt to draw water from the same, or at any time uncover or remove any
protection from them, or in any manner interfere with the same except by
permission of authorized officials.



(Code 1982, § 19-118)



Sec. 18-38.  Water meters generally.



   Water meters for the measurement of all classes of service provided by
the city shall be furnished by the city with the cost thereof borne by the
requesting party and paid at the time of receipt of a building permit. Such
meters shall be installed by a licensed plumber or authorized person. The
city shall retain control and be responsible for the cost of meter
replacement due to normal meter usage. Any meter having been abused, tampered
with, intentionally damaged or damaged through the fault or misuse by the
customer shall be replaced at the customer's expense, costs of which shall be
set by resolution.



(Code 1982, § 19-116; Ord. No. 649, 3-6-89; Ord. No. 714, 12-2-91; Ord. No.
786, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 1163, 10-15-12)



Sec. 18-39.  Lawn meters.



   Lawn meters shall be paid in full to the public works department when
they are picked up.



(Ord. No. 649, 3-6-89; Ord. No. 714, 12-2-91)



Sec. 18-40.  Reading dials for meters.



   (a)   All water meters shall be equipped with a remote reading
device capable of being read by a radio receiving unit and/or any future
upgrade needed to ensure efficient service provided by the City Water
Department.  The device shall be installed under the direction of the city
water department on all water meters, the type of device and the date of
installation to be determined by the city. The cost of installing such device
shall be at current value, set by resolution and found in the city schedule
of fees. The city shall retain ownership of the device, and the device will
be under the control of the city water department at all times. The device
shall be considered as part of the water meter servicing the property and
shall not be removed or altered except by employees of the city.  Where an
outside meter reading device shall be installed for a nonresidential building
and the cost of such installation exceeds the established charge, the
property owner shall be required to pay an additional charge which will cover
the additional cost of installation.



   (b)   If the consumer or property owner refuses to grant access to
the city to install a remote reading device, the water may be shut off to
such property.



   (c)   City water users whose meters do not have remote reading dials
shall purchase the same as determined by the common council.



(Code 1982, § 19-117; Ord. No. 594, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 649, 3-6-89; Ord. No.
771, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 1016, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 1102, 9-8-09)



Sec. 18-41.  Water shortages-Defined.



   Whenever the city determines that an emergency exists, in that the
water supply available to the entire city for essential functions is in
jeopardy because of drought, flood, natural disaster, other act of God, or
any other cause beyond the control of the city, the city may impose such
restrictions on the use of water as it determines to be necessary to meet
such emergency. In the event the city declares such an emergency and imposes
restrictions on the use of water, all users of the city's water shall submit
to those restrictions.



(Code 1982, § 19-219)



   Cross reference—Definitionsand rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



Sec. 18-42.  Same-Regulation of outdoor water use.



   Whenever the city determines that an emergency exists as provided in
section 18-41, outdoor water use within the city water system shall be
regulated as follows:



   (1)   Residential lawn watering is prohibited between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (2)   Residential lawn watering during permitted hours will be
conducted with no more than two (2) sprinklers or fifty-foot soaker hoses and
hose diameter shall not exceed five-eighths inch.



   (3)   No watering shall be conducted with an open hose.



   (4)   Residential users with underground sprinkling systems and
commercial and public water systems shall be regulated by the city water
department.



(Code 1982, § 19-220)



   Cross reference—Vegetation, Ch. 19; trees, § 19-26 et seq.



Sec. 18-43.  Same-Amendment of regulations by resolution.



   Upon adoption of a resolution by the common council declaring an
emergency water shortage, the council may, by resolution, amend and modify
the restrictions set forth in section 18-42 and make such other regulations
pertaining to the use of water within the city as is deemed in the public
interest.



(Code 1982, § 19-221)



Sec. 18-44.  Abandoned water lines.



   Abandoned water lines must be capped or plugged at the corporation stop
unless otherwise directed by the public works department.



(Ord. No. 1046, 1-2-07)



Sec. 18-45.  Water meters.



   Water meters must be installed within the structures they are serving
whenever possible. When a meter pit becomes necessary outside of the
structure, the meter(s) must be accessible from ground level without entering
the pit.



(Ord. No. 1046, 1-2-07)



Secs. 18-46—18-60.     Reserved.



ARTICLE III. SANITARY SEWER SERVICE*



   *Cross reference—Sewerservice in mobile home parks, § 12-152.



   State law reference—Sewersystems, SDCL § 9-48-1 et seq.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 18-61.  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius,
expressed in milligrams per liter.



   Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of
a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face
of the building wall.



   Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection.



   Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to receive both wastewater
and storm or surface water.



   Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of
land owned by others.



   Floatable oil shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such
that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pre-treatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with
the collection system.



   Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.



   Industrial wastes shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes,
trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.



   Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and
combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or ground water.



   pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams,
per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a
hydrogen-ion concentration of 10-7.



   Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch
(1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.



   Public sewer shall mean a common sewer controlled by a governmental
agency or public utility.



   Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface
waters that are not admitted intentionally.



   Sewage is the spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater."



   Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage
water.



   Slug shall mean any discharge of water or waste-water which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation
and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment works.



   Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a drain or
sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water
from any source.



   Superintendent shall mean the (superintendent of wastewater facilities,
and/or of wastewater treatment works, and/or of water pollution control) of
the city.



   Suspended solids shall mean total suspended matter that either floats
on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other
liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred
to as nonfilterable residue.



   Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



   Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. From the
standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater
that may be present.



   Wastewater facilities shall mean the structures, equipment, and
processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial
wastes and dispose of the effluent.



   Wastewater treatment works shall mean an arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes
used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment
plant" or "water pollution control plant."



   Watercourse shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage
of water either continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. No. 511, art. I, §§ 1-27, 9-20-82)



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



Sec. 18-62.  Sewer service lines.



   Each residential unit or commercial unit within the city shall have a
service line connected with the municipal sewer system in accordance with
this section. Such service lines shall be of material meeting the
specifications as set forth by the Water/Wastewater Utilities Superintendent
and approved by the City Engineer and of such size to meet the minimum
requirements of the South Dakota Plumbing Code and the requirements set forth
in the Standard Specifications for Installation and Repair of Water and Sewer
Service Lines, as adopted by the City of Spearfish, and as may be amended
from time to time.



(Code 1982, § 19-124; Ord. No. 1180, 7-1-13; Ord. No. 1181, 9-3-13)



Sec. 18-63.  Unsanitary deposits prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



(Ord. No. 511, art. II, § 1, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-64.  Discharges into natural outlet.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 511, art. II, § 2, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-65.  Disposal of wastewater.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool, or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of wastewater. Alternate plumbing fixtures and disposal
methods may be acceptable based on engineering designs and national standards
when approved by the authority having jurisdiction.



(Ord. No. 511, art. II, § 3, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 1046, 1-2-07; Ord. No. 1154,
9-17-12)



Sec. 18-66.  When sewer connection required (with exceptions).



   The owner of each house, building, or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the
city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer
of the city, is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within
ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided a public
sewer is within two hundred (200) feet of the property line.



   Under circumstances where alternate plumbing fixtures and disposal
methods have been allowed within the two hundred (200) feet requirement and
nuisances develop from these systems, connection to the municipal sanitary
system must be completed within ninety (90) days.



(Ord. No. 511, art. II, § 4, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 1154, 9-17-12)



Sec. 18-67.  Violations, penalty, liability.



   (a)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this
article, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.



   (b)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limits provided for in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (c)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article
shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned
the city by reason of such violation.



(Ord. No. 511, art. VIII, 9-20-82)



Secs. 18-68—18-85.    Reserved.



DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION



Sec. 18-86.  Right of entry.



   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in
accordance with the provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 511, art. VII, § 1, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-87.  Right to information.



   The superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The
industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information
in question might result in an advantage to competitors.



(Ord. No. 511, art. VII, § 2, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-88.  Liability of companies, city.



   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in this article, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
city employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage
to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands
for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company growing
out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required
in section 18-163.



(Ord. No. 511, art. VII, § 3, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-89.  Entry onto certain easements.



   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the
wastewater facilities lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.



(Ord. No. 511, art. VII, § 4, 9-20-82)



Secs. 18-90—18-105.  Reserved.



DIVISION 3. PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS



Sec. 18-106.  When required.



   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of this article, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this
article.



(Ord. No. 511, art. III, § 1, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-107.  Permit required; fee.



   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
superintendent. A permit and inspection fee may be charged by the city at the
time the application is filed.



(Ord. No. 511, art. III, § 2, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-108.  Inspection, approval of work.



   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction, and, in any event the applicant for the permit
shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection,
and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within twenty-four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent.



(Ord. No. 511, art. III, § 3, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-109.  Specifications generally.



   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department
of water and natural resources. No permit shall be issued for any private
wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the lot is less than one (1) acre. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.



(Ord. No. 511, art. III, § 4, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-110.  Connection to public sewer; filling of private facility.



   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to property served by
a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 18-109, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer within sixty (60) days in
compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with suitable material.



(Ord. No. 511, art. III, § 5, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-111.  Sanitary maintenance.



   The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.



(Ord. No. 511, art. III, § 6, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-112.  Additional requirements.



   No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer.



(Ord. No. 511, art. III, § 7, 9-20-82)



Secs. 18-11—18-130.  Reserved.



DIVISION 4. BUILDING SEWERS AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTIONS*



   *Cross references—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; mobile
home parks, § 12-26 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 15.



Sec. 18-131.  Permit required.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent.



(Ord. No. 511, art. IV, § 1, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-132.  Classification of permits; inspection fee.



   (a)   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits:



   (1)   For residential and commercial service, and



   (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.



   In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent.



   (b)   A permit and inspection fee for residential, commercial, and
industrial building sewer permits shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed.



(Ord. No. 511, art. N, § 2, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-133.  Liability for costs.



   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.



(Ord. No. 511, art. IV, § 3, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-134.  Separate connections; adjoining properties.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building: Except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer, but the city does not and
will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or
resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.



(Ord. No. 511, art. IV, § 4, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-135.  Use of old sewers.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet
all requirements of this division.



(Ord. No. 511, art. IV, § 5, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-136.  Technical specifications.



   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary
sewers, including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and back-filling the trench, shall
all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of suitable code
provisions or in application thereof, the materials and procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice
No. 9 shall apply.



(Ord. No. 511, art. W, § 6, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-137.  Point of connection; lifter.



   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by suchbuilding drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the buildings sewer.



(Ord. No. 511, art. IV, § 7, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-138.  Surface runoff restricted.



   (a)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to
a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by
the superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.



   (b)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.E.F. Manual of Practice
No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and
verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation.



(Ord. No. 511, art. IV, § 8, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 1046, 1-2-07)



Sec. 18-139.  Request for inspection.



   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the
supervision of the superintendent.



(Ord. No. 511, art. W, § 10, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-140.  Excavations.



   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.



(Ord. No. 511, art. IV, § 11, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-141.  Abandoned sewer lines.



   Abandoned sewer lines will be removed from the sewer main and the patch
in the sewer line will be replaced pursuant to the current method approved by
the public works department.



(Ord. No. 1046, 1-2-07)



Secs. 18-142—18-155.  Reserved.



DIVISION 5. SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM USE REGULATIONS



Sec. 18-156.  Unpolluted discharges—Generally.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff
from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be
discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the superintendent.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 1, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-157.  Same—Combined, storm sewers; natural outlets.



   Stormwater, other than that exempted under section 18-156, and all
other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the superintendent and other regulatory agencies.
Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural
outlet.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 2, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-158.  Discharges prohibited into public sewers.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described water or wastes to any public sewers:



   (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.



   (2)   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal systems, or to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or have an adverse
effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works. Any
user discharging any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the costs of
managing the effluent or the sludge of the city's treatment works, shall pay
for such increased costs.



   (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than (5.5) or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works.



   (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 3, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-159.  Certain discharges limited.



   The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall
be limited to discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will
not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. The superintendent may set limitations lower than the limitations
established in the regulations below if in his opinion such more severe
limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his
opinion as to the acceptability, the superintendent will give consideration
to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the
wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment
plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant,
and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer
which shall not be violated without approval of the superintendent are as
follows:



   (1)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
(150) degrees Fahrenheit (65° Celsius).



   (2)   Wastewater containing more than twenty-five (25) milligrams
per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of
mineral oil origin.



   (3)   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils,
fat, or grease.



   (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see section
18-61). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes,
hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or
similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in
kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by
caterers.



   (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc
and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such
material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials.



   (6)   Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent.



   (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.



   (8)   Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
slug.



   (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



   (10)   Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other water
or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 4, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-160.  Discretionary authority of superintendent.



   (a)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in section 18-159, and in the judgment
of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent
may:



   (1)   Reject the wastes,



   (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers,



   (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge,
and/or



   (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of section 18-165.



   (b)   When considering the above alternatives, the superintendent
shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the
discharger. If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the superintendent.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 5, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-161.  Interceptors.



   (a)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as
specified in section 18-159(3), or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units.



   (b)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captivated material and shall maintain
records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by
the superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not
performed by owner personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste
disposal firms.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 6, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-162.  Maintenance of pretreatment, flow-equalizing facilities.



   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 7, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-163.  Control structures.



   When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such structures, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 8, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-164.  Certain information may be required.



   The superintendent may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this article. These
requirements may include:



   (1)   Wastewaters' discharge peak rate and volume over a specified
time period.



   (2)   Chemical analyses of wastewaters.



   (3)   Information on raw materials, processes, and products
affecting wastewater volume and quality.



   (4)   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil,
solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control.



   (5)   A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer
pretreatment facility location.



   (6)   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.



   (7)   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of
materials through spills to the municipal sewer.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 9, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-165.  Standard for measurements, tests, etc.



   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health
Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies
are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the
superintendent.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 10, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-166.  Status of special agreement.



   No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment.



(Ord. No. 511, art. V, § 11, 9-20-82)



Secs. 18-167—18-185.  Reserved.



DIVISION 6. RATE DETERMINATION SYSTEM



Sec. 18-186.  Purpose.



   The purpose of this division shall be to generate sufficient revenue to
pay all costs for the operation and maintenance of the complete wastewater
system. The costs shall be distributed to all users of the wastewater system
in proportion to each user's contribution to the total loading of the
treatment works. Factors such as strength (BOD and SS), volume, and delivery
flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included as the basis for
the user's contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of operation
and maintenance costs to each user (or user class).



(Ord. No. 512, § 1, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-187.  Determining total annual cost of operation, maintenance.



   The city shall determine the total annual costs of operation and
maintenance of the wastewater system which are necessary to maintain the
capacity and performance, during the service life of the treatment works, for
which such works were designed and constructed. The total annual cost of
operation and maintenance shall include but need not be limited to labor,
repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power,
sampling, laboratory tests, and a reasonable contingency fund.



(Ord. No. 512, § 2, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-188.  Determining each user's wastewater contribution percentage.



   (a)   The city shall determine each user's average daily volume of
wastewater, which has been discharged to the wastewater system, which shall
then be divided by the average daily volume of all wastewater discharged to
the wastewater system, to determine each user's volume contribution
percentage. The amount used as the total average daily volume of wastewater
shall exclude infiltration and inflow. The city shall determine each user's
average daily poundage of five-day twenty-degree Celcius biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) which has been discharged to the wastewater system which shall
then be divided by the average daily poundage of all five-day BOD discharged
to the wastewater system to determine each user's BOD contribution percentage.



   (b)   The city shall determine each user's average suspended solids
(SS) poundage which has been discharged to the wastewater system which shall
then be divided by the average daily poundage of all suspended solids
discharged to the wastewater system, to determine the user's suspended solids
contribution percentage. Each user's volume contribution percentage, BOD
contribution percentage and suspended solids contribution percentage shall be
multiplied by the annual operation and maintenance costs for wastewater
treatment of the total volume flow, of the total five-day twenty-degree
Celcius BOD and of the suspended solids, respectively.



(Ord. No. 512, § 3, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-189.  Determining a surcharge system for users with excess BOD and
SS.



   The city will determine the average suspended solids (SS) and
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) daily loadings for the average residential
user. The city will assess a surcharge rate for all non-residential users
discharging wastes with BOD and SS strengths greater than the average
residential user. Such users will be assessed a surcharge sufficient to cover
the costs of treating such users' above normal strength wastes. Normal
strength wastes are considered to be two hundred (200) p.p.m. BOD and two
hundred fifty (250) p.p.m. SS. The surcharge rate structure for such above
normal strength waste dischargers is on file in the office of the finance
officer.



(Ord. No. 512, § 4, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-190.  Determining each user's wastewater service charge.



   Each nonresidential user's wastewater treatment cost contributions as
determined in sections 18-188 and 18-189 shall be added together to determine
such user's annual wastewater service charge. Residential users may be
considered to be one (1) class of user and an equitable service charge may be
determined for each user based upon an estimate of the total wastewater
contribution of this class of user. The common council may classify
industrial, commercial, and other nonresidential establishments as a
residential user, provided that the wastes from these establishments are
equivalent to the wastes from the average residential user with respect to
volume, suspended solids, and BOD. Each user's wastewater treatment cost
contribution will be assessed in accordance with the rate schedule on file in
the office of the finance officer.



(Ord. No. 512, § 5, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-191.  Wastewater facilities replacement fund.



   A reserve fund called the wastewater facilities replacement fund is
hereby established within the wastewater utility fund for the purpose of
providing sufficient funds to be expended for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories and appurtenances during the useful life (twenty (20)
years) of the wastewater treatment facilities necessary to maintain the
capacity and performance for which such facilities are designed and
constructed.



(Ord. No. 512, § 6, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-192.  Payment of user's wastewater service charge and penalties.



   The city shall submit an annual statement to the user for the user's
annual wastewater service charge or one-twelfth of the user's annual
wastewater service charge may be included with the monthly water and/or
wastewater utility billing. The city may add a penalty of one and one-half (1
1/2) percent per month if the payment is not received by the city within
fifteen (15) days. Should any user fail to pay the user charge within three
(3) months of the due date, the city may stop the wastewater service to the
property.



(Ord. No. 512, § 7, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-193.  Review of each user's wastewater service charge.



   The city shall review the total annual cost of operation and
maintenance as well as each user's wastewater contribution percentage not
less often than every two (2) years and will revise the system as necessary
to assure equity of the service charge system established herein and to
assure that sufficient funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain
the wastewater treatment works. If a significant user, such as an industry,
has completed in-plant modifications which would change that user's
wastewater contribution percentage, the user can present at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the common council, such factual information and the
city shall then determine if the user's wastewater contribution percentage is
to be changed. The city shall notify the user of its findings as soon as
possible.



(Ord. No. 512, § 8, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-194.  Notification.



   Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are
attributable to wastewater treatment services.



(Ord. No. 512, § 9, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-195.  Wastes prohibited from being discharged to the wastewater
treatment system.



   The discharge of any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly, or by interaction
with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal systems or to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or to animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or
have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the
treatment works is hereby prohibited. Any user discharging any toxic
pollutants which cause an increase in the costs of managing the effluent or
the sludge of the city's treatment works, shall pay for such increased costs.



(Ord. No. 512, § 10, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-196.  Prohibition of clear water connections.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaways drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to
a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(Ord. No. 512, § 11, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-197.  Proper design and construction of new sewers and connections.



   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary
sewers and sewer connections, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city and the state. In the absence of
code provision or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.E.F. Manual of
Practice No. 9 shall apply.



(Ord. No. 512, § 12, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 1046, 1-2-07)



Secs. 18-198—18-215.  Reserved.



ARTICLE IV. RATES AND CHARGES AND BILLING PROCEDURE*



   *Cross reference—Finance, § 2-161 et seq.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 18-216.  Tap fees.



   At the time of making application for utility services under section
18-6, the applicant shall pay to the city finance officer an additional sum
to be determined as follows:



   (1)   For Class 1, residential users:



      a.   For water and sewer hookups    $1,000.00



      b.   For water hookups only   500.00



      c.   For sewer hookups only   500.00



      d.   For remote meter   140.00



   (2)   Class 2, commercial user units. Commercial user units shall
pay an initial minimum fee as determined below. This fee is subject to
reassessment three (3) years following application for an accurate
determination of water usage. Any increase due to a greater monthly usage of
water than that upon which the initial fee was based will be assessed at that
time.



      a.   Water and sewer hookups, two thousand two hundred dollars
($2,200.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of
average monthly water consumption.



      b.   Water hookup only, eight hundred dollars ($800.00) plus
eighteen dollars ($18.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of average monthly
water consumption.



      c.   Sewer hookup only, one thousand four hundred dollars
($1,400.00) plus thirty-two dollars ($32.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons
of average monthly water consumption.



   (3)   Class 3, industrial user units. Industrial user units shall
pay an initial minimum fee as determined below. This fee is subject to
reassessment three (3) years following application for an accurate
determination of water usage. Any increase due to a greater monthly usage of
water than that upon which the initial fee was based will be assessed at that
time.



      a.   Water and sewer hookups, three thousand four hundred
dollars ($3,400.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per one thousand (1,000)
gallons of average monthly water consumption.



      b.   Water hookups only, one thousand four hundred dollars
($1,400.00) plus eighteen dollars ($18.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons
of average monthly water consumption.



      c.   Sewer hookups only, two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) plus
thirty-two dollars ($32.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of average water
consumption.



   (4)   Class 4, excessive use units. Excessive use units shall pay an
initial minimum fee as determined below. This fee is subject to reassessment
three (3) years following application for an accurate determination of water
usage. Any increase due to a greater monthly usage of water than that upon
which the initial fee was based will be assessed at that time.



      a.   Motels and hotels:



         1.   Motels and hotels with no food service and bar, per
gallon, per day, per unit, $100.00.



         2.   Motels and hotels with food services and bar, per
gallon, per day, per unit, $175.00.



         3.   A swimming pool will be considered an additional
unit.



      b.   Service stations, per gallon, per month, 10,000—15,000.



      c.   All other facilities shall have their average monthly
consumption computed from water bills for similar businesses in this area or
from national averages.



   (5)   Additional conditions:



      a.   Moving or decreasing the size of a tap to service a lot
that has an existing tap, no additional tap fee will be charged providing the
existing tap is plugged and abandoned, at owner's cost.



      b.   Enlarging the size of tap to service a lot that has an
existing tap, tap fee of larger tap, less the tap fee at present rate of
original tap; plus costs of plugging and abandonment of the original tap.



      c.   A tap fee will be charged as per fee schedule set out in
this division for each tap serving a lot. Each building situated on the lot
must have a separate tap.



      d.   Changing the use of an existing tap from residential to
commercial or industrial: tap fee of new use, less credit for residential tap
fee at current rate, less credit for current average consumption.



   (6)   In addition to the above-stated tap fees, there shall be a
one-time charge as set forth herein for all entities who tap into water lines
previously constructed at city expense:



 


Size of Tap (inches)

 

Fee




1

 

$1,000.00




2

 

2,000.00




3

 

3,000.00




4

 

4,000.00




6

 

6,000.00




 



This fee shall be paid at the time of application for the utility service.



   (7)   Tap fees for services exclusively for fire suppression systems
only will be one-fourth the fees listed in section 18-216 (6) above.  If
service line and fire suppression system are supplied by the same line, tap
fees will be based on the size of the line servicing the entity’s normal
utilities.  Lines which include a cost recapture fee or similar agreement
may dictate additional fees as set forth within said agreement.



(Code 1982, § 19-218; Ord. No. 535, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 546, 9-19-83; Ord. No.
584, 10-21-85; Ord. No. 626, 11-2-87; Ord. No. 649, 3-6-89; Ord. No. 714,
12-2-91; Ord. No. 771, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 868, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 1047, 1-2-07)



Sec. 18-217.  Deposits required.



   Every applicant for new utility service is required to pay a security
deposit. The amount of the deposit is contained within the Master Fee
Schedule, which is set and amended by resolution. Deposits will be returned
following three (3) years of payment history in the form of a credit on the
monthly utility bill. Existing utility customers with a payment history of at
least three (3) years are not required to pay a deposit when adding or
changing service locations.



(Code 1982, § 19-200; Ord. No. 760, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1016, 8-15-05; Ord. No.
1207, 3-3-15)



Sec. 18-218.  Deposits not to pay interest.



   The amount of money deposited with the city as a deposit for utility
services shall not bear interest.



(Code 1982, § 19-201)



Sec. 18-219.  Refunds of deposit.



   Refunds of deposits made for utility services shall be made at the
discretion of the city finance officer after three (3) years of continuous,
timely payment of bills. Application of deposit may be made in partial or
total settlement of accounts when supply is cut off for nonpayment of bill,
or for any infraction or violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of
the city, relative to utility service offered by the city.



(Code 1982, § 19-202; Ord. No. 760, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1127, 10-18-10)



Sec. 18-220.  Extension fee.



   The city is authorized to charge extension fees pursuant to the terms
of utility trunkline cost recapture agreements.



(Ord. No. 962, § 2, 7-21-03)



Secs. 18-221—18-235.  Reserved.



DIVISION 2. WATER



Sec. 18-236.  Class 1, residential.



   All rates related to Class 1, residential water service provided by the
city are listed in the city fee schedule, which is set and amended by
resolution.



(Code 1982, § 19-204; Ord. No. 535, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 603, 10-6-86; Ord. No.
649, 3-6-89; Ord. No. 691, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 714, 12-2-91; Ord. No. 765,
11-21-94; Ord. No. 948, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 1016, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 1037,
10-2-06; Ord. No. 1073, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 1087, 11-17-08; Ord. No. 1109,
10-5-09)



Sec. 18-237.  Class 2, commercial.



   All rates related to Class 2, commercial water service provided by the
city are listed in the city fee schedule, which is set and amended by
resolution.



(Code 1.982, § 1.9-205; Ord. No. 535, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 603, 10-6-86; Ord.
No. 649, 3-6-89; Ord. No. 691., 1.1-19-90; Ord. No. 714, 12-2-91; Ord. No.
765, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 1016, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 1037, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 1073,
10-15-07; Ord. No. 1087, 11-17-08; Ord. No. 1109, 10-5-09)



Sec. 18-238.  Class 3, residential or commercial outside the city limits.



   All rates related to Class 3, residential or commercial outside the
city limits water service provided by the city are listed in the city fee
schedule, which is set and amended by resolution.



(Code 1982, § 19-206; Ord. No. 1109, 10-5-09)



Sec. 18-239.  Class 3, Industrial.



   Water rates shall be established by the common council for class 3,
industrial purposes by resolution and when or if set, such fees will be
listed in the city fee schedule. Such service shall be subject to
discontinuance upon written notice thirty (30) days in advance of termination
of service.



(Code 1982, § 19-207; Ord. No. 1109, 10-5-09)



Sec. 18-240.  Demand charge on meters.



   All rates related to demand charges on meters provided by the city are
listed in the city fee schedule, which is set and amended by resolution.



(Code 1.982, § 19-208; Ord. No. 649, 3-6-89; Ord. No. 786, 12-18-95; Ord.
No. 849, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 1016, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 1109, 10-5-09)



Sec. 18-241.  Estimated charges.



   When for any reason a meter is not read for a period and an estimate is
necessary, the consumption of the three (3) previous periods will be used.



(Code 1982, § 19-209)



Sec. 18-242.  Mobile homes.



   Each single mobile home upon any residential premises will have a
separate water meter chargeable as an ordinary residence.



(Code 1.982, § 19-210)



Sec. 18-243.  High usage inspection.



   Upon request of a utility customer, the city will charge a fee to be
set by resolution and can be found in the schedule of fees to inspect service
lines for high consumption. If a problem exists that is determined to be city
responsibility, the fee will be waived.



(Ord. No. 868, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 1102, 9-8-09)



Sec. 18-244.  Service availability rate.



   (a)   There is hereby established a reduced rate (service
availability rate) for residential and commercial water and sanitary sewer
accounts during extended periods of vacancy of one (1) continuous billing
cycle or more.



   (b)   The service availability rate shall be the current,
appropriate minimum rate for water and sanitary sewer service.



   (c)   There will be a non-refundable service availability rate
administration fee established by resolution.  This fee will be billed on
the customer's utility bill and is required to convert a utility account from
full rates to the service availability rate.



   (d)   The service availability rate will not be applied
retroactively under any circumstances and shall become effective only upon
notification to the city by the utility account owner (1) of the vacancy or
(2) that the meter has been issued for new construction.



   (e)   The service availability rate may be prorated for the first
and final billing periods of the actual vacant period.



   (f)   Any water usage during a full service availability rate
billing cycle will cause the account to be converted to full rates for that
corresponding billing cycle and future billing cycles.



   (g)   If utility account has been converted to full rates due to
water usage, re-establishment of a new service availability rate period is
required and any applicable fees will be assessed.



   (h)   The service availability rate shall not apply when a mobile
home, building or other structure is removed from the property.



(Ord. No. 995, 11-5-04; Ord. No. 1164, 11-5-12)



Sec. 18-245.  Master meters.



   Not withstanding the provisions of any other section to the contrary,
water usage in planned unit developments, mobile home courts and
homeowner’s associations may, in the sole discretion of the city, be
measured by a master meter.



(Ord. No. 1016, 8-15-05)



Secs. 18-246—18-260.  Reserved.



DIVISION 3. SANITARY SEWER



Sec. 18-261.  Surcharge rate structure for above normal strength wastes—
Generally.



   The city will determine the average total suspended solids (SS) and
five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) daily loadings for the average
residential user or in lieu of such a determination will consider the average
residential strength wastes to be 200 mg/l BOD and 250 mg/l SS. The city will
assess a surcharge rate for all nonresidential users discharging wastes with
BOD and SS strengths greater than the average residential user. The surcharge
will be sufficient to cover the costs of treating such users' above normal
strength wastes. Such users will pay an additional service charge of ten
cents ($0.10) per one thousand (1,000) gallons for each 25 mg/l over 200 mg/l
of BOD and seven cents ($0.07) per one thousand (1,000) gallons for each 25
mg/l over 250 mg/l SS.



(Ord. No. 51.2, App. A, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-262.  Sewer rates schedule.



   (a)   Sanitary sewer charge.  All sanitary sewer rates for the City
of Spearfish are listed in the city fee schedule, which is set and amended by
resolution.



   (b)   Wastewater sewer charge for sewage treatment. All wastewater
sewer rates for the City of Spearfish are listed in the city fee schedule,
which is set and amended by resolution.



   (1)   Any nonresidential user with BOD and SS greater than the
average residential user's strength of 250 mg/l BOD and 200 mg/l SS will pay
a surcharge in accordance with the rates shown in the surcharge rate
structure.



   (2)   All users without water meters or not categorized elsewhere,
located within the city's boundaries, shall be charged according to the EQR
schedule the base sewer rate per the city fee schedule per month per EQR.



   (3)   All users, located within the city's boundaries, will be
allowed to determine irrigation usage separately by installing separate
meters.  Payment for this meter by the user will be at a rate determined by
the city.  There will be no sanitary sewer system charges applied to meters
recording irrigation use only.



   (4)   All users located outside of the city's boundaries without
water meters or not categorized elsewhere, shall be charged according to the
EQR schedule a service charge of 1.5 times the base sewer line rate per the
city fee schedule.



   (5)   Where, in the judgment of the common council, special
conditions surrounding the use of city sanitary sewer facilities to the
extent that the application of the service charges as specified herein would
be inequitable, the council may establish a special rate applying to such
contributors.



   (6)   Users that exceed the normal flow, biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) and/or total suspended solids (TSS) amounts may be charged as follows:



      a.   All applicable sewer line charges per city fee schedule.



      b.   All applicable waste water charges per city fee schedule.



      c.   A forty-five cent ($0.45) per pound BODs over ten (10)
pounds per month.



      d.   A thirty-two cent ($0.32) per pound TSS over twelve and
five-tenths (12.5) pounds per month.



   (c)   Monitoring of the above-referenced parameters shall be
accomplished by the user under a program acceptable to the city.  The city
shall perform the necessary lab tests to determine the quantity of these
parameters.  Payment for the city-furnished services shall be at rates
determined by the city.



   (d)   There is hereby established the following equivalent
residential unit (EQR) schedule:




Type of   EQR





User   Units




   (1)   Single-family residential               1.0



   (2)   Multifamily:



      a.   Studios, efficiencies, 1 bath            0.6



      b.   One bedroom, 1 bath                0.7



      c.   Two bedroom, 1 bath               0.8



      d.   Apartment with 1 ½ baths or 3 bedrooms and over   1.0



      e.   Nursing homes, per bed            0.3



      f.   Mobile homes in trailer court            0.8



      g.   Coin-operated washing machine         0.5



   (3)   Transient residential unit:



      a.   Manager's unit (1 min.)            1.0



      b.   Rental room with cooking            0.3



      c.   Rental room without cooking            0.2



      d.   Additional, per 2 beds over 2 beds per room      0.1



      e.   Mobile home camps, per space         0.4



      f.   Hospital, per bed space            0.3



      g.   Coin-operated washing machine         0.5



   (4)   Restaurants and bars:



      a.   Restaurant and bar per 10 seats         0.65



      b.   Banquet rooms per 10 seats            0.35



      c.   Drive-in per car stall                0.35



   (5)   Commercial or public buildings



      (offices, stores without special



      water, with special process see



      special user rates):



      a.   Minimum per building or customer up to 1,000 SF   1.0



      b.   Each additional 1,000 SF or fraction
thereof      0.4



   (6)   Industrial, warehouses (without special process water needs,
with special process water, see special user rates):



      a.   0-2,000 SF   1.0



      b.   Each additional 1,000 SF or fraction thereof
      0.1



   (7)   Service stations:



      a.   Basic station   2.0



      b.   With washrack, per rack             1.0



   (8)   Laundromats:



      a.   Per washer    1.6



      b.   Commercial washers (see



         special user rates).



   (9)   Churches, nonprofit organizations, schools:



      a.   Churches, per 100 seats            1.5



      b.   Schools without cafeteria or gym (showers), per 50
students    1.5



      c.   Schools with either cafeteria or gym, per 50
students      1.75



      d.   Schools with cafeteria and gym, per 50 students   2.0



   (10)   Miscellaneous:



      a.   Swimming pools:



         1.   Private/per 40,000 gal            0.5



         2.   Transient and multi-family users/40,000 gal   1.0



         3.   Public, per 40,000 gal            1.0



      b.   Recreation vehicle waste dump         5.0



      c.   Public restrooms (per pair of
toilets)         0.04



(Code 1982, § 19-211; Ord. No. 498, 6-7-82; Ord. No. 512, App. B, 9-20-82;
Ord. No. 587, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 603, 10-6-86; Ord. No. 714, 12-2-91; Ord. No.
765, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 786, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 903, 10-1-01; Ord. No. 948,
2-18-03; Ord. No. 1016, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 1037, 10-2-06; Ord. No. 1047,
1-2-07; Ord. No. 1065, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 1073, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 1087,
11-17-08; Ord. No. 1132, 2-22-11)



Sec. 18-263.  Wastewater facilities replacement fund schedule.



   The reserve fund called the wastewater facilities replacement fund
established within the wastewater utility fund as an interest-bearing account
shall be funded by a deposit of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) per year
obtained from the wastewater utility fund at the end of each fiscal year.



(Ord. No. 512, App. C, 9-20-82)



Sec. 18-264.  Sewer rental fund.



   Any and all funds, fees, rentals, charges, or rates collected under the
authority of this division for sewer services shall be remitted to the city
finance officer each month and shall be kept in a separate fund to be known
as the sewer rental fund, and such fund shall be used only for the purposes
of paying the cost of financing the operation, maintenance or construction of
the sanitary utilities, except that no part of such fund shall be used to
meet the cost of construction of lateral sewers serving local territory or
the portion of the cost of sanitary sewer utilities which have been financed
by special assessment against benefited properties. Pursuant to approval of
ordinances numbered 290 and 296 by the requisite vote of the qualified
electors of the city, the city has authorized construction of a new outfall
line and sewage treatment facility as a utility undertaking. By resolution
duly enacted on October 18, 1971, the city has established the terms and
conditions for the issuance of three hundred fifty thousand dollars
($350,000.00) sewage disposal utility revenue bonds to finance the city's
portion of the cost of such utility undertaking, and has established on the
books of the city a sewage disposal utility fund, and various subfunds, for
administering all revenues of such utilityundertaking. So long as any of the
sewagedisposal utility revenue bonds, dated November1, 1971, or any other
bonds made payable from such sewage disposal utility fund pursuant to such
resolution, remain outstanding, all rates and charges collected under this
division for sewer services for deposit in the sewer rental fund shall be
paid into the sewage disposal utility fund and accounted for as provided in
such resolution.



(Code 1982, § 19-212)



Secs. 18-265—18-280.  Reserved.



DIVISION 4. BILLING PROCEDURE



Sec. 18-281.  When payment due.



   All customer payments for city utility services must be received by the
city on or before 4:00 p.m. on the twenty-first day following the date
printed on the bill.  If, however, that due date falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or a legal holiday observed by the city, payment must be received on
or before 4:00 p.m. the next business day.  If payment is not received by
the due date, a five (5) percent penalty will be added to the bill.



(Ord. 1201, 11-17-14)



Sec. 18-282.  Suspension of utility service; notice; lien created;
reinstatement.



   A.   A customer utility account will be deemed delinquent on the
twenty-third day following the date printed on the second consecutive monthly
bill if neither monthly bill has been paid.  The city will notify customers
of a delinquency by mail, which notice shall include the total amount due and
the date service may be suspended.  Water service may be suspended on the
eighth day after the date printed on the delinquency notice unless full
payment, including all past due and current charges, is received. Wastewater
collection, wastewater treatment, and garbage pickup service will continue
uninterrupted. To avoid water service suspension, customers may make
arrangements with the Utility Billing Department prior to the payment due
date indicated on the delinquency notice.



   B.   Unpaid utility bills shall become a lien or property tax
assessment upon any and all property for which utility service is provided,
and such bill and lien shall be enforceable against the owner of the property.



   C.   Suspended water service will not be reinstated until all
utility bills, fees, charges, rentals, and meter deposits have been paid in
full.  Reinstatement will occur within twelve hours of full payment.



   D.   Monthly connection fees will continue to be assessed even after
service is suspended due to nonpayment.



   E.   In the event the account holder and the property owner are not
the same person and the account holder becomes delinquent on three
consecutive occasions, a notice and final bill will be sent to the account
holder and the property owner. At the end of the then current billing cycle,
the account will be transferred into the property owner’s name and will
become the property owner’s obligation.



   F.   The Finance Officer shall develop an Administrative Utility
Collection Procedure Policy to implement procedures concerning this section.



(Ord. 1202, 11-17-04; Ord. 1208, 3-3-15)



Sec. 18-283.  Reserved.



Sec. 18-284.  Relocation of service to new address; voluntary discontinuance
of service.



   A utility customer shall give notice to the city’s Utility Billing
Department three (3) days before relocating or discontinuing city utility
services.  Failure to give such notice shall cause the customer to be
responsible for any charges that may accrue until such notice has been given.



(Ord. 1202, 11-17-14)



Secs. 18-285—18-300.  Reserved.



ARTICLE V. UTILITY TRUNKLINE COST RECAPTURE AGREEMENTS



Sec. 18-301.  Authority to enter into contracts.



   Pursuant to SDCL 9-47-16 (water systems) and SDL 9-48-15 (sanitary
sewer systems), as from time to time amended, the common council is hereby
authorized to enter into contracts with private real estate developers to
provide for proportionate recapture of costs and expenses for the original
installation of utility service trunklines according to criteria hereafter
established by the common council by resolution for qualification,
application, payment, repayment and recapture.



(Ord. No. 947, 2-3-03)



CHAPTER 19 VEGETATION*




   Art. I.   In General, §§ 19-1—19-25





   Art. II.   Trees, §§ 19-26—19-99





      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 19-26—19-50





      Div. 2.   Urban Forestry Board, §§ 19-51—19-70





      Div. 3.   Planting and Maintenance, §§ 19-71—19-99





   Art. III.   Landscape Regulations, §§ 19-100—19-108




   *Cross references—Burning of trash, leaves and any other material or
product prohibited, § 7-1; fire prevention code adopted, § 7-46; flood
prevention and protection, Ch. 8; development permit required, § 8-31;
health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 9; arborist license required, § 10-96;
solid waste, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14;
subdivisions, Ch. 15; regulation of outdoor water use during water shortage,
§ 18-42; zoning, App. A.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Secs. 19.1—19-25.    Reserved.



ARTICLE II. TREES*



   *Cross references—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14;
regulation of outdoor water use during water shortage, § 18-42; zoning, App.
A.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 19-26.  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Board is the urban forestry board created by section 19-51.



   Forester shall mean the person employed by the city who has direct
responsibility for implementing and enforcing this article.



   Park trees shall mean the trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody
vegetation on public lands.



   Pest shall mean any organism, insect, rodent or other agent that
damages or causes abnormal growth, disease or death of any tree, shrub, bush
or woody vegetation.



   Street trees shall mean trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody
vegetation on lands lying within municipal rights-of-way.



(Ord. No. 541, § 9-107, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 607, § 9-106, 1-19-87; Ord. No.
651, 3-20-89)



   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, §
1-2.



Secs. 19-27—19.50.    Reserved.



DIVISION 2. URBAN FORESTRY BOARD*



   *Cross reference—Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-71 et seq.



Sec. 19-51.  Established, composition, appointment.



   There is hereby established an urban forestry board which shall consist
of seven (7) residents of this city, appointed by the mayor with the approval
of the common council. The county agent and city public works administrator
shall serve as ex-officio members of the board.



(Ord. No. 607, § 9-107, 1-19-87; Ord. No. 704, 6-3-91)



Sec. 19-52.  Terms, compensation, organization.



   (a)   The terms of office of the board members shall be three (3)
years. Members appointed to the board shall be appointed in staggered terms.
In the event a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor
shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of that term.



   (b)   Members of the board shall serve without compensation.



   (c)   The board shall choose its own officers and shall keep a
journal of the proceedings. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum.



(Ord. No. 607, § 9-107, 1-19-87)



Sec. 19-53.  Duties.



   The duties of the urban forestry board are as follows:



   (1)   The board shall develop a city tree plan.



   (2)   The board, when requested by the common council, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, reports, and recommendations upon any
special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.



(Ord. No. 541, § 9-108, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 645, § 9-108, 11-21-88; Ord. No.
607, § 9-107, 1-19-87)



Sec. 19-54.  Review by council.



   Any decision of the board may be appealed to the common council within
seven (7) days of such decision.



(Ord. No. 541, § 9-115, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 607, § 9-113, 1-19-87)



Secs. 19-55—19-70.    Reserved.



DIVISION 3. PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE



Sec. 19-71.  Street and park trees generally.



   (a)   No street tree shall be planted unless the urban forestry
board shall have first approved the kind, size, variety, and location
thereof, and granted a permit therefor. The permit shall be issued without
charge.



   (b)   A list of trees and shrubbery suitable for street trees shall
be developed by the board.



   (c)   Care of street trees shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the abutting property.



   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to top any street or park
tree. Topping is defined as the cutting back of limbs to stubs more than six
(6) inches in diameter or trimming within the crown to such a degree as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or interfering with utility services or similar
obstructions may be topped with the approval of the board.



   (e)   Stumps of street and park trees shall not project above the
surface of the ground.



   (f)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within rights-of-way and on public grounds.



   (g)   The city may remove or cause to be removed, any tree or part
thereof which is infested with any pest or is in an unsafe condition or is
injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvements or which interferes with public walkways, streets,
highways or alleys.



(Ord. No. 541, §§ 9-109, 9-110, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 607, § 9-10, 1-19-87)



   Cross references—Streets and public rights-of-way, § 14-26 et seq.;
parks and recreation areas, § 14-251 et seq.



Sec. 19-72.  Destruction of street and park trees.



   When the city must destroy street trees to install or repair water and
sewer lines, the property owner may be awarded up to fifteen dollars ($15.00)
per tree replacement matching funds. The funds shall be paid to property
owner upon receiptof proof of purchase and planting. Private utility
companies shall be responsible for the same matching funds as specified
herein when operating within city right-of-way.



(Ord. No. 541, § 9-108, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 645, § 9-108(8), 11-21-88)



Sec. 19-73.  Trees on private property.



   (a)   The city shall have the right to inspect and remove or cause
to be removed any dead or diseased tree on private property if such trees
constitute a hazard or harbor pests harmful to other trees. The forester
shall notify the owners of such trees, in writing, to remove the same. In the
event the owner shall fail to do so or make suitable arrangements for doing
so within ten (10) days of such notice, the city may remove the trees and
charge the cost of removal to the owners or levy the same as an assessment
against the property.



   (b)   Any person claiming an interest in any tree ordered to be
removed may appeal such order to the board within seven (7) days from the
date of the order subject to the limitations in section 19-74.



(Ord. No. 541, § 9-111, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 607, § 9-109, 1-19-87)



   Cross references—Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; mobile
homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 12; subdivisions, Ch. 15; zoning,
supplementary district regulations, App. A, Art. V.



Sec. 19-74.  Storage of dead or cut trees with any contagious disease or
pest infestation.



   No person shall store or permit the accumulation of any elm wood in the
city. No person shall store any tree or part thereof known to harbor or
contain any pest infestation or declared to contain any pest infestation.



(Ord. No. 541, § 9-112, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 607, § 9-110, 1-19-87)



Sec. 19-75.  Interference.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere
with the city or any of its agents engaged in the planting, cultivation,
mulching, pruning, spraying, inspecting or removing of any trees within the
city as authorized by this article.



(Ord. No. 541, § 9-113, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 607, § 9-111, 1-19-87)



Sec. 19-76.  Care and maintenance of city right-of-way.



   The care, mowing and maintenance of city right-of-way including, but
not limited to, the area between the property line and street curb shall be
the responsibility of the owner, manager or lessee of the abutting property.



   Such persons are jointly and severally liable for the care, maintenance
and mowing.



(Ord. No. 830, 10-20-97; Ord. No. 952, 4-21-03)



Secs. 19-77—19-99.  Reserved.



ARTICLE III. LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS*



   *Editor's note—Ord. No. 698, adopted Mar. 18, 1991, which added §§
19-100—19-108 to Code, contained an addendum which is not included herein,
but is on file and available in the office of the city finance officer. Such
addendum pertains to recommended design standards, recommended plant
material, and prohibited plant material.



Sec. 19-100.  Purpose.



   The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the orderly, safe,
healthful and aesthetic development of the city and to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the community. The objectives of these
regulations are as follows:



   (1)   To aid in regulating and controlling vehicular and pedestrian
circulation in parking areas;



   (2)   To enhance the environmental and aesthetic conditions of the
community;



   (3)   To protect and enhance the value of property and to provide
wildlife habitat;



   (4)   To reduce heat and noise, wind and air turbulence, and the
glare of sunlight and vehicle lights, erosion and air pollution.



(Ord. No. 698, 3-18-91)



Sec. 19-101.  Landscaping required.



   Landscaping conforming to the standards set forth in this section shall
be required in the following districts:



   (1)   Multiple-family residential district (R3), excepting
single-family use.



   (2)   All commercial districts.



   (3)   All industrial districts.



   (4)   Parking lots in any zoning district that are designed for
fifty (50) vehicles and more.



(Ord. No. 698, 3-18-91)



Sec. 19-102.  Landscape requirements.



   The following requirements are considered to be minimum and shall be
approved on the basis of a landscape plan submitted by the applicant to the
building official, accompanied, when required, by a guarantee approved by the
city attorney, and installed as per the approved plan:



   (1)   The amount and type of material shall be based on a point
system determined by the square footage of a lot not covered by a building.
In phased development, the planning commission shall determine lot area for
the purpose of this article. Trees, shrubs, grass and ground cover, both
existing and proposed, shall receive points towards landscape requirements
according to the following table:



 




LANDSCAPE MATERIAL POINTS TABLE



 
 
New Landscape Material (Points)
 
Existing Mature Landscape Material (Points)


Large trees
 
A minimum mature spread of 45 feet. Conifers which reach a mature height over
20 feet
 
2000
 
5000


Medium trees
 
A minimum mature spread of 25 feet. Conifers reaching a mature height height
of at least 20 feet
 
1000
 
2500


Small trees
 
A minimum mature spread of 15 feet. Conifers reaching a mature height of less
than 3 feet
 
500
 
1500


Shrubs
 
A minimum mature height of 2 feet
 
250
 
500


Live ground cover
 
1 square yard
 
100
 
300


Grass
 
1 square yard
 
10
 
10


Opaque hedge
 
Minimum 15 lineal feet, minimum 5 feet in height
 
500
 
1000




 



EXAMPLE:




Lot = 20,000 square feet





Structure = 7,000 square feet





20,000 square feet





-7,000 square feet




= 13,000 square feet not covered by a building




13,000 points of material needed





Possible solution to required points:





   4   new large trees @ 2000 points each =  8000 points





   20   new small shrubs @ 250 points each = 5000 points




                     TOTAL = 13,000 points



   (2)   In large parking lots of fifty (50) spaces and more, interior
planter areas shall be provided at a ratio of two hundred (200) square feet
for every fifty (50) spaces, shall contain trees and shrubs.



Exception: Upon application, new and/or used vehicle dealer lots may be
exempted in whole or in part, by the planning commission.



   (3)   To prevent traffic hazards, landscaping in sight triangles
required by the zoning ordinance (ten (10) feet at accessways, thirty (30)
feet at the intersection of two (2) or more rights-of-way) shall provide
unobstructed cross-visibility level between three (3) and six (6) feet.



   (4)   Maintenance: The owner of the building or his manager or agent
shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas which shall
be maintained so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance at all
times and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Maintenance shall
include the replacement of all dead plant material.



   (5)   If at the time of final inspection all the requirements of
these regulations have not been satisfactorily completed, a certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued unless a guarantee has been provided.



(Ord. No. 698, 3-18-91)



Sec. 19-103.  Plan requirements.



   Two (2) copies of a landscape plan conforming to these regulations
shall be submitted to the building official at the time a building permit is
requested, consisting of a scaled plot plan showing clearly delineated
existing and proposed landscaping, type and size of landscaping materials and
location of buildings and utility easements and rights-of-way.



(Ord. No. 698, 3-18-91)



Sec. 19-104.  Design standards.



   All landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanship manner and
according to generally accepted planting procedures. The following minimum
standards shall be observed:



   (1)   Deciduous trees: Trunk shall be one and one-half (1 1/2)
inches measured by caliper at the time of planting.



   (2)   Evergreen trees: Minimum height of four (4) feet.



   (3)   Live ground cover: Shall present a finished appearance and
reasonably complete coverage within one (1) year from planting.



   (4)   Shrubs: Minimum height of one (1) foot at the time of planting.



   (5)   Grass: Planted in a species normally grown as permanent lawns
in the city.



   (6)   Prohibited materials: Synthetic or artificial materials,
cottonwood, elm and poplar trees.



(Ord. No. 698, 3-18-91)



Sec. 19-105.  Applicability.



   The requirements and standards set forth herein shall apply to all new
construction and, as hereinafter provided, reconstruction in the city.



   All nonconforming property existing on April 19, 1991, shall be allowed
to continue until such time as a building permit is granted to enlarge,
reconstruct or substantially alter a structure on the property, at which time
the entirety of these regulations shall apply.



(Ord. No. 698, 3-18-91)



Sec. 19-106.  Exceptions.



   The common council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission,
shall have the power to grant exceptions in special cases where there are
unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships created in
meeting the requirements of these regulations. The guidelines to be used in
determining whether a variance should be granted are as follows:



   (1)   That the hardships or difficulties of meeting the requirements
of these regulations are peculiar to that property, and not general in
character.



   (2)   Financial hardship due to meeting the requirements of these
regulations is not sufficient to show unnecessary hardship, unless the
financial difficulties amount to confiscation of property.



(Ord. No. 698, 3-18-91)



Sec. 19-107.  Enforcement.



   The enforcing official for these regulations shall be the building
official who shall administer these regulations and secure compliance
therewith. The building official shall review and approve landscaping plans,
make necessary inspections, and initiate written notice and remedies of all
violations found to exist on any premises. In the review and approval of
landscape plans, consultation of the urban forester shall be solicited.



(Ord. No. 698, 3-18-91)



Sec. 19-108.  Penalties.



   Any person who violates any provision of these regulations shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.



   Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Prosecution or conviction under this
provision shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violation of
these regulations.



(Ord. No. 698, 3-18-91)



APPENDIX A ZONING*




   Art. I.   Title, Purpose and Jurisdiction, §§ 1—3





   Art. II.   Definitions





   Art. III.   Zoning Districts and Map, §§ 1—3





   Art. IV.   District Regulations, §§ 1a—13





   Art. V.   Supplementary Regulations, §§ 1—10





   Art. VI.   Administration and Enforcement, §§ 1—17




   *Editor's note—Ord. No. 969, adopted Aug. 18, 2003, repealed Ord. No.
770, adopted May 1, 1996, and enacted a new zoning ordinance as set forth
herein. See Code Comparative Table.



   Editor's note—Printed herein is the Zoning Ordinance for Spearfish,
South Dakota, as adopted by the common council on Aug. 18, 2003. Obvious
misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For
stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the
same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of
numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions
made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Appendix A, regarding area
regulations, and Appendix B, off-street parking illustrations, are available
in the office of the city planning and zoning department.



   Cross references—Advertising, Ch. 3; distribution of handbills, §
3-26 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; consuming, blending, possessing,
alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited and the disposal of
containers containing alcoholic beverages restricted, § 4-17; area where
on-sale or off-sale licenses to sell any alcoholic beverages, § 4-6;
animals, Ch. 5; keeping of fowl, rabbits, etc., restricted, § 5-6; buildings
and building regulations, Ch. 6; barbed wire and electrified fences
prohibited, § 6-1; building permit fees, § 6-29; uniform abatement of
dangerous buildings code adopted, § 6-31; pole buildings prohibited in
certain areas, § 6-32; numbering of buildings, § 6-76 et seq.; fire
protection and prevention, Ch. 7; burning of trash, leaves and any other
material or product prohibited, § 7-1; sell or discharge of fireworks
prohibited, § 7-3; fire prevention code adopted, § 7-46; storage of
explosives, blasting agents, etc., restricted, § 7-49; routes for vehicles
transporting explosives, § 7-50; fire lanes established by the fire chief
and chief of police, § 7-52; routes established for vehicles transporting
houses and chemicals, § 7-51 et seq.; flood prevention and protection, Ch.
8; development permit required, § 8-31; health, sanitation and nuisances,
Ch. 9; licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10; peddlers'
regulations, § 10-196 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and
other public places, Ch. 14; parks and recreation areas, § 14-251 et seq.;
subdivisions, Ch. 15; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 17; abandoned vehicles, §
17-501 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 18; vegetation, Ch. 19; trees, § 19-26 et seq.



ARTICLE I. TITLE, PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION



Section 1. Title.



   These regulations shall be known and may be cited as "The 2004 Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Spearfish, South Dakota."



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 999, 2-7-05)



Section 2. Purpose.



   It is the purpose of this zoning ordinance to promote the safety,
health, convenience, aesthetics and general welfare in the City of Spearfish,
South Dakota.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 3. Jurisdiction.



   These regulations shall apply to all lands within the corporate
boundary of the City of Spearfish, South Dakota as from time to time may be
amended.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS



   The following words, terms and phrases are defined and shall be
interpreted as such throughout this ordinance. Terms not defined shall have
the meaning customarily assigned to them.



   Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of land and/or buildings located on the same lot or on an
adjoining lot where at least one property line connects to a lot having the
same ownership where a primary/permitted use is located, and with a
development lot agreement as further described in Section VI Administration
and Enforcement. An accessory use may only be constructed in conjunction with
the issuance of a building permit for, or following the construction of, a
primary use.



   Adult day care means a facility, other than a private residence,
receiving one or more persons, eighteen (18) years of age or older, for care
for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It includes facilities
for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled or physically
handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult day care
does not include treatment centers.



   Alterations means, as applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts, or an enlargement, or the moving of an
interior component from one location or position to another.



   Animal boarding means the provision of shelter, feeding, training
and/or supervision of domestic pets, horses and other livestock, where the
animals being cared for are not owned by the service provider.



   Area, building means the square footage of the footprint of the
principal building and all accessory buildings exclusive of nonenclosed
porches, terraces, steps and decks.



   Basement means a story having at least one-half of its height below the
average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as
one-half story.



   Bed and breakfast means a residence offering overnight lodging and a
morning meal, with not more than four (4) guest sleeping rooms for not more
than eight (8) persons. A bed and breakfast in a residential zone shall be
regulated as a home occupation.



   Boarding house means a dwelling as distinct from a hotel or rooming
house where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods,
meals or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more but not
exceeding twelve (12) persons on a weekly or monthly basis.



   Building official means the official responsible for the administration
and enforcement of the various codes regulating construction, use or
occupancy of buildings and structures, public or private.



   Certificate of occupancy means the instrument issued by the building
official when a new use is being established and the building has been
inspected and found to meet adopted codes and ordinances relating to
construction and use. Such certificate authorizes occupancy of the building
for its specified use.



   Child care center means a facility, by whatever name, which provides
care, supervision, instruction, recreation and/or activities any time during
the day, evening, or overnight hours, on a regular basis to children, and for
compensation.  This definition shall not include the following:  1) a
care-giver who provides these services, with or without compensation, within
the care-giver’s residence;  2) these services provided as an
accessory/support use for the employees and patrons of a business or
public/quasi-public use; 3) services provided by persons employed as in-home
private care- givers, regardless of the time and duration of the care
provided (i.e., nannies, babysitters, au-pairs, and similar care providers);
4) privately or publicly owned and operated schools offering K-12 education;
5) group and foster homes for children under the age of 18.



   City council means the Spearfish Common Council.



   Club, private means an organization catering exclusively to members and
their guests, in premises and buildings for recreational or athletic purposes
which are not conducted primarily for gain, providing that any vending
stands, merchandising or commercial activities are provided primarily for the
club membership.



   Collector road means a road intended to move traffic from local roads
to minor arterials.



   Conditional use permit means the permitting of a use of land and/or
structures not otherwise permitted by right in the zoning district.



   Condominium means real property consisting of an undivided interest in
portions of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in
space in a residential, industrial, or commercial building on such real
property. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in
other portions of real property.



   Dwelling means a building or portion thereof, exclusive of manufactured
homes as defined, used for residential purposes.



   Dwelling, multiple family means one building containing three (3) or
more dwelling units and used by three (3) or more families living
independently of each other.



   Dwelling, single family means a building designed for occupancy of one
family, and not attached to another dwelling.



   Dwelling, two-family means a dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units
occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other.



   Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms served by municipal water and
sanitary sewer and designed as a unit for occupancy by one (1) family for
cooking, living and sleeping purposes.



   Family means one (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption; or a group not to exceed five persons, none of whom are related by
blood or marriage, occupying the premises and living as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit. A family shall be deemed to include domestic servants
employed by the family and occupying the same premises.



   Floor area means the sum of the gross floor area for each of the
several stories under roof, measured from the exterior limits or faces of a
structure.



   Fraternity or sorority house means a dwelling housing the members of a
chartered fraternity or sorority living together under a nonprofit
cooperative arrangement as distinct from a boarding or lodging house or
private club.



   Governing body means the Spearfish Common Council.



   Group care home/ assisted living facility means a residential facility
established for the purpose of providing, on a long term basis and for
monetary compensation, room and board for three (3) or more individuals
living as a single household unit, who are unrelated by blood or marriage,
and who by reason of age, physical, or mental disability may require personal
assistance in achieving personal independence. Such a facility may contain a
separate and defined living unit for a resident caretaker or manager. In
addition to the above, group care homes shall include all such facilities
licensed by state or federal authority which provide room, board and other
care for three or more persons. Provided, however, that missions,
detoxification centers, detention and residential inpatient treatment
facilities shall not be construed to fall under the definition of group care
homes, whether licensed or not.



   Height means as related to zoning district height regulations, the
vertical distance measured from the average ground elevation of the proposed
finished grade to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck
line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs.



   Historic monuments and places means a location, site, building,
facility, corridor, system, or use of property that has historical
significance recognized as such by the Spearfish Historical Society, or a
facility or museum dedicated to the housing and display of history, relics
and antiques.



   Home Occupation Type 1 means any activity conducted for financial gain
by the occupants of any dwelling unit or accessory structure on the same
property and in accordance with the following:



   (1)   Such activity is conducted entirely within the dwelling unit
or accessory structure and entirely and only by the occupants of the dwelling.



   (2)   No external alteration of the dwelling unit or accessory
structure on the same property or  other visible evidence of such activity
is readily apparent.



   (3)   No signage or outside storage is provided.



   (4)   Such activity does not cause or encourage excessive vehicular
or pedestrian traffic not ordinarily associated with the surrounding area.



   Home Occupation Type 2 means any activity conducted for financial gain
by the occupants of any dwelling unit or accessory structure on the same
property and in accordance with the following:



   (1)   In addition to the occupants of the dwelling, employees who do
not reside in the dwelling unit also participate in such activity.



   (2)   Such activity results in vehicular or pedestrian traffic
levels above what is ordinarily associated with the surrounding area.



   (3)   Signage or outdoor storage is provided.



   International building code means the Building Code, as officially
adopted by the City of Spearfish.



   Large scale contractor means a provider of construction services whose
operations take place either



outdoors or indoors, and whose operations typically consist of heavy
construction, excavation, trenching, and earthmoving activities and whose
operations typically require the storage of machinery, vehicles, and
equipment in an outdoor storage yard.



   Local road means a road intended to provide access to other roads from
individual properties.



   Logo means a character or symbol used to represent an entire word or
phrase and without words incorporated in or around the character or symbol.
In advertising, a logo is recognizable by the general public as a tradename,
whether registered or not.



   Lot means a platted parcel of land which is or may be occupied by a
building and its accessory buildings.



   Lot, corner means a lot on which at least two (2) adjoining sides abut
for their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the
intersection of two (2) such sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135)
degrees. A corner lot shall be deemed to have two (2) front lot lines and two
(2) side lot lines.



   Lot coverage means the area of a lot that is covered by occupied
structures including garages.



   Lot, depth means the average distance from the street line of the lot
to its rear line, measured in the general direction of the sidelines of the
lot.



   Lot, double frontage means an interior lot which runs through a block
from street to street, abutting on two (2) or more streets.



   Lot, frontage means that dimension of a front lot line abutting on a
street.



   Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot.



   Lot, irregular means a lot having at least two (2) sides not parallel
to one another.



   Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot.



   Lot line, front means in the case of an interior lot, the line
separating the lot from the street. For a double frontage lot, the lines
separating the lot from each street.



   Lot line, rear means the lot boundary opposite and most distant from
the front lot line. In the case of a pointed or irregular lot, it shall be an
imaginary line parallel to and farthest from the front lot line, not less
than ten (10) feet long and wholly within the lot.



   Lot line, side means any boundary line not a front line or rear line.



   Lot width means the width of a lot at the building setback line
measured at right angles to its depth.



   Major arterial means a road intended to move through traffic between
traffic generators and large areas.



   Manufactured home means a portable dwelling unit, designed and
constructed to be towed on its own chassis, comprised of frame and wheels,
and designed to be connected to utilities for year-round occupancy. The term
shall include:



   (1)   Units containing parts that may be folded, collapsed, or
telescoped when being towed and that may be expanded to provide additional
cubic capacity: and,



   (2)   Units composed of two (2) or more separately towable
components designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of being
separated again into the components for repeated towing.



The term shall include units designed to be used for residential, commercial,
educational or industrial purposes excluding, however, recreational vehicles
and travel trailers.



   Manufactured home park means a parcel of land, of not less than two (2)
acres, whereupon manufactured homes are placed.



   Manufactured home space means a defined plot of ground or lot within a
manufactured home park which is designed for and designated as the location
for two (2) automobiles and one (1) manufactured home, and not used for any
other purposes whatsoever other than customary accessory uses.



   Minor arterial means a road intended to collect and distribute traffic
in a manner similar to primary arterials, except that these roads service
minor traffic generating areas, and/or are designed to carry traffic from
collector streets to the system of major arterials.



   Modular home means a modular home consists of finished units composed
of two (2) or more components designed to be joined into one (1) integral
unit not capable of being separated into its components for moving and
towing; designed to be placed on a permanent foundation with or without a
basement. To be classed as a modular home, the completed unit must meet with
the specifications of the following:



   (1)   International Building Code, as adopted.



   (2)   National Electric Code, as adopted.



   (3)   Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted.



   (4)   International Mechanical Code, as adopted.



   Nonconforming use means a structure or use of land existing at the time
of enactment of this ordinance which does not conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is located.



   Office means a room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs
of a business, profession, service, industry, or government and generally
furnished with desks, tables, files, and communication equipment. This
definition excludes private home offices.



   Open space means total area of all land on a lot not covered by
structures or parking lots.



   Outdoor sales means the outdoor display and marketing of a limited
supply of products and services to the public.



   Outdoor storage means the keeping in an unroofed area of any goods,
material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours
that are not considered under the definition of outdoor sales.



   Parking, controlled access means a hard surfaced parking area with a
defined entrance and exit, designed and of sufficient size that no vehicle is
required to back into a public street for egress.



   Parking, off street means parking space(s) located behind the curb line
of a public street, within a garage or carport or outside the maintained
driving surface of a public street.



   Parking, on-site means a hard surfaced parking area of not less than
one hundred seventy-one (171) square feet per parking space located wholly
within the boundaries of the lot on which it is constructed.



   Personal services means a business that provides non-medical services
to individuals. Typical uses include but are not limited to, beauty salons
and spas, barber shops, massage, physical therapy, animal grooming, personal
item repair shops, and body art services.



   Planning commission means the City of Spearfish Planning Commission.



   Property line means the boundary of a parcel of land.



   Public uses means public parks, schools, and administrative, cultural,
and service buildings, not including public land or buildings devoted solely
to storage and maintenance of equipment and material.



   Retail Type 1 means establishments engaged in selling products, goods,
services, or merchandise, and where primary inventory is located within an
enclosed structure, and outdoor sales, if provided, is an accessory use.



   Retail  Type 2 means establishments engaged in selling products,
goods, services, or merchandise, and where primary inventory is displayed
outdoors.



   Rooming house means a building, other than a boarding house, where
lodging only is provided for compensation to three (3) or more, but not
exceeding twelve (12) persons. A building which has accommodations for more
than twelve (12) persons shall be defined as a hotel under the terms of this
ordinance.



   Screened/screening means enclosed by and hidden from view of the
adjacent properties by a natural or man-made feature. Examples of screening
include solid walls, solid fences, and hedges with year-round foliage.



   Service and repair establishments means businesses that are primarily
engaged in fixing and maintaining personal property to include but not be
limited to: large and small appliances, equipment, machinery, bicycles, and
vehicles.



   Setback, average means a building setback where at least fifty percent
(50%) of the structure follows a setback that is greater than required, with
the remaining portion of the setback at a distance less than what is required.



   Setback line means a line delineating the minimum allowable distance
between property boundaries and the foundation of a structure, within which
no building or other structure shall be placed except as provided in



Article V, Section 2. The front setback line is parallel to or concentric
with the street right-of-way.



   Sign, accessory means a sign customarily incidental, appropriate and
subordinate to the principal use of land and buildings, and located on the
same lot. An on-premise sign.



   Sign, advertising means a sign which directs a attention to a use,
commodity, or service not related to the property on which it is located. An
off premise sign.



   Sign, directional means an on-premise accessory sign for the purpose of
directing the flow of traffic on a specific lot or lots.



   Sign, monument means a freestanding ground sign, supported wholly by a
base structure and containing one (1) or more accessory signs of individual
businesses on the property; as distinguished from a pole sign.



   Sign or other advertising device means any structure which displays or
includes any letter, words, or representation used as an announcement,
direction or advertisement. The word "sign" includes any type of advertising
device, but does not include a logo, the flag, pennant or insignia of any
nation, state, city, or other political unit.



   Sign, permanent means a sign permanently affixed to a building or
structure.



   Sign, pole means a sign that is supported above the ground by one or
more legs, poles, or other apparatus, and the area beneath the sign is more
than fifty percent (50%) open to the passage of light and air.



   Sign, portable means a sign structure which can be moved from location
to location.



   Sign, roof means any sign erected or constructed wholly upon the roof
of any building.



   Sign, temporary means any sign, banner, pendent, valance or advertising
display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board, or
other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a
limited period of time only.



   Sign, wall means any sign painted on or attached to and erected
parallel to the face of the outside wall of any building which displays only
one (1) advertising surface.



   Small scale contractor means a provider of construction services whose
operations take place primarily indoors, such as plumber, electrician,
cabinet/countertop maker, heating/cooling supplier, and window and door
installers.



   Spot zoning means the zoning practice that classifies or reclassifies a
parcel or area in a manner which is not sufficiently related to the
classification of similarly situated land. Spot zoning shall not be permitted.



   Storage building means a completely enclosed structure containing one
or more independently secured and accessible spaces that may be rented to a
tenant for the purposes of storing the tenant’s personal property for any
length of time.



   Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included
between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it,
or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the
ceiling next above it. (Per International Building Code as adopted)



   Street frontage means all the property on one (1) side of a street
between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along
the line of the street or, if the street is dead ended, then all of the
property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the dead
end of the street.



   Street, intersecting means any street which joins another street at an
angle, whether or not it crosses the other.



   Street line means the legal line between street right-of-way and
abutting property.



   Structure means a combination of materials to form a construction that
is safe and stable.



   Temporary shelter means a facility that provides housing and support
services to persons with no ordinary or regular residence as a result of
domestic violence, unemployment, or other social or economic hardship. This
definition excludes treatment centers.



   Townhouse means one (1) of a group of two (2) or more attached
single-family dwelling units built on one (1) or more common lot lines. Each
townhouse shall be located on an individually platted lot which may contain
open space in addition to the area upon which it is constructed. The owner of
the townhouse may also participate in the ownership of common property, if
any, within a townhouse development.



   Treatment center means a use involving housing for persons while
receiving specialized treatment, and/or counseling because of addiction to
drugs or alcohol, mental illness or other behavior disorders.



   Use means the specific purpose for which land or a building is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.



   Variance means an officially approved exception to the strict
interpretation of zoning ordinance requirements and regulations as set forth
in Articles IV and V. An approved variance is a vested property right that
runs with the land.



   Vacate means upon petition, and with the approval of an adjoining
property owner or owners, the process involved in releasing public property
to private ownership. In original town, such release is effected through a
public bidding process. For areas not within original town, vacated public
property reverts to the adjoining property owner(s), at no cost.



   Wholesale means establishments engaged in providing goods, products,
and commodities to other businesses.



   Zoning administrator means the official designated by the city council
to administer these regulations.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 999, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 1018, 9-6-05; Ord. No.
1129, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 1137, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 1195, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 1223,
12-21-15; Ord. No. 1275, 4-2-18; Ord. No. 1284, 8-20-18)



   State law reference-Definitions generally, § 1-2.



ARTICLE III. ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP



Section 1. Establishment of zoning districts.



   The city is hereby divided into districts of ten (10) different types,
each being of such number, shape, kind and area, and being of such common
unity of purpose and adaptability of use as are deemed most suitable to carry
out the purpose of this ordinance.



Types of Districts:



   AG          Agricultural



   R1         Single-Family Residential



   R-2         One- and Two-Family Residential



   R-3         Multi-Family Residential



   C-1         Central Commercial



   CC          Central Core Commercial



   C2         Highway Service Commercial



   C-3         Office Commercial District



   ILR         Light/Restrictive Industrial



   IH         Heavy Industrial



   DRD         Development Review District



   APZ         Airport Zoning District



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1219, 12-21-15)



Section 2. Zoning map.



   The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this
ordinance are denoted and defined as shown in the map entitled "Zoning Map of
Spearfish, South Dakota," adopted, together with this ordinance, and
certified by the City of Spearfish Finance Officer. This map, together with
everything shown, is hereby incorporated into this ordinance as is fully set
forth and described herein. The zoning map and description of the area shall
be kept and maintained by the zoning administrator.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 3.  Rules for interpretation of district boundaries.



   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of any of
the districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:



   1.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerlines of
such streets, highways or alleys.



   2.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following
platted lot lines or other property lines, such lines shall be construed to
be said boundary lines.



   3.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the
center line of streams, rivers or other continuously flowing water courses
shall be construed as following the channel center line of such water courses
and these boundaries shall be deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction
of the city unless otherwise indicated.



   4.   Boundaries shown as following or closely following the limits
of political jurisdictions shall be construed as following such lines.



   5.   Where the application of the aforesaid rules leaves a
reasonable doubt as to the boundaries between two districts, the regulations
of the more restrictive districts shall govern the entire parcel in question,
unless otherwise determined by the city council.



   6.   Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated,
the district classification of the property to which the vacated portions of
land accrue shall become the classification of the vacated land.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



ARTICLE IV. DISTRICT REGULATIONS



Section 1a.   Rural large lot single family (RLS-1).



   A.   General description. The Rural Large Lot Single Family district
is to provide for residential environments that are of larger acreage than
may be practical to be served by municipal utilities, yet generally less
acreage than is necessary for agricultural production pursuits.  It is
intended that this district will provide a minimum of public utilities,
services or improvements, and is strictly a very low density rural type
environment as commonly known in terms of open space, odors, noises, dust,
keeping of animals, and self-sufficiency.



   B.   Primary uses permitted. Property and structures in the Rural
Large Lot Single Family district shall be used for the following purposes:



   1.   Detached site-built or modular single-family dwellings.



   2.   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to a
primary use when located on the same lot, after the primary use has been
established.



   3.   Telecommunications facilities.



   4.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems.



   5.   Animal enclosures, fences, pastures, turnouts, and confinements
and the keeping of animals, all of which shall be regulated by Chapter 5
Article I of the city code.  These shall be considered as accessory uses
after the primary use has been established and shall not include commercial
kennels, emergency animal rescue shelter operations, and similar facilities.



   6.   Home Occupation Type 1 where fifteen percent (15%) or less of
the floor area of the structure is dedicated to the home occupation.



   C.   Uses eligible for a conditional use permit.  Conditional use
permits may be granted to properties for the following land uses:



   1.   Animal boarding.



   2.   Bed and breakfast.



   3.   Cemetery.



   4.   Child care center.



   5.   Church.



   6.   Fenced outdoor private storage and/or parking.



   7.   Historic monument and/or place.



   8.   Landscape nursery including greenhouse and sales building.



   9.   Personal services.



   10.   Private storage building built before main residence.



   11.   Public park and/or playground.



   12.   Public utility substation.



   13.   Public or private school or educational services.



   14.   Public or private recreation uses.



   15.   Second residence/guest house.



   16.   Municipal use other than parks/playground.



   17.   Home Occupation Type 2 with greater than fifteen percent (15%)
of the floor area of the structure dedicated to the home occupation.



   18.   Telecommunications facilities as defined and regulated in
Article V, Section 8.



   D.   Area regulations. All setbacks shall be measured from the
owner's property lines. For reference, see Appendix 1 and Article V, Section
2.



   1.   Front setback. All structures, thirty-five (35) feet.



   2.   Side setback.



      a.   Primary uses, twenty (20) feet.



      b.   Corner lots, two (2) front setbacks and two (2) side
setbacks.



      c.   Unattached buildings of accessory use, ten (10) feet for
buildings that are less than two hundred (200) square feet.  All other
unattached buildings two hundred (200) square feet and greater, twenty (20)
feet.



   3.   Rear setback.



      a.   Primary uses, thirty-five (35) feet.



      b.   Unattached accessory use buildings two hundred (200)
square feet and under, ten (10) feet.



      c.   Unattached accessory use buildings greater than two
hundred (200) square feet, twenty (20) feet.



   4.   Lot width. Minimum seventy-five (75) feet at the front setback
line.



   5.   Minimum lot size. Eight (8) acres.



   E.   Height regulations.  Thirty-five (35) feet for all structures.



   F.   Off-street parking and loading requirements. See Article V,
Sections 3 and 5.



(Ord. No. 1165, 11-19-12; Ord. No. 1223, 12-21-15; Ord. No. 1276, 4-2-18)



           



Editor's note—Below is a modification of the title of current section 1 of
the zoning code to add "b" after 1.



Section 1b.   AG agricultural district.



   A.   General description. This district is intended to protect
agricultural lands and to preserve the natural beauty and open character of
forests and other natural areas from incompatible land uses.



   B.   Primary uses permitted. Property and structures in the AG
agricultural district shall be used for the following purposes:



   1.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop
harvesting including roadside stands exclusively for the sale of produce, but
excluding commercial feed lots.



   2.   Detached site-built or modular single-family dwellings.



   3.   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to a
primary use when located on the same lot, after the primary use has been
established.



   4.   Veterinary clinics, subject to the following requirements:



      a.   Confinement pens for large animals and outdoor runs for
small animals shall maintain a minimum setback of eighty (80) feet from all
property lines.



      b.   The clinic facility shall be constructed and operated in
such a manner as to minimize the transmission of sound to neighboring
properties.



      c.   Fenced outdoor runs and exercise areas shall be used only
during normal business hours and shall be screened to a height of eight (8)
feet.



   5.   Telecommunications facilities.



   6.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems.



   7.   Home Occupation Type 1 where 15% or less of the floor area of
the structure is dedicated to the home occupation.



   C.   Uses eligible for a conditional use permit.  Conditional use
permits may be granted to properties for the following land uses:



   1.   Animal boarding.



   2.   Bed and breakfast.



   3.   Cemetery.



   4.   Child care center.



   5.   Church.



   6.   Fenced outdoor private storage and/or parking.



   7.   Historic monument and/or place.



   8.   Landscape nursery including greenhouse and sales building.



   9.   Personal services.



   10.   Private storage building built before main residence.



   11.   Public park and/or playground.



   12.   Public utility substation.



   13.   Public or private school or educational services.



   14.   Public or private recreation uses.



   15.   Second residence/guest house.



   16.   Municipal use other than parks/playground.



   17.   Home Occupation Type 2 with greater than fifteen percent (15%)
of the floor area of the structure dedicated to the home occupation.



   18.   Telecommunications facilities as defined and regulated in
Article V, Section 8.



   D.   Area regulations. All setbacks shall be measured from the
owner's property lines. For reference, see Appendix 1 and Article V, Section
2.



   1.   Front setback. All structures, twenty-five (25) feet.



   2.   Side setback.



      a.   Primary uses, eight (8) feet.



      b.   Corner lots, two (2) front setbacks and two (2) side
setbacks.



      c.   Unattached buildings of accessory use located on interior
lots, five (5) feet.



   3.   Rear setback.



      a.   Primary uses, twenty-five (25) feet.



      b.   Unattached buildings of accessory use five (5) feet.



   4.   Lot width. Minimum seventy-five (75) feet at the front building
line.



   5.   Minimum lot size. One (1) acre.



   6.    Maximum lot coverage. Ten (10) percent.



   E.   Height regulations. Maximum five (5) stories or sixty (60) feet.



   F.   Off-street parking and loading requirements. See Article V,
Sections 3 and 5.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1030, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 1122, 8-16-10; Ord.
No. 1223, 12-21-15; Ord. No. 1276, 4-2-18; Ord. No. 1285, 8-20-18)



Section 2. R1 single-family residential district.



   A.   General description. This district is intended to be used for
single-family residential development with low population densities.



   B.   Primary uses permitted. Property and structures in an R1
district shall be used for the following purposes:



   1.   Detached site-built or modular singlefamily dwellings.



   2.   Home Occupation Type 1 where fifteen percent (15%) or less of
the floor area of the structure is dedicated to the home occupation.



   3.   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to a
primary use when located on the same lot, after the primary use has been
established.



   4.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems.



   C.   Uses eligible for a conditional use permit. Conditional use
permits may be granted to properties for the following land uses:



   1.   Bed and breakfast.



   2.   Cemetery.



   3.   Child care center.



   4.   Church or place of worship.



   5.   Group home.



   6.   Historic monument/place.



   7.   Home Occupation Type 2 with greater than fifteen percent (15%)
of the floor area of the structure dedicated to the home occupation.



   8.   Publicly owned structure/facility/park.



   9.   Office.



   10.   Personal services.



   11.   Privately owned recreational use.



   12.   Private school or educational service.



   13.   Public utility substation.



   14.   Second dwelling unit.



   15.   Telecommunications facilities.



   D.   Area regulations. All setbacks shall be measured from the
property line.



   1.   Front setback.



      a.   Twenty-five (25) feet.



      b.   If a lot abuts a one-hundred (100) foot wide public
right-of-way, the front setback may be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and
provided that a garage door facing the street is a minimum of twenty (20)
feet from the public sidewalk.



   2.   Side setback.



      a.   Primary uses, eight (8) feet, except lots platted before
April 1980, five (5) feet.



      b.   Unattached structures of accessory use, five (5) feet.



   3.   Rear setback.



      a.   Primary uses, twenty-five (25) feet.



      b.   Unattached structures of accessory use, five (5) feet.



   4.   Lot width. There shall be a minimum lot width of seventy-five
(75) feet at the front building line, except for lots of record platted
before April 1980.



   5.   Minimum lot size. Eight thousand (8,000) square feet. For
churches and their accessory structures, thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.



   6.   Maximum lot coverage. Forty (40) percent.



   7.   Height regulations. Dwellings shall not exceed two and one-half
(21/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet; accessory structures shall not
exceed fifteen (15) feet. Exceptions to the height restriction for accessory
uses may be granted by the zoning administrator due to architectural
considerations.



   8.   Off-street parking and loading requirements. As regulated in
Article V, Sections 3 and 5.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1030, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 1122, 8-16-10; Ord.
No. 1276, 4-2-18; Ord. No. 1278, 5-7-18)



Section 3. R2 one- and two-family residential district.



   A.   General description. This is a residential district to provide
for medium population density. The principal uses of land are for
single-family detached and two-family attached dwellings.



   B.   Primary uses permitted. Property and structures in an R2
residential district shall be used for the following purposes:



   1.   Any use permitted in an R1 district.  Maximum of two (2)
detached dwellings per lot.



   2.   Two-family dwelling on one common lot.



   3.   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to a
primary use when located on the same lot, after the primary use has been
established.



   4.   Home Occupation Type 1 where fifteen percent (15%) or less of
the floor area of the structure is dedicated to the home occupation.



   5.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems.



   C.   Uses eligible for a conditional use permit.  Conditional use
permits may be granted to properties for the following land uses:



   1.   Bed and breakfast.



   2.   Cemetery.



   3.   Child care center.



   4.   Church or place of worship.



   5.   Group home.



   6.   Historic monument/place.



   7.   Home Occupation Type 2 with greater than fifteen percent (15%)
of the floor area of the structure dedicated to the home occupation.



   8.   Personal services.



   9.   Publicly owned structure/facility/park.



   10.   Office.



   11.   Privately owned recreational use.



   12.   Private school or educational service.



   13.   Public utility substation.



   14.   Retail.



   15.   Two-family dwellings having a shared wall at a common lot
line, according to the criteria in paragraph D.



   16.   Telecommunications facilities.



   D.   Area regulations. All setbacks shall be measured from the
property line.



   1.   Front setback.



      a.   Twenty-five (25) feet.



      b.   If a lot abuts a one-hundred (100) foot wide public
right-of-way, the front setback may be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and
provided that a garage door facing the street is a minimum of twenty (20)
feet from the public sidewalk.



   2.   Side setback.



      a.   Primary uses, eight (8) feet; five (5) feet if platted
prior to April of 1980.



      b.   Unattached structures of accessory use, five (5) feet.



      c.   Two-family dwelling per paragraph C.15, zero (0) feet at
property line where dwellings attach, eight (8) feet from outside lot lines
which may be approved at five (5) feet if applicant can demonstrate that
adequate provisions are made for drainage and maintenance.



   3.   Rear setback.



      a.   Twenty-five (25) feet;



      b.   Unattached structures of accessory use, five (5) feet.



   4.   Minimum lot width.



      a.   Seventy-five (75) feet at the front setback line. Lots
platted before April 1980 are not subject to this requirement.



      b.   Two-family dwelling per paragraph C.15. No minimum.



   5.   Maximum number of dwellings per lot.



      a.   Primary uses - two (2).



      b.   Conditional use permit uses - one (1).



   6.   Minimum lot size.



      a.   Eight-thousand (8,000) square feet.



      b.   Two-family dwelling per paragraph C.14, no minimum lot
size.



   7.   Maximum number of attached dwellings -  two (2).



   8.   Maximum lot coverage -  Forty percent (40%).



   9.   Maximum structure height:



      a.   Thirty-five (35) feet.



      b.   Accessory structures shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet.



   10.   Off-street parking and loading requirements.  As regulated in
Article V, Sections 3, 4 and 5



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1030, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 1122, 8-16-10; Ord.
No. 1195, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 1239, 3-21-16; Ord. No. 1276, 4-2-18; Ord. No.
1278, 5-7-18)



Section 4. R3 multi-family residential district.



   A.   General description. This residential district is intended to
promote and encourage the establishment and maintenance of a suitable
environment for urban residence in areas appropriate by location and
character for occupancy by high-density, multiple-family dwellings. One of
the important purposes of this district is to create adequate standards of
residential development in order to prevent overcrowded and unhealthy housing
conditions.



   B.   Primary uses permitted. Property and structures in an R3
multi-family residential district shall be used for the following purposes:



   1.   Any use permitted in the R1 and R2 districts including two or
more attached dwellings with each dwelling on an individually platted lot.



   2.   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to a
primary use when located on the same lot, after the primary use has been
established.



   3.   Bed and breakfast.



   4.   Cemetery.



   5.   Child care center.



   6.   Church or place of worship.



   7.   Fraternity or sorority house.



   8.   Group care homes/assisted living facility .



   9.   Manufactured home parks.



   10.   Multi-family dwelling units.



   11.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems.



   C.   Uses eligible for a conditional use permit.  Conditional use
permits may be granted to properties for the following land uses:



   1.   Historic monument/place.



   2.   Home Occupation Type 2 with greater than fifteen percent (15%)
of the floor area of the structure dedicated to the home occupation.



   3.   Office.



   4.   Personal services.



   5.   Privately owned recreational use.



   6.   Private school or educational service.



   7.   Publicly owned structure/facility/park.



   8.   Public utility substation.



   9.   Restaurant or food preparation.



   10.   Retail.



   11.   Telecommunications facilities.



   12.   Personal service establishment.



   D.   Area regulations. All setbacks shall be measured from the
property lines.



   1.   Front setback.



      a.   Twenty-five (25) feet for all structures not exceeding
thirty-five (35) feet in height.



      b.   If a lot abuts a one hundred (100) foot wide public
right-of-way, the front setback may be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and
provided that a garage door facing the street is a minimum of twenty (20)
feet from the public sidewalk. This shall apply only to lots where all
structures do not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height



      c.   Thirty-five (35) feet for all structures that are
thirty-five (35) feet and taller in height (Exception:  Telecommunications
shall follow Article V. Section 8.)



   2.   Side setback.



      a.   Single-family and two-family dwellings on one lot - eight
(8) feet; except lots platted before April 1980 - five (5) feet.



      b.   Two or more attached dwellings with each dwelling on a
separate lot - zero (0) feet at common/shared wall and eight (8) feet on
remaining sides; see Figure 2b.



      c.   Multi-family dwellings - twelve (12) feet.  For
structures thirty-five (35) feet and taller in height, twelve (12) feet plus
one (1) foot additional side setback for every additional twelve (12) feet of
structure height.



      d.    All unattached structures of accessory use, five (5)
feet.







 



   3.    Rear setback.



      a.   Twenty-five (25) feet for all structures not exceeding
thirty-five (35) feet in height.



      b.   Thirty (30) feet for all structures thirty-five (35) feet
and taller in height



   4.   Minimum lot width - 75 feet at the front setback line except:



      a.   Lots platted before April 1980 which shall not be
required to comply.



      b.   For two or more attached dwellings where each dwelling is
on an individually platted lot, the lot width shall be what is necessary to
accommodate setbacks, off-street parking and the dwelling unit.



   5.   Minimum lot size - Eight thousand (8,000) square feet for all
primary uses.  Exception to this requirement are:



      a.   Single-family dwellings or two-family dwellings on one
common lot platted before April 1980.



      b.   For attached dwellings where each dwelling is on an
individually platted lot, the lot size shall be what is necessary to
accommodate setbacks, off-street parking and the dwelling unit.



      c.   Lots smaller than eight-thousand (8,000) square feet and
platted before April 1980 may develop according to the density regulation in
7. below.



   6.   Density regulations - For lots smaller than 8,000 square feet,
after July 2014 the maximum density in the R-3 district is two (2) dwellings
per lot.



   7.   Maximum lot coverage.  Thirty (30) percent.



   8.   Maximum structure height:



      a.   All primary uses and conditional use permit uses: maximum
of sixty (60) feet.



      b.   Unattached accessory structures - maximum of fifteen (15)
feet.



   9.   Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.  As
regulated in Article V, Sections 3, 4 and 5.



   10.   Useable open space (applies only to property where all
dwellings are on one common lot).



      a.   Structures not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height
- four hundred (400) square feet per dwelling unit.



      b.   Structures thirty-five (35) feet and taller in height -
three hundred (300) square feet per dwelling unit.



      c.   Within the useable open space, designated play area for
children must be provided at fifty (50) square feet per dwelling unit.  This
shall not apply to multi-family developments exclusively restricted to the
elderly.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1030, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 1122, 8-16-10; Ord.
No. 1195, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 1239, 3-21-16; Ord. No. 1276, 4-2-18; Ord. No.
1278, 5-7-18)



Section 5. C1 central commercial district.



   A.   General description. This commercial district is for personal
and business services and the general retail business of the city.



   B.   Primary uses permitted. Property and structures in the C1
central commercial district shall be used for the following purposes:



   1.   Retail Type 1 establishments, including incidental
manufacturing of goods for sale at wholesale or retail on the premises.



   2.   Eating and drinking establishments.



   3.   Food and beverage production.



   4.   Service and repair establishments.



   5.   Personal service establishments.



   6.   Hotel, motel, rooming and boarding house, bed and breakfast.



   7.   Entertainment services, including venues for live or recorded
entertainment, community centers, recreation centers, fitness and exercise
centers, public or private swimming facilities, golf courses, and municipal
uses.



   8.   Parking lots and garages.



   9.   Offices.



   10.   Financial institutions.



   11.   Private clubs and lodges.



   12.   Newspaper and printing firms.



   13.   Churches.



   14.   Single, two-family and multi-family dwellings.



   15.   Group care homes/assisted living facility.



   16.   Telecommunications facilities.



   17.   Fitness and exercise centers.



   18.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems.



   19.   Child care center or adult day care.



   20.   Storage buildings.



   21.   Car wash facility.



   22.   Schools and universities.



   23.   Temporary shelter.



   24.   Wholesale.



   C.   Uses eligible for a conditional use permit. Conditional use
permits may be granted to properties for the following land uses:



   1.   Veterinary clinics for domesticated animals including pet
daycare an overnight pet stays.



   2.   Telecommunications facilities.



   3.   Retail Type 2.



   4.   Treatment center.



   D.   Area regulations. All setbacks shall be measured from the
property line.



   1.   Front setback. None.



   2.   Side setback. None.



   3.   Rear setback. None.



   4.   Lot width. No minimum requirement.



   5.   Minimum lot size. No minimum requirement.



   6.   Lot coverage. No maximum percentage of lot coverage except
that, for structures serviced from the rear, space shall be provided either
inside or outside the structure for loading or unloading goods and materials.
Such space shall have access to a street or other public way.



   E.   Height regulations. Maximum sixty (60) feet.



   F.   Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements per city
code.



   G.   Open space requirements of the R-3 zoning district shall apply
to all multi family uses.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1030, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 1048, 2-20-07; Ord.
No. 1122, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 1137, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 1285, 8-20-18)



Section 6. CC central core commercial district.



   A.   General description. The purpose of this district is to
separate it from the central commercial district and to provide for a
business, retail, entertainment, and cultural identity of the City. The
district is comprised of Blocks 20, 21, 22, 28, 29, 30, 41, 42, and 43 of
Original Town.



   B.   Primary uses permitted. Property and structures in the CC
central core commercial district shall be used for the following purposes:



   1.   All of the primary uses permitted in C1 district.



   C.   Uses eligible for a conditional use permit. Conditional use
permits may be granted to properties for the following land uses:



   1.   Fraternity or sorority house.



   2.   Telecommunications facilities.



   3.   Retail Type 2.



   D.   Area regulations. All setbacks shall be measured from the
property line.



   1.   Front setback. None.



   2.   Side setback. None.



   3.   Rear setback. None.



   4.   Lot width. No minimum requirement.



   5.   Minimum lot size. No minimum requirement.



   6.   Lot coverage. No maximum percentage of lot coverage except
that, for structures serviced from the rear, space shall be provided either
inside or outside the structure, for loading or unloading of goods and
materials. Such space shall have access to a street or other public way.



   7.   Covered sidewalks. Covered sidewalks may be allowed provided
that the covering structure is of such materials and appearance to conform
with and enhance the existing and surrounding architecture and shall:



      a.   Be self-supported on the structure face and be set back
at least two (2) feet from the curb line.



      b.   Be of such width and height, design and material as will
not impede public safety operations for the affected structures.



   E.   Height regulations. Maximum sixty (60) feet.



   F.   Parking regulations. No off-street parking required.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1030, 6-19-06; Ord. 1200, 11-17-14; Ord. No.
1285, 8-20-18)



Section 7. C2 highway service commercial district.



   A.   General description. This district is established for the
accommodation of retail and business service activities and are typically
located and grouped along a major street, street intersection or highway
interchange, generating a considerable volume of vehicular traffic.



   B.   Primary uses permitted. Property and structures in the C2
highway service commercial district shall be used for the following purposes:



   1.   All of the primary uses in C1 district.



   2.   Gasoline, diesel, propane, and CNG service stations.



   3.   Building material sales.



   4.   Garden centers, greenhouses and nurseries.



   5.   Sales or leasing of new and used vehicles, recreational
vehicles, trailers, or equipment.



   6.   Monument sales.



   7.   Sales and service of prefabricated and manufactured homes.



   8.   Auction houses.



   9.   Taxidermists.



   10.   Campground.



   11.   Outdoor storage uses either as a primary use or an accessory
use which shall comply with the following requirements.



      a.   All outdoor storage and outdoor sales display of
merchandise, material and equipment shall be screened by a solid opaque fence
eight feet high at the lot line which abuts any residential district. If this
is not adequate to screen the view of storage and display, the zoning
administrator is authorized to require additional landscaping or any other
buffer technique.



      b.   If the outdoor storage is the primary use of the lot, and
not in association with a retail type 1 or 2 land use, showroom, warehouse,
commercial building, etc. on the same lot, a solid fence eight (8) feet in
height shall be provided for all storage areas with the exception of lots
where the primary use is the storage of RV's and boats, in which case the
fence is not required provided the RV's and boats being stored are not junked
nor inoperable.



      c.   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall not exceed
forty (40) feet in width, exclusive of curb returns.



      d.   Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an
arrangement of reflectors and an intensity of lighting which will not
interfere with adjacent land uses or the use of adjacent streets.



   12.   Retail Type 2.



   13.   Veterinary clinics for domesticated animals including pet
daycare and overnight pet stays, provided that all care is provided within an
enclosed structure and no outdoor runs or kennels are provided.



   14.   Small scale contractor.



   C.   Uses eligible for conditional use permit. Conditional use
permits may be granted to properties for the following land uses.



   1.   Drop-off or transfer sites for household recyclables.



   2.   Telecommunications facilities.



   3.   Large scale contractor.



   4.   Veterinary clinics for domesticated animals including pet
daycare and overnight pet stays for which outdoor runs and kennels are
provided.



   5.   Treatment center.



   D.   Area regulations. All setbacks shall be measured from the
property line.



   1.   Front setback. Twenty-five (25) feet.



   2.   Side setback. None.



   3.   Rear setback. Ten (10) feet; and where serviced from the rear,
thirty (30) feet.



   4.   Lot width. Minimum seventy-five (75) feet at the front setback
line.



   5.   Minimum lot size. Five thousand (5,000) square feet.



   6.   Lot coverage. No maximum percentage of lot coverage.



   E.   Height regulations. Maximum sixty (60) feet.



   F.   Minimum off-street parking, loading, and landscape requirements
per city code.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1030, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 1048, 2-20-07; Ord.
No. 1081, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 1122, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 1285, 8-20-18)



Section 7a.   C-3 office commercial district.



   A.   General description.  This commercial district is intended to
provide a place for those types of institutional and commercial activities
where separate buildings and building groups are often surrounded by
landscaped yards and open areas. Land, space and aesthetic requirements of
these uses make desirable either a central location or a suburban location
near residential neighborhoods.



   B.   Primary uses permitted.  Property and structures in the C3
office commercial district shall be used for the following purposes:



   1.   Art gallery.



   2.   Assembly halls.



   3.   Child care center or adult day care.



   4.   Hospitals and medical facilities, not including veterinary
establishments, with pharmacies allowed as an accessory use to permitted
medical facilities.



   5.   Laboratories for medical research and testing.



   6.   Libraries.



   7.   Museums.



   8.   Office buildings in which no primary activity is carried on
catering to retail trade with the general public, and no primary stock of
goods is maintained for sale to customers.



   9.   Personal service establishments.



   C.   Uses eligible for a conditional use permit. Conditional use
permits may be granted to properties for the following land uses:



   1.   Retail Type 1 establishments, including incidental 
manufacturing of goods for sale at wholesale or retail on the premises.



   2.   Eating and drinking establishments.



   3.   Food and beverage production.



   4.   Service and repair establishments.



   5.   Hotel, motel, rooming and boarding house, bed and breakfast.



   6.   Entertainment services, including venues for live or recorded
entertainment, community centers, recreation centers, fitness and exercise
centers, public or private swimming facilities, golf courses, and municipal
uses.



   7.   Parking lots and garages.



   8.   Private clubs and lodges.



   9.   Newspaper and printing firms.



   10.   Churches.



   11.   Single, two-family, and multi-family dwellings.



   12.   Group care homes/assisted living facility.



   13.   Telecommunications facilities.



   14.   Fitness and exercise centers.



   15.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems.



   16.   Storage buildings.



   17.   Car wash facility.



   18.   Schools and universities.



   19.   Temporary shelter.



   20.   Veterinary clinics for domesticated animals including pet
daycare and overnight pet stays with or without outdoor runs or kennels.



   21.   Wholesale.



   22.   Treatment center.



   D.   Area regulations.  All setbacks shall be measured from the
property line.



   1.   Front yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.



   2.   Side yard: Twelve (12) feet.



   3.   Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.



   4.   Lot width: Minimum seventy-five (75) feet at the front setback
line.



   5.   Minimum lot size: Seven thousand (7,000) square feet.



   6.   Maximum lot coverage: Thirty-five percent (35%).



   E.   Height regulations: Maximum thirty-five (35) feet.



   F.   Minimum off-street parking, loading, and landscape requirements
per city code.



(Ord. No. 1219, 12-21-15; Ord. No. 1285, 8-20-18)



Section 8. ILR light/restrictive industrial district.



   A.   General description.  This district is intended to provide for
a number of light manufacturing, wholesale, retail, warehousing and service
uses where landscaped site frontages provide an attractive setting for
business.



   B.   Primary uses permitted. Property and structures in the ILR
light/ restrictive industrial district shall be used for the following
purposes:



   1.   Manufacturing.



   2.   Back office (non-retail), - Administrative technical
support/customer service, and corporate offices, that may or may not have a
related manufacturing or warehouse function.



   3.   Printing and publishing plant.



   4.   Warehouse, distribution and wholesale facilities.



   5.   Broadcasting facilities.



   6.   Repair services.



   7.   Contractor or building trades offices and shop.



   8.   Cleaning and laundry plants.



   9.   Bottling, cold storage, or ice production.



   10.   Computer design and development facilities.



   11.   Data processing facilities.



   12.   Telecommunications facilities.



   13.   Research or business incubator center.



   14.   General machine shop.



   15.   Custom crafts (ceramics, furniture, stained glass, etc.).



   16.   Mail and parcel services.



   17.   Essential municipal and public utility facilities - including,
but not limited to, transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers, and
telephone exchanges.



   18.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems.



   19.   Retail Type 1, including incidental manufacturing of goods for
sale at wholesale or retail on the premises.



   20.   Retail Type 2.



   21.   Eating and drinking establishments.



   22.   Parking lots and garages.



   23.   Churches.



   24.   Fitness and exercise centers.



   25.   Private clubs and lodges.



   26.   Child care center.



   27.   Car wash facility.



   28.   Gasoline, diesel, propane, and CNG service stations.



   29.   Garden centers, greenhouses and nurseries.



   30.   Auction houses.



   31.   Taxidermists.



   32.   Veterinary clinics for domesticated animals including pet
daycare and overnight pet stays for which outdoor runs and kennels are
provided.



   33.   Entertainment services, including venues for live or recorded
entertainment, community centers, recreation centers, fitness and exercise
centers, public or private swimming facilities, golf courses, and municipal
uses.



   34.   Storage buildings.



   35.   Equipment rental, sales, and service.



   36.   Personal services establishments.



   C.   Uses eligible for a conditional use permit. Conditional use
permits may be granted to properties for the following land uses:



   1.   Telecommunications facilities.



   2.   Schools and universities.



   3.   Crematory.



   4.   Detached site-built or modular single-family dwellings in
support of a primary use.



   D.   Prohibited uses.  There shall be no noxious or offensive trade
or activity which may be or may become an annoyance or nuisance, by reason of
unsightliness, the excessive emissions of odors, dust, fumes, smoke or noise,
excessive vibration, glare, heat, fire hazard, industrial waste, or
stockpiling.



   1.   Extractive industries.



   2.   Automobile and machinery wrecking, salvage, junkyard and
similar types of used-material businesses.



   3.   Livestock feed lots and sale barns.



   4.   Packing plants and slaughterhouses.



   5.   Non adult educational facilities.



   E.    Area regulations.



   1.   Front setback. Twenty-five (25) feet. Building with sidewall
height over twenty (20) feet shall have a forty (40) foot front setback.



   2.   Side setback. Ten (10) feet.



   3.   Rear setback. Ten (10) feet.



   4.   Minimum lot size. Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.



   5.   Maximum lot coverage. Seventy-five (75) percent.



   6.   Outdoor storage areas may not occupy more than twenty percent
(20%) of the parcel's total gross land area.



   7.   There shall be no open storage of material, equipment or
products unless behind an opaque screen which is not less than the height
necessary to completely screen the use. All fencing or screening shall meet
the following criteria:



      a.   Be aesthetically compatible with the building design and
shall be of an all-wood construction, or masonry, or concrete in the case of
walls, or all metal construction for security fences.



      b.   No fence or screen shall be permitted to extend closer to
the street than the front building setback line.



      c.   All fences and screening shall be maintained in good
condition and in case of walls, shall be painted or stained.



      d.   Short-term storage of forty-eight (48) hours or less
shall be allowed in area next to building.  If scrap storage is necessary,
the same shall be on concrete pad and completely screened from view.



      e.   No storage shall be permitted, even if conforming with
the requirements of this paragraph, if the same shall create a health hazard
for occupants of adjacent properties or the public.



   F.   Height regulations.  As per Uniform Building Code (UBC) and in
consultation with the Black Hills Airport Board, or their designee.



   G.   Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. As
regulated in Article V, Sections 3 and 5:



   1.   No loading dock shall be constructed facing any public street
unless it is constructed a minimum of forty (40) feet from the property line.



   2.   All loading, unloading and maneuvering operations shall be
off-street.  No loading or unloading shall be permitted which will interfere
with ingress or egress thereto.  Driveways and access roads to loading or
unloading facilities shall be paved at least as far as the defined setback
area.



   3.   Paved surface areas required. All parking areas, circulation
area loading/unloading areas shall be hard surfaced.



   H.   Landscaping requirements. As regulated by Chapter 19, Article
III, Code of Ordinances, City of Spearfish.



   I.   Signs. As regulated by Article V, Section 6.B.1.b.(6).



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1032, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 1122, 8-16-10; Ord.
No. 1199, 10-20-14; Ord. No. 1260, 5-1-17; Ord. No. 1296, 12-4-18)



Section 9. IH heavy industrial district.



   A.   General description. This district is intended to:



   1.   Reserve appropriately located areas for heavy industrial and
related activities where the environmental impacts are of a different nature
than in other commercial and industrial zones, and ensure the continuity of
locations for industries that can operate on sites with minimum mutual
adverse impact.



   2.   Provide opportunities for certain types of industrial uses to
concentrate in mutually beneficial relationships to each other.



   B.   Primary uses permitted. Property and structures in the HI heavy
industrial district shall be used for the following purposes:



   1.   Large scale or small scale contractor.



   2.   Manufacturing, fabricating, construction and construction
trade-related activities, processing and warehousing which would not be
compatible with a commercial, light industrial or residential environment.



   3.   Outdoor storage.



   4.   Public utility substations.



   5.   Publicly owned structure/facility/park.



   6.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems.



   7.   Retail Type 1 and 2 of goods manufactured onsite.



   8.   Residential use for watchmen or caretakers when employed on the
premises.



   9.   Service and repair establishments.



   10.   Telecommunications facilities.



   11.   Veterinary clinics for domesticated animals including pet
daycare and overnight pet stays, with or without outdoor kennels and runs.



   C.   Conditional use permits may be granted to properties for the
following land uses:



   1.   Extractive operations for sand, gravel, rock, minerals, and
similar materials.



   2.   Processing facilities for food, beef, pork, fish, poultry,
agricultural crops, timber, wood and similar raw materials.



   D.   Area regulations.



   1.   Front setback. Twenty-five (25) feet.



   2.   Side setback. Twenty-five (25) feet.



   3.   Rear setback. Twenty-five (25) feet.



   4.   When the side or the rear of a lot is adjoining a residential
district, a setback of no less than fifty (50) feet shall be required and no
development other than vegetative cover shall be permitted within setback
area.



   5.   Lot width. One hundred (100) feet except in cul-de-sac areas.



   6.   Minimum lot size. Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet minimum.



   7.   Maximum lot coverage. Seventy-five (75) percent lot coverage.



   E.   Height regulations. As per adopted building code regulations;
an applicant shall provide evidence that Black Hills Airport has been
notified of structure height.



   F.   Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. As
regulated in Article V, Sections 3 and 5.



   G.   Signs, as regulated by Article V, Section 6., B., b., (5).



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 982, 5-21-04; Ord. No. 1030, 6-19-06; Ord.
No. 1122, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 1296, 12-3-18)



Section 10. Development review district.



   A.   General description. The purpose of the development review
district is to allow development of undeveloped parcels of land that, by
virtue of their visually and/or environmentally unique location, lend
themselves to a blend of diverse yet compatible uses, innovative layouts or
sensitive designs. Development of such parcels shall be accomplished while
meeting public requirements, including preservation, promotion and protection
of open space, scenic vistas and natural resources, by the application of
extra administrative controls. All final plans in the development review
district shall be recommended by the planning commission and approved by the
common council under the procedure set forth herein. Final approval by the
common council is deemed to be an administrative act not subject to
referendum.



   B.   Uses permitted. Unless expressly prohibited in C. below, the
following uses are permitted:



   1.   Commercial uses.



   2.   Inpatient and outpatient health care facilities and clinics.



   3.   Long term care, congregate and assisted living facilities.



   4.   Religious and educational facilities and institutions.



   5.   Light manufacturing and office park uses.



   6.   Public and private recreation facilities and their ancillary
services.



   7.   Variable density housing.



   8.   Public and private transportation, utility and public safety
facilities.



   9.   Agricultural uses.



   10.   Telecommunications facilities as defined and regulated in
Article V, Section 8 by administrative approval and use permit.



   11.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems per Article V, Section 9.



   C.   Uses prohibited.



   1.   New and used vehicle or machinery sales and service.



   2.   Manufactured home sales.



   3.   Building material sales.



   4.   Truck terminals, stand-alone warehouse facilities.



   5.   Use requiring unscreened outside storage.



   6.   Industrial uses.



   7.   Advertising signs.



   D.   Minimum requirements for improvements and design.



   1.   General. Minimum requirements for improvements and design are
not subject to modification by the procedure outlined in Appendix A - Zoning
Ordinance Article VI, Section 2, variances. Projects that exceed the minimum
requirements are encouraged.



   2.   Area regulations.



      a.   Front, side and rear setbacks, lot width and size are
governed by the minimum requirements for parking and open space as described
per paragraph 3 and 6 below.



      b.   Height restrictions.



         (1)   Commercial uses—Twelve (12) stories.



         (2)   Residential uses—Three (3) stories.



         (3)   All other uses—Five (5) stories.



   3.   Parking. For individual uses, or approved as a comprehensive
parking plan for integrated uses or for the overall development, as regulated
by Article V, Sections 3 and 5.



   4.   Lighting. All lighting shall be fully shielded, eighty-five
(85) percent full cut-off fixtures.



   5.   Signs. As regulated for individual uses in Article V, Section
6, or approved as a comprehensive signage plan for the overall development
which, when evaluated as a whole, meets the intent of Article V, Section 6.
All illuminated signage shall be down-lighted or back-lighted.



   6.   Open space.



      a.   Common open space—A minimum total area of ten (10)
percent of the land included in the application shall be comprised of common
open space, which shall be used for amenity or active or passive recreational
use. Open space containing natural features may be left unimproved.



      b.   Individual lot open space—Commercial, twenty (20)
percent; all other uses, thirty (30) percent.



   7.   Landscaping. Each application shall include a comprehensive
landscaping plan showing the location and species of all plant materials and
an irrigation plan, meeting the minimum requirements of Chapter 19, Article
III of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Spearfish. Additional
requirements in the form of berms, open yard buffer areas, landscape islands
and live and/or constructed screening are encouraged and may be imposed as
conditions of landscape plan approval.



   8.   Transportation system. Each application shall include a
transportation plan showing points of ingress and egress, circulation
pattern, and integration with the system to which it relates.



      a.   All streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways and rights-of-way
to be dedicated to the city shall conform to the minimum requirements of
Chapter 15A, Subdivision Regulations of the Revised Ordinances of the City of
Spearfish, as adopted and in effect when the plan is approved.



      b.   All streets, sidewalks, pedestrian-ways and rights-of-way
to remain private shall be subject to approval as part of the overall
development plan.



   E.   Process Overview – Applying the DRD zoning for the first
time. In traditional zoning districts, development standards are uniform and
contained within the zoning code. However, the development standards in DRD
zoning are unique and are fashioned and applied to the particular land being
developed. These development standards take the form of a Concept Plan and a
Final Plan. DRD zoning must always include an associated Concept Plan or
Final Plan. There are two ways to secure development approval with the DRD
zoning. The applicant may choose from two types of DRD review processes:



   1.   Two-Step Approval. Concept Plan approval followed by Final Plan
approval at a later point in time. Typically, the two-step process is used
when a project includes any one of the following:



      a.   more than one land use;



      b.   more than one parcel developer;



      c.   moderate to high potential for change in the land uses
and/or reconfiguration of the concept plan before build out;



      d.   build-out takes place over a period of many years; or



      e.   exact locations of site improvements is unknown at the
time DRD is requested.



   2.   One-Step Approval – Final Plan. If site development will
commence in one clearly defined time frame following zoning approval, only a
Final Plan approval is required at the time DRD zoning is requested. The
Final Plan contains all of the information required to effectuate a change of
zoning, and thus a separate Concept Plan is unnecessary. For one-step
approvals, the Final Plan will be evaluated using both the Concept Plan and
Final Plan criteria.



   F.   Concept Plan. The Concept Plan depicts a general configuration
and description of proposed land uses, structures, lot sizes, and street and
pedestrian networks. The concept plan is intended to be flexible and will
provide an overall framework within which specific development will take
place through the approval of the Final Plan.



   1.   Concept Plan Submittal Requirements. At the time of the initial
request to change zoning to DRD, or for a revision to a previously approved
Concept Plan, the following information must be included in the Concept Plan:



      a.   Ownership and legal description of the property included
in the project, and of adjoining properties;



      b.   Significant topographical features including, but not
limited to, watercourses, drainages, mountains and outcroppings, forested
areas, and historical/archeological sites/structures listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Places;



      c.   Approximate location, size, scale, and use of all
existing and proposed land uses, structures, improvements and fa-cilities to
be constructed/reconstructed;



      d.   Schedule of minimum setbacks for each type of land use;



      e.   Proposed areas to be designated as open space, landscape
areas, recreation areas or areas to be held in common ownership;



      f.   A conceptual street plan showing projected locations for
ingress and egress and internal circulation patterns;



      g.   Application form and rezoning fee according to the
approved fee schedule;



      h.   Such other conceptual information that is deemed
appropriate by the Planning Commission.



   2.   Concept Plan Approval Criteria. In consideration of a request
for Concept Plan approval, the Planning Commission and City Council shall
take into account factors including, but not limited to:



      a.   Conformance with the goals and policies of the
comprehensive plan;



      b.   Compatibility with and relationship to existing and
potential uses adjacent to the proposed project;



      c.   Public safety issues relating to projected traffic
generated by the proposed uses and to the existing or potential
transportation system of adjoining properties;



      d.   Community benefit of the proposed use(s);



      e.   Aesthetic considerations related to the scope and size of
(the) proposed use(s);



      f.   Adequacy of public services for the proposed use(s); and



      g.   Testimony received from the public at the public hearing.



   3.   Concept Plan Review Process and Public Hearing Notice
Requirements.



      a.   Upon receipt of a complete application containing the
required information, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the Concept Plan
for review and comment to all City department heads, the Spearfish Historic
Preservation Commission, and any applicable County, State and Federal highway
authority if the parcel receives access not within the right of way
permitting jurisdiction of the City of Spearfish.



      b.   The Concept Plan shall be presented at a meeting of the
Planning Commission, which shall set a Planning Commission public hearing
date. Alternatively, the Planning Commission may require additional
information be provided before setting a public hearing date.



      c.   The applicant shall, by certified mail, notify all
property owners in the city limits within one hundred forty (140) feet of the
property and owners of physically adjoining property outside the city limits
of the Planning Commission's public hearing. This notice shall be postmarked
a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission's public hearing
and shall include the hearing date, time, and location.



      d.   A notice containing the date, time and place of the
Planning Commission's public hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City of Spearfish. Such notice shall appear a minimum of ten
(10) days prior to the public hearing.



      e.   Upon completion of the noticing requirements, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and forward its
recommendation to the City Council, fully setting forth the conditions of
Concept Plan approval in its recommendation.



      f.   A notice containing the date, time, and place of the City
Council's public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the
City of Spearfish. Such notice shall appear once for two consecutive weeks
prior to the public hearing.



      g.   Upon receiving public hearing testimony, the City Council
shall take action on the concept plan and if approved, shall provide written
conditions of concept plan approval.



   G.   Final Plan. The Final Plan depicts detailed site development
information and is required to be submitted after the approval of a Concept
Plan, or along with the initial request to change zoning to DRD if the
One-Step approval process is used. In no instance may other related approval
activities such as subdivision platting or issuance of a building permit
commence without the approval of the Final Plan.



   1.   Final Plan Submittal Requirements. All Final Plans must include
the following information:



      a.   The ownership and legal description of the property
included in the project and of adjoining properties;



      b.   Location and siting, size and use of all structures,
building setbacks, improvements and facilities to be
constructed/reconstructed by the applicant, if applicable;



      c.   Architectural elevations of all commercial and
multi-family (3 or more attached units) structures, if applicable;



      d.   Location of all points of ingress and egress and their
relationship to the existing transportation system and internal traffic
circulation pattern;



      e.   Street widths, materials of construction, and
curb/gutter, sidewalk and recreation paths, if applicable;



      f.   Landscape plan, if applicable;



      g.   Lighting plan;



      h.   Parking plan;



      i.   Drainage plan;



      j.   Designation of all areas to be dedicated to the public or
held in common ownership;



      k.   Proposed covenants and restrictions, if applicable;



      l.   Such other architectural and engineering data as may be
required by the Planning Commission; and



      m.   A preliminary plat may be submitted as a part of the
final plan.



   2.   Final Plan Approval Criteria. In consideration of a request for
Final Plan approval, the Planning Commission and City Council shall take into
account of the following factors both the One-Step and Two-Step types of
Final Plan approval:



      a.   Conformance with Permitted Used, Prohibited Uses, and
Minimum Requirements for Improvement and Design;



      b.   Site and building design compatibility with and
relationship to existing and potential uses adjacent to the proposed project;



      c.   Aesthetic considerations related to the scope and size of
(the) proposed use(s);



      d.   Public safety issues relating to projected traffic
generated by the proposed uses and to the existing or potential
transportation system of adjoining properties; and



      e.   Testimony received from the public, and comments received
by departments, agencies and commissions as provided in Section 10.F.3.a. or
10.G.4.a, as applicable.



      In addition to the approval criteria above, for One-Step Final
Plans, (concurrent change of zoning plus final plan approval) the following
shall also be taken into consideration:



      f.   Community benefit of the proposed use(s);



      g.   Conformance with the goals and policies of the
comprehensive plan and compatibility with surrounding land uses; and



      h.   Adequacy of public services for the proposed use(s).



   3.   Two-Step Final Plan Review Process and Meeting Notice
Requirements.



      a.   Final Plans shall require a Planning Commission
recommendation to the City Council who shall approve or deny on the Final
Plan.



      b.   Property owners within one hundred forty (140) feet of
the property where Final Plan approval is sought shall be notified of the
time, place, and date for when the final plan approval will be discussed by
the Planning Commission and City Council.



      c.   Such notice shall be provided by:



         i.   Mailed notice sent by regular first class mail by
the applicant and postmarked not less than seven (7) days before the date of
the Planning Commission meeting, with the date of the meeting counted as the
seventh (7th) day.



         ii.   A sign posted on the site where approval is sought
that provides the time, place, and date for when the Final Plan approval will
be discussed by the Planning Commission and City Council. The sign shall
conform to the standards established by the zoning administrator and shall be
posted not less than seven (7) days before the date of the Planning
Commission meeting, with the date of the meeting counted as the seventh (7th)
day.



   4.   One-Step Final Plan Review Process and Public Hearing Notice
Requirements.



      a.   Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator shall forward the Final Plan for review and comment to all city
department heads, the Spearfish Historic Preservation Commission, and any
applicable county, state, and federal highway authority if the parcel
receives access not within the right of way permitting jurisdiction of the
City of Spearfish.



      b.   The Final Plan shall be presented at a meeting of the
Planning Commission, which shall set a Planning Commission public hearing
date. Alternatively, the Planning Commission may require additional
information be provided before setting a public hearing date.



      c.   The applicant shall, by certified mail, notify all
property owners in the city limits within one hundred forty (140) feet of the
property and owners of physically adjoining property outside the city limits,
of the Planning Commission's public hearing. This notice shall be postmarked
a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission's public hearing
and shall include the date, time, and location.



      d.   A notice containing the date, time and place of the
Planning Commission's public hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City of Spearfish. Such notice shall appear a minimum of ten
(10) days prior to the public hearing.



      e.   Upon completion of the noticing requirements, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and forward a recommendation
to the City Council, fully setting forth its findings and conditions, if any,
pertaining to the recommendation.



      f.   A notice containing the date, time, and place of the City
Council's public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the
City of Spearfish. Such notice shall appear once for two consecutive weeks
prior to the public hearing.



      g.   Upon receiving public hearing testimony, the City Council
shall take action on the request for rezoning to the DRD and approval of the
Final Plan. If approved, written conditions of Final Plan approval shall be
provided.



   H.   Revisions to an Approved DRD Concept Plan or Final Plan.



   1.   After approval of a Final Plan or Concept Plan, no substantial
change in either plan, as determined by the zoning administrator, may be made
without obtaining the recommenda-tion of the Planning Commission and approval
of the City Council, following the same procedure of the original applicable
plan approval.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 999, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 1030, 6-19-06; Ord.
No. 1122, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 1183, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 1266, 9-18-17)



Section 11. APZ airport zoning district.



   A.    General description. The purpose of the airport zoning
district (APZ) is to provide for and promote the aviation and economic
development potential of Black Hills Airport/Clyde Ice Field. This district
shall apply to all existing and future properties included in the ownership
boundaries of the airport. To achieve its purpose the district shall, in
concert with the airport master plan:



   1.   Reserve appropriately located areas for business, industry and
aviation and to provide and ensure the continuity of locations for uses that
can operate on sites with maximum mutual beneficial impact.



   2.   Establish and maintain high standards of site planning,
architecture and landscape design that will create a safe and attractive
environment for business and industry, while maximizing the protection of the
aviation mission of the airport.



   3.   Protect areas appropriate for business, industry and aviation
from intrusion by inharmonious uses.



   4.   Provide opportunities for certain types of industrial,
business, residential and aviation uses to concentrate in mutually beneficial
relationships to each other without compromising the primary mission of
aviation.



   B.   Uses permitted.



   1.   All aviation and related uses.



   2.   Light industries and businesses that operate solely within the
confines of an enclosed structure and whose activities do not cater to the
general public.



   3.   Residential use shall be limited to those areas designated as
"Residential Air Park" (RAP), by the Airport Master Plan, as from
time-to-time may be amended.



   4.   Photovoltaic (PV) systems per Article V, Section 9.



   C.   Use restrictions. There shall be no activity which may be or
may become an annoyance, nuisance, hindrance or threat to aviation activity.
No activity shall be permitted until clearance/ approval has been received by
all applicable local, state and federal agencies having jurisdiction over
airport property.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no use may be
made of land or water within any zone established by this ordinance in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or
radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for
pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in
the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of
the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or
interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to
use the airport.



   D.   Building permits required. No material change shall be made in
the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and
no landscaping shall be planted in the district hereby created unless a
permit has been applied for and granted by the city. Each application for a
permit shall be accompanied by a site and construction plan approved by the
airport board. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this
ordinance shall be granted.



   E.   Area regulations.



   1.   Residential, business and light industrial uses.



      a.   Minimum platted lot size. Twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet.



      b.   Minimum platted lot width. One hundred (100) feet at the
front property line.



      c.   Setback requirements.



         (1)   Front-Thirty-five (35) feet.



         (2)   Side-Twelve (12) feet.



         (3)   Rear-Ten (10) feet, except where abutting
residential uses, fifty (50) feet.



   2.   Hanger facilities.



      a.   No minimum platted or leased lot size.



      b.   Hangers shall maintain a minimum twelve-foot setback from
all structures.



   3.   Height regulations. Not to exceed controlling structure
elevations specified by the airport airspace plan.



   4.   Special requirements. The following special requirements shall
apply to each permitted use:



      a.   Lighting.



         (1)   A pulsating, flashing, rotating, oscillating, or
other type of lighting intended as an attentiongetting device shall be
expressly prohibited.



         (2)   Flood lights, spot lights, or other lighting
device shall be so arranged or shielded as not to cast illumination in an
upward direction above an imaginary line extended from the light source
parallel to the ground.



         (3)   Any light which constitutes a "misleading light"
within the meaning of regulations adopted by the Federal Aviation Admin-
istration, is expressly prohibited.



      b.   Radio and electronic.



         (1)   Any FCC-regulated radio or electronic device shall
be permitted only in conjunction with a valid license or authorization issued
by the Federal Communications Commission.



         (2)   Any radio or electronic device, the operation of
which would violate any rules or regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission is expressly prohibited.



      c.   Smoke. Any operation or use that emits smoke, dust or any
visible fumes or vapors into the atmosphere, excluding normal residential and
HVAC emmissions, shall be expressly prohibited.



      d.   Fencing. No fence shall be permitted which impedes
aviation sight distances, poses a security risk to aviation activities,
exacerbates snow drifting in any approach or transitional sub-zone, or in any
manner poses an adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of
navigable areas of the airport.



   5.   Paved vehicle parking.



      a.   Terminal. One (1) space per fifteen (15) square feet of
assembly area plus one (1) space per employee.



      b.   Hangars. One (1) space per aircraft.



      c.   Repair and maintenance facilities. One (1) space per
employee.



      d.   For uses a.-c., parking may be provided in a central
location.



      e.   Residential air park, light industry and business uses.
As regulated by Article V, Sections 3 and 5.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1122, 8-16-10)



Section 12. Flood hazard areas.



   A.    General description. The designation of flood hazard areas by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and adopted by the city is for the
protection of drainageways to permit the unimpeded flow of surface run-off
without endangering life and health or causing property damage due to
flooding by controlling the nature and intensity of land uses and the
location, elevation and quality of structures in the floodplain. Flood hazard
areas may overlay all zoning districts within the jurisdiction of this
ordinance.



   B.    Uses permitted. All uses permitted shall be regulated by the
floodplain Administrator in accordance with Chapter 8, "Flood Prevention and
Protection" Articles I, II, III of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Spearfish.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 13. Adult oriented businesses.



   A.   Adult oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 10 of City Code
shall be allowed in C2 Zoning Districts.



   B.   No adult oriented business may be located within one thousand
three hundred twenty (1320) feet (including public rights-of-way) of a
residence, child care center or day care home; nursing home, assisted living
or other similar facility providing care for elderly or disabled; any public
or private school including elementary, middle, secondary school, high
school, instructional school; vocational high school, trade school, college,
or university; public park, public open space or publicly owned property;
game center or arcade, public library, church, synagogue, temple, or other
house of worship, the premises of any on/off-sale alcoholic beverage
licensee.  In addition, no adult oriented business shall be located within
one thousand three hundred twenty (1320) feet of another adult oriented
business.



   C.   For the purposes of this section, measurements shall be made in
a straight line in all directions, without regard to intervening structures
or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of a parcel
containing an adult oriented business to the nearest point on the property
line of a parcel containing the uses as listed in Section 13.B.



   D.   An adult oriented business lawfully operating in conformity
with this section does not violate this section if any of the uses in 13.B
subsequently locates within one thousand three hundred and twenty feet (1320)
of the adult oriented business.



(Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 1143, 9-19-11)



Section 14. Downtown business improvement district.



   A.   The downtown business improvement district is hereby
established pursuant to the provisions of SDCL Ch. 9-55.



   B.   The purposes of the district and the public improvements of
facilities to be included in the downtown business improvement district are
as follows:



      1.   The acquisition, construction, maintenance, and operation
of public off-street parking facilities for the benefit of the district area;



      2.   Improvement of any public place or facility in the
district area, including landscaping and plantings;



      3.   Construction or installation of convention or event
centers, pedestrian shopping malls or plazas, sidewalks, including moving
sidewalks, parks, meeting and display facilities, bus stop shelters,
lighting, benches or other seating furniture, sculptures, trash receptacles,
shelters, fountains, skywalks, and pedestrian and vehicular overpasses and
underpasses or any useful or necessary public improvement;



      4.   Leasing, acquiring, constructing, reconstructing,
extending, maintaining, or repairing parking lots or parking garages, both
above and below ground, or other facilities for the parking of vehicles,
including the power to install such facilities in public areas, whether such
areas are owned in fee or by easement, in the district area;



      5.   Creation and implementation of a plan for improving the
general architectural design of public areas in the district area;



      6.   The development of any activities and promotion of the
district area;



      7.   Maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of any
improvements or facilities authorized by this chapter;



      8.   Any other project or undertaking for the betterment of
the facilities in the district area, whether the project is capital or
noncapital in nature;



      9.   Enforcement of parking regulations within the district
area; and



      10.   Employing or contracting for personnel, including
administrators for any improvement or promotional program under this chapter,
and providing for any service necessary or proper to carry out the purposes
of this chapter.



   C.   The description of the boundaries of the downtown business
improvement district as indicated by the plat showing the exterior boundaries
of the downtown business improvement district have been prepared and filed
with the city administrator, and a copy of which is attached to Ordinance
1110 as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference.



   D.   The real property located in the boundary of the downtown
business improvement district shall be subject to a special assessment
authorized by SDCL § 9-55-2.



   E.   The method of assessment to be imposed on the real property
within the downtown business improvement district shall be as follows: the
initial assessment shall be based upon running street feet of the property
depending on the street upon which the property lies plus any additional
assessment requested by the downtown business improvement district board.



   F.   The district shall be entitled to impose any special assessment
upon the property within a business improvement district in the municipality
or a general business license and occupation tax on businesses and users of
space within a business improvement district or both, as may be authorized by
SDCL Ch. 9-55.



(Ord. No. 1110, 12-7-09)



ARTICLE V. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS



Section 1. Development standards.



   In order to accomplish the general purpose of this ordinance, it is
necessary to give special consideration to certain uses because they are
unique in nature, require large land areas and are potentially incompatible
with existing development.



   A.    Manufactured home parks/subdivisions. The following
development standards shall apply for all manufactured home parks, which
shall be approved as a development permitted on review:



   1.   Minimum area of manufactured home park. No park shall be
allowed to open on less than two (2) acres.



   2.   Only manufactured homes shall be permitted, except for
additions and accessory structures which may be constructed on-site.



   3.   Minimum lot size. Five thousand (5,000) square feet, exclusive
of public street rights-of-way and private street easements.



   4.   Street standards.



      a.   Public streets shall meet minimum standards of the
subdivision ordinance or, in the case of private streets,



   standards   established by the city council in the approval process.



      b.   Cul-de-sac roads shall have a maximum length of three
hundred (300) feet and a minimum turnaround of forty-foot radius.



      c.   Be accessible at all times to fire department, ambulance,
police, sanitation and utility vehicles.



   5.    Street lighting. The developer shall furnish and install
street lights in accordance with city standards. On private streets, lights
shall be operated and maintained by the developer.



   6.   Fencing and screening. The developer shall install screening,
opaque fencing or plantings on the front, side and rear perimeters of the
manufactured home park, according to site plans approved by the planning
commission.



   7.   Shade trees. The developer shall plant shade trees on the
property. One (1) tree with a minimum trunk diameter of not less than one (1)
inch shall be planted on each manufactured home lot. Trees shall be of
varieties recommended by the city parks and recreation department.



   8.   Drainage and storm sewers. Per Chapter 15A.



   9.   Water/sewer facilities. Per Chapter 15A.



   10.   Utilities. Per Chapter 15A.



   11.   Recreation areas. A park and recreation area shall be provided
having a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet for each manufactured
home site, consolidated into usable space. This requirement may be waived by
the planning commission if the manufactured home park has minimum lot sizes
of six thousand (6,000) square feet.



   12.   Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall meet minimum
setbacks in 15.d below.



   13.   Lot width. Minimum fifty (50) feet.



   14.   Perimeter setbacks.



      a.   Twenty-five-foot perimeter setback from all public
rights-of-way.



      b.   Any perimeter yard abutting a residential district shall
maintain a fifteen-foot setback.



      c.   All perimeter setbacks shall be maintained and landscaped.



   15.   Lot setbacks.



      a.   Front yard-Fifteen (15) feet from all road rights-of-way
within the manufactured home park.



      b.   Rear yard-Ten (10) feet.



      c.   Side yard-Eight (8) feet.



      d.   Accessory structures-Five (5) feet, side and rear.



   16.   Off-street parking. There shall be a minimum of two (2) paved,
off-street parking spaces on each manufactured home lot, which may be located
in the front or side yard.



   17.   Storage space. The manufactured home park shall provide a
paved storage area for boats, campers, R.V's, etc., for use only by tenants.
The number of spaces within this area shall be equal to one (1) space for
every five (5) manufactured homes sites. Each space shall be ten (10) feet by
twenty (20) feet.



   18.   Securing and skirting. All manufactured homes and accessory
structures shall be securely anchored to the ground, at intervals approved by
the building official. Manufactured homes, once in their permanent location
upon the lot, shall be fully skirted within sixty (60) days.



   19.    Additions to manufactured homes. Building permits shall be
required for all additions, which shall meet all setback requirements. No
additions or structures erected shall have a height greater than the height
of the manufactured home to which it is attached; and shall be supported by a
foundation approved by the building official.



   20.    Signs.



      a.   The developer shall install, in accordance with standards
of the city, all road and street name signs.



      b.   Each manufactured home park shall be permitted to
display, on each frontage, one (1) identifying sign of maximum size of
twenty-five (25) square feet.



   21.   Guarantees to include improvements. Guarantees may be required
in an amount determined by the planning commission and approved by the city
council, to assure completion of all requirements within this section.



   22.   General provisions.



      a.   Sidewalks from the paved driveway to the main entry of
the manufactured home shall be a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches in width.



      b.   Each manufactured home shall have an address of
three-inch high letters mounted on the side fronting the street.



      c.   Each manufactured home space shall be clearly defined by
permanent markers.



      d.   Each manufactured home space shall be serviced by the
public water and sewer system. Manufactured homes that cannot be connected to
the public water and sewer system shall not be permitted.



      e.   Manufactured homes shall not be used for commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential uses, except home occupations as defined
in Article II and permitted as a use permitted on review.



   23.   Application requirements. The application shall be accompanied
by three (3) copies of the plot plan drawn to scale, and prepared by a
licensed engineer or architect. The following information shall be shown:



      a.   The location and legal description of the proposed
manufactured home park.



      b.   Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements
and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the man- ufactured
home park.



      c.   The proposed use of buildings shown on the site.



      d.   The location and size of all manufactured home spaces.



      e.   The location of all points of ingress and egress and
internal traffic circulation pattern.



      f.   A landscaping plan.



      g.   The location of all lighting standards to be provided.



      h.   The location of all walls and fences, the indication of
their height, and the materials of their construction.



      i.   The name and address of the applicant.



      j.   Such other architectural and engineering data as may be
required to permit the zoning administrator and city council to determine if
the provisions of this ordinance are being complied with.



      k.   An estimated timetable for project development.



   B.   Water and sewer systems, septic systems.



   1.   Water systems. Each primary residential and commercial use
within the city shall be connected with the municipal water system, according
to Chapter 18, Article II of the city code.  Property zoned Rural Large Lot
Single Family shall be exempt from this requirement, and shall be permitted
private individual or shared wells according to state statutes governing
private wells.



   2.   On-site water system. Any use involving a principal structure
which is not served by the municipal water system, shall have an on-site
water system. Approval of the on-site system shall be according to Chapter
18, Article II of the city code.



   3.   Sewer systems and on-site sewage disposal alternatives. Each
residential and commercial unit within the city shall be connected with a
public sewer system according to Section 18-66 of Chapter 18, Article III of
the city code. Alternate plumbing fixtures for on-site disposal systems shall
be governed by Section 18-65 of Chapter 18, Article III of the city code.



   C.   Health, safety, and aesthetic barriers.



   1.   Whenever property in one (1) zoning category abuts property of
a more restrictive zoning category and the property in the less restrictive
category is being developed, the zoning administrator may require, as a
condition of the building permit, such barriers be constructed by the
developer as are deemed necessary and appropriate for the protection of the
more restrictive area. Appeals of the Zoning Administrator’s requirements
shall be per Article VI, Section 6.



The zoning from most restrictive to least restrictive is as follows: AG, R1,
R2, R3, CC, C1, C2, ILR and IH.



Such devices may include fences, hedges, traffic controls and patterns or any
other device reasonably necessary to attain the goals sought.



For purposes of definition, property of one (1) zoning category shall be
deemed to abut another zoning category whenever two properties directly abut.



   2.   The foregoing provision shall not apply  to the development of
an R2 property abutting an R1 district.



   3.   In commercial and industrial districts, outside storage of
goods or materials shall be prohibited in any area on the street frontage of
a building.



   D.   Storm water.



   1.   Every owner of real property shall be responsible for the safe
discharge of storm water from the owner’s property.  All building and
development plans shall include a storm water discharge and disposal plan
which shall be approved by the city engineer.



   2.   If connection to an existing storm sewer is not available or if
the existing storm sewer is not adequate as determined by city staff, every
owner of commercial, industrial, and multi- family zoned property shall be
required to construct an on-site storm water detention facility for all
impervious surfaces.  The facility shall be designed by a registered
professional engineer.



   3.   Every developer of a new subdivision shall submit plans for
storm water handling and discharge for approval by the city engineer.  If
connection to existing storm drainage facilities is not available, new
subdivisions of more than ten (10) acres and having a minimum of fifteen (15)
building lots shall construct an on-site storm water detention facility
designed by a registered professional engineer.



   4.   The on-site detention facilities required herein shall meet the
following minimum requirements:



      a.   The post-development peak flow from the site shall be
detained such that it shall not exceed the existing peak flow from the site
for the ten (10) year frequency and fifty (50) year frequency, twenty-four
(24) hour rainfall events.



      b.   The existing and post-developed peak flows and runoff
hydro graphs shall be determined by watershed modeling using Technical
Release 55 (TR-55), “Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds” from Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, formerly Soil Conservation Service (SCS).



      c.   Rainfall data shall be obtained from National Weather
Service Technical Paper 40 (NWSTP-40) and the SCS Synthetic Rainfall
Twenty-four(24) hour Distribution Type II shall be used to develop the
rainfall curve.



      d.   Storm water detention volumes and release rates shall be
determined by routing the runoff hydro graphs using detailed routing
computations based on the application of the continuity principle (i.e.,
level pool routing).



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 986, 6-25-04; Ord. No. 999, 2-7-05; Ord. No.
1165, 11-19-12)



Section 2. Additional area requirements.



   The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or to
qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations
set forth in Article IV:



   A.   Exceptions and additional area requirements. No yard, open
space, or lot area required for a building or structure shall be occupied by
any other building or structure except:



   1.   Overhanging roofs, eaves, gutters, cornices, decks, carports or
any other architectural features up to three (3) feet from the side property
line;



   2.   Nonenclosed driveways and parking spaces, curbs, sidewalks,
steps and terraces;



   3.   Open porches and decks may encroach ten (10) feet into the
front yard setback, and sixteen (16) feet into the rear yard setback;



   4.   Fences, walls and hedges, subject to the regulations as set
forth in this section;



   5.   Flagpoles and light poles;



   6.   Garbage disposal equipment, nonpermanent;



   7.   Landscape features, planting boxes and recreational equipment;



   8.   Parking spaces subject to the regulations set forth in Article
V, Section 3;



   9.   Signs, subject to the regulations set forth in Article V,
Section 6;



   10.   Trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants subject to the sight
obstruction requirements in this section;



   11.   Lots platted prior to April 1980 may be developed without a
variance for minimum lot width at the front building line if all other
requirements are met;



   12.   Buildings existing at the adoption of this ordinance may,
without a variance, be extended along existing exterior lines so long as
setback requirements in the direction of the extension are met;



   13.   Temporary, nonhabitable buildings for uses incidental to
construction work, immediately adjacent to the work and which shall be
removed upon completion or abandonment of the work. Motor homes or campers
are not permitted.



   B.   Allowance for average setbacks. In the case of an irregular
lot, at the discretion of the zoning administrator, average setbacks may be
permitted. (See Article II, Definitions, Setback, average)



   C.   Sight obstructions. The following regulations provide for the
maximum safety of persons using sidewalks and streets, and for the maximum
enjoyment of the use of property:



   1.   On any corner lot, at an uncontrolled intersection, no wall,
fence, sign, structure or any plant growth shall be placed or maintained.



      a.   If the elevation of such object is between two and
one-half feet (2 1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the crown of the adjacent
roadways; and,



      b.   If located within a triangle formed by the curb line
intersection and two (2) points forty (40) feet in each direction from the
intersection along each curb line.



   2.   In any required front yard, except as provided in this section,
no fence, wall, hedge or yard ornament shall be permitted which materially
impedes vision across such yard above the height of four (4) feet.



      Exception: Sound and safety barriers in the form of landscaping,
opaque fences or walls may be installed along lot lines adjoining the
rights-of-way of major or minor arterials with controlled intersections. Such
barriers may only be installed along side and rear yards abutting the street.



   D.   Lot division conditions. The purpose of this section is to
clarify certain conditions pertaining to the division of  existing platted
lots.



   1.   Unless approved by a variance or other zoning method, no
platted lot shall be divided unless such division results in the creation of
lots, each of which conforms to all of the applicable regulations of the
district in which the property is located.



   2.   For lots that are smaller than the minimum required by the
zoning district, changing the direction of interior lot lines between two
adjoining lots adjacent to the corner of two (2) streets, is permitted if it
does not result in a reduction of the square footage of either lot.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 999, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 1165, 11-19-12; Ord.
No. 1287, 8-20-18)



Section 3. Minimum off-street parking requirements.



   No land shall be used or occupied; no structure shall be erected,
altered, used or occupied, and no use shall be operated unless off-street
parking facilities, in at least the amount required, are provided or
available, and maintained in the manner set forth. Uses existing on the
effective date of this ordinance shall not be reduced below the requirements
of this section.



   Off-street parking facilities shall be provided and maintained as
required in this section for any addition to or the extension or enlargement
of a use of land or building which existed on the effective date of this
ordinance. The provisions and maintenance of the off street parking
facilities required shall be the joint and several responsibility of the
operator and owner of the use and the operator or owner of the land on which,
or the structure in which it is located.



   A.   Minimum requirements.



      1.   Standards.



         a.   Each off-street parking space shall be an area of
not less than one hundred seventy-one (171) square feet, exclusive of access
or maneuvering area, ramps, and other appurtenances as per the following
standards (for illustration, see Appendix 2):



 


Required Off Street Parking Stall Dimensions



Parking
 
Stall Length
 
Stall Width
 
Aisle Width


90 º
 
19 ft.
 
9 ft.
 
25 ft.


60 º
 
19 ft.
 
9 ft.
 
18.5 ft.


45 º
 
19 ft.
 
9 ft.
 
13.5 ft.


30 º
 
19 ft.
 
9 ft.
 
11 ft.


Parallel
 
21 ft
 
9 ft.
 
11 ft.



 



         b.   Off street parking facilities shall be located on
the site on which the use or structure for which they are provided is located
except as otherwise permitted under a special plan for location or sharing of
facilities, or for properties in Original Town and having central core
zoning. Multi-family development located in the central core zoning district
shall provide off-street parking.



         c.   A minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape buffer strip
is required between public sidewalks and off-street parking stalls, parking
lots, and parking lot access driveways that run parallel to a public
sidewalk. 



            (1)   The landscape buffer shall be designed so
that there is a mix of live plant material and rock, gravel, etc., with not
more than ten feet in any direction without plant cover or tree canopy. The
buffer shall be visually distinct from the adjacent sidewalk and discourage
vehicles from driving over the sidewalk.



            (2)   Areas within the public right- of-way may be
included in the ten (10) foot dimension.



            (3)   This requirement does not apply to the
following:



               A.   A standard residential driveway that
provides access to a garage, carport or uncovered parking space located on
private property.



               B.   A driveway needed to cross the buffer
strip to provide access from the street to parking stalls.



               C.   Parking that is located within the
public right-of-way boulevard.



      2.   Maintenance. Off-street parking facilities shall be
constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the following
specifications:



         a.   Drainage and surfacing. They shall be properly
graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphalt and maintained in good
condition, free of weeds, dust, trash and debris;



         b.   Protective barriers. They shall be provided with
barriers of such dimensions that occupants of adjacent structures are not
unreasonably disturbed, either by day or night, by the movement of vehicles;



         c.   Outdoor lighting. When provided, shall have an
arrangement of reflectors and an intensity of lighting which will not
interfere with adjacent land uses or the safe use of adjacent streets.



         d.   Entrances and exits. They shall be provided with
designated entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion;



         e.   Prohibition of other uses. They shall not be used
for the sale, storage, repair, or dismantling of any vehicles, equipment,
materials or supplies.



         f.   In the event they are designed such that the
facility abuts a public sidewalk and vehicle parking is diagonal or
perpendicular to the sidewalk, a permanent barrier shall be installed three
(3) feet from the interior edge of the sidewalk to prevent vehicle
encroachment over the sidewalk. If the facility abuts and faces a street and
there is no sidewalk, permanent barriers shall be installed seven (7) feet
from the curb to provide for a pedestrianway and to prevent vehicle
encroachment.



         (g)   In commercial districts, if the parking facility
is located at the intersection of two (2) streets and abuts the street curb,
a thirty-foot unobstructed sight triangle shall be required at the corner of
the intersection, measured on the curb line. At accessways formed by the
intersection of the accessway and the public right-of-way line, a ten-foot
unobstructed sight triangle, measured on property lines, shall be required.
Parking facilities shall be striped accordingly.



         h.    In residential districts, parking spaces accessed
by local roads and required by this ordinance shall be located and designed
with a minimum of twenty-three (23) feet or sufficient depth from the back of
the sidewalk so that there will be no vehicle encroachment over the public
sidewalk.



         i   If a parking facility accesses a collector street,
major arterial or minor arterial as designated by the major street plan map
that functionally classifies streets in the city, or if by reasons of
topography as determined by the planning commission, the facility shall have
a controlled access with a designated entrance and exit, and sufficient
maneuvering space on the interior of the lot to preclude the necessity of
vehicles backing onto the street.



      3.   Minimum amounts of off-street parking facilities
required. The following minimum amounts of off-street parking facilities
shall be provided. The classification of uses shall be deemed to include and
apply to all uses and if the classification is not readily determinable it
shall be fixed by the zoning administrator.



         a.   Dwellings, one-family and twofamily. Two (2) spaces
per dwelling unit.



         b.   Dwellings, multi-family. 2.25 spaces per dwelling
unit except for senior citizens housing which shall provide 1.5 spaces per
unit.



         c.   Hotels, motels, rooming houses, bed and breakfast
establishments. One (1) space per guest room.



         d.   Manufactured home parks. Two (2) spaces per
manufactured home.



         e.   Nursing, long-term care facilities. One (1) space
per four (4) beds.



         f.   Theaters, auditoriums, gymnasiums. One (1) space
per three (3) seats. Convention facilities: One (1) space per fifteen (15)
square feet of assembly area. Multiple-screen theater: One (1) space per five
(5) seats.



         g.   Churches. One (1) space per four (4) seats.



         h.   Funeral homes. One (1) space per four (4) seats.



         i.   Schools, elementary. Two (2) spaces per classroom.



         j.   Schools, secondary. Ten (10) spaces per classroom.



         k.   Restaurants, on-sale liquor establishments. One (1)
space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area.



         l.   Private and public utility substations, commercial
storage units. No parking requirements except that all areas of ingress/
egress and loading/unloading/ storage shall be hard surfaced.



         m.   Health clinics. Single practitioner clinics one (1)
space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area; multiple
practitioner clinics one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross
floor area.



         n.   Industrial and manufacturing establishments. One
(1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area.



         o.   Warehouses shall provide one (1) parking space per
one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area plus one (1) parking
space per employee.



         p.   Group care homes/assisted living and congregate
care facilities. One (1) space for each three (3) residents, one (1)
handicapped space, and one (1) space for each employee on the most fully
staffed shift.



         q.   Office buildings for general business, commercial
and personal service establishments. One (1) space per two hundred (200)
square feet of gross floor area.



         r.   Buildings for retail trade. One (1) space per three
hundred (300) square feet of gross retail space.



         s.   Drive-up windows. Driveways for drive-up service
windows shall be of sufficient length to accommodate the stacking of three
vehicles.



         t.   Sports and recreation facilities.



            (1)   Golf course. Six (6) spaces per hole.



            (2)   Baseball/softball/soccer. Thirty-six (36)
spaces per field.



            (3)   Tennis court. Four (4) spaces per court.



            (4)   Swimming pool/water park. As per a parking
plan approved by the city council.



            (5)   Bowling alley. Four (4) spaces per lane.



         u.   Fire/ambulance facilities. Fire, four (4) spaces
per bay; ambulance, three (3) spaces per bay.



         v.   New and used vehicle and equipment sales. All areas
used for storage and display shall be paved.



         w.   Manufactured home sales. Based on standard
requirements for permanent structures and sales offices.



         x.   Airports. As regulated in the APZ, airport zoning
district.



      4.   Combined facilities. The off-street parking facilities
required of two (2) or more uses located on the same building site or an
immediate proximity may be combined and used jointly, provided that the
facilities shall provide the sum total of the facilities required.



      5.   Maximum amounts of of street parking facilities. For
commercial uses, excluding new and used vehicle sales, minimum amounts of
off-street parking facilities may be exceeded by only twenty (20) percent.
Parking in excess of this maximum may be approved by the common council upon
justification of need.



      6.   Special plan for location or sharing of facilities.
Off-street parking facilities may be located on another site or shared under
the following procedure.



         a.   Application for approval of special plan. An
application for approval of a special plan shall be filed with the planning
commission by the owner(s) of the entire land area to be included within the
special plan. It shall include the owner(s) of all structures existing on the
land and all encumbrances of the land and structures. The application shall
contain such information required by this ordinance or deemed necessary by
the zoning administrator and shall include plans showing the location of the
uses or structures for which off-street parking facilities are required and
the location of the proposed off-street parking.



         b.   Review of application. Applications shall be
reviewed by the planning commission and either approved or disapproved by the
city council within ninety (90) days, except that the applicant may request a
continuance.



         c.   Recording of special plan. A copy of the plan shall
be recorded as a restrictive covenant against the property.



         d.   Amendment or withdrawal of special plan. A plan may
only be amended or withdrawn pursuant to the same procedure as for approval.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1041, 12-4-06)



Section 4. Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles.



   Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat,
camping and hauling, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a
dwelling or on any lot in any residential district for more than forty-eight
(48) hours unless it is located behind the front yard building line.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 5. Off-street loading and unloading requirements.



   In all districts, and on the same premises with every structure
involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or
merchandise, there shall be provided adequate space for standing, loading and
unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets
or alleys.



   Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be provided as follows:



   A.   One (1) off-street loading and unloading space shall be
provided for buildings up to and including twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet of floor area, plus one (1) additional off-street loading and unloading
space for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area
up to and including one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.



   B.   There shall be provided an additional off-street loading and
unloading space for each additional forty thousand (40,000) square feet of
floor area in excess of over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.



   C.   Where trailer trucks are involved, such loading and unloading
space shall be designed with appropriate means of truck access to a street or
alley as well as adequate maneuvering area.



   D.   All areas devoted to permanent off-street loading and unloading
as required under this section shall be of asphalt or concrete construction.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 6. Sign regulations.



   A.   General provisions and purpose.  By virtue of its lush Black
Hills Valley location and its largely uncluttered and unspoiled aesthetics,
the purpose of these regulations shall be to allow signage that:



      1.   Permits a balance between the need for identification of
businesses and community activities and the need for preservation of the
city's scenic qualities.



      2.   Places reasonable limits pertaining to the time, place
and manner which include the appropriate locations, sizes, quantity, and
construction and illumination methods of signs.



      3.   Encourages the use of sign materials and sign placements
that reflect the natural beauty of the community.



      4.   Protects the public from visual pollution and hazardous
conditions that can result from commercial signs which are structurally
unsafe, obscure the vision of motorists, create dangers to pedestrian
traffic, or which compete or conflict with necessary traffic signals and
warning signs.



   B.   Signs subject to these regulations. The requirements of the
sign regulations apply to all signs installed within the City of Spearfish,
for any purpose, with the exception of:



      1.   Changing the sign face or the copy or message on signs
specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy.



      2.   Painting, repainting, cleaning or minor maintenance of a
sign provided no structural alteration is made.



      3.   Window signs.



      4.   Signs that are considered exempt from regulation as
provided in the definition of a sign.



      5.   A flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or
other political unit.



      6.   Governmental regulatory, directional, information and
warning signs; governmental agency flags, emblems and insignia; and temporary
signs placed for the purpose of public safety.



      7.   Commemorative plaques placed by recognized historical
agencies and commissions.



      8.   Signs which can be viewed only from within the confines
of a structure, or other a clearly defined space, or location where
legibility of the sign is not possible from a public street.



      9.   Instructional, directional, or identification signs ten
(10) square feet and less, placed in a location so as to direct people or
drivers toward a specific place on a parcel of land such as parking
information, 'enter or exit' signs.



   C.   Permitted temporary signs:



      1.    Temporary signs (see definitions section H) are
illustrated in Figure 1. TYPE A and TYPE B temporary signs are signs
containing a message printed on rigid material. Type C temporary signs are
signs printed on flexible material such as vinyl, plastic, etc.  For
permitted uses, sizes, and locations of temporary signs, see Table 1.







 







 







 



 


TABLE 1 - TEMPORARY SIGNS




Temporary Sign Type

 

Sign Purpose

 

Maximum Size

 

Number Permitted

 

Location

 

Permit Required?

 

Additional Regulations



Type A
 
1. Business Promotion

2. Special Event
 
6 square feet - any zoning district
 
2 signs per event
 
On private property, or in right-of- way with adjacent owner's permissio n.
 
YES - if displaye d for more than 14 days per year.
 
See Section 6G for permit submittal requirements for Type A signs displayed
longer than 14 days per year.

No lighting allowed.

See Section 6.C.2. for location/placement and installation.


3. Real Estate

4. Rally/Seasonal Vendor
 
6 square feet - any zoning district
 
1 sign per street frontage


5. Election
 
6 square feet - any zoning district
 
10 signs per parcel of land



 



 


TABLE 1 - TEMPORARY SIGNS




Temporary Sign Type

 

Sign Purpose

 

Maximum Size

 

Number Permitted

 

Location

 

Permit Required?

 

Additional Regulations



Type B
 
1. Business Promotion

2. Special Event

3. Rally/Seasonal Vendor
 
6 square feet - Commercial or Industrial District
 
2 signs per event
 
Signs larger than 6 square feet must be located on private property.

Signs 6 square feet and less may be located in the right- of-way with
adjacent owner's permissio n.
 

 

NO
 
No lighting allowed.

See Section 6.C.2. for location/placement and installation.


4. Real Estate
 
6 square feet - any residential zoning; 32 s.f. Commercial or Industrial
District
 
1 sign per street frontage


5. Election
 
6 square feet - any residential zoning; 32 square feet Commercial or
Industrial District
 
10 signs per parcel of land


Type C
 
1. Temporary sign for newly opened business -  60 day max.

2. Business Promotion

3. Special Event

4. Real Estate

5. Election

6. Rally/Seasonal Vendor
 
32 square feet  - Commercial or Industrial District
 
1 per parcel of land
 
On private property only
 
 

NO
 
No lighting allowed.

See Section 6.C.2. for location/placement and installation.



 



      2.   Location/placement and installation of temporary signs.



         a.    No temporary sign may be placed on:



            (1)   A utility box/cabinet, transformer, and
similar utility installation;



            (2)   A support pole for a traffic signal, street
light, power, cables, phone lines, etc.;



            (3)   A support pole for street signage.



         b.   Election signs may be posted no earlier than sixty
(60) days prior to and removed forty-eight (48) hours after an election.
Election signs may be a banner secured to temporary stakes.



         c.   Temporary signs must be installed in the following
manner:



            (1)   It must remain in place in windy conditions
and secured so as not to blow into the street.



            (2)   May be placed in the public right of way but
may not obstruct pedestrian use of the sidewalk, or the use of any city
street or street/road shoulder. 



            (3)   Must be removed at the close of business
each day.



            (4)   On Main Street, temporary signs may not be
placed within the area formed by the intersection of two building faces per
Figure 2.



            (5)   In all locations, temporary signs must be
set back five (5) feet from the street curb.



            (6)   If for business promotion use, the sign must
be located adjacent to the business that the sign is promoting.



            (7)   Special event signs shall not be posted
earlier than twenty-four (24) hours prior to, and removed two (2) hours after
the close of a special event.



            (8)     During the Sturgis Motorcy cle Rally
beginnin g seven (7) days before the official start of the Rally, and ending
seven (7) days after the official close of the Rally, banners attached to
temporary stakes are permitted to be placed on private property.







 



   D.   Permanent signs; allowed size(area)  and types of construction
and illumination - see Table 2 for summary.



      1.   Method for calculating sign size or area:



         a.   The actual dimensions of the outer limits of the
sign face material, excluding frames that physically hold the sign shall
comprise the maximum sign area.



         b.   In the case of individual lettering on an exterior
wall, awning, or other undefined structure or space, sign area shall be
determined by calculating the area of a geometric object large enough to
cover the words forming the sign message, around the whole of the lower case
letters excluding ascenders/descenders, if necessary, a combination of
geometric objects may be used.



         c.    Logos may be excluded from the sign area provided
that:



            (1)   The logo(s) is/are subordinate to the
sign(s) that are subject to a permit and a maximum sign area.



            (2)   Logo(s) shall not exceed twenty (20) square
feet for each logo.



      Example of using a simple rectangle to calculate sign area for
individual letters (within outlined area):







 



       Example of using a simple rectangle or combinati on of geometric
shapes to calculate sign area for individual letters and/or images on more
than one line (within outlined area):







 



      2.   Design and construction requirements of all permanent
signs.



         a.   All exterior mounting hardware, brackets, and
related supporting elements (except for freestanding support poles/posts)
shall not be visible.  If concealment is not possible, supporting hardware
shall be painted a color to blend with the surrounding structure.



         b.   A footing design shall be submitted for free
standing signs that are taller than fifteen (15) feet measured from grade at
the bottom of the support, to the highest part of the sign.  The footing
design may require a professional engineer's design, at the discretion of the
building official.



         c.   No sign shall be attached to a tree, utility pole
or box, vending machine, benches, street fixtures/ furnishings or other
unapproved structure.



 


TABLE 2




1

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5

 

6

 

6




Sign Type

 

Max . Number Signs Permitted

 

Max. Square Footage each sign*

 

Location Permitted

 

Lighting Permitted

 

Other Regulations

 

Sign Permit Required?





Church
 
1 per street frontage per parcel
 
50
 
On private property
 
yes, see Section 6.D.7
 
Permanent signs Section 6.D
 
yes


Kiosk Tenant
 
1 per tenant
 
30
 
Exterior building wall; no pole mounted signs
 
yes, see Section 6.D.7
 
Permanent signs Section 6.D
 
yes


Multi Tenant Commercial Building
 
3 per tenant
 
2 per each linear foot of suite width
 
On private property
 
yes, see Section 6.D.7
 
Permanent signs Section 6.D
 
yes


1 monument sign
 
300**
 
On private property
 
yes, see Section 6.D.7
 
Permanent signs Section 6.D
 
yes


Commercial and Industrial outside Central Core zoning
 
2 per street frontage
 
2 square feet per each linear foot of building facing the street.  150
maximum per street
 
On private property
 
yes, see Section 6.D.7
 
Permanent signs Section 6.D
 
yes


Central Core Downtown
 
2 per street frontage
 
Maximum 100 square feet total per street frontage for all signs
 
On private property
 
yes, see Section 6.D.7
 
Permanent signs Section 6.D
Square footage may be apportioned by owner
 
yes


Home Occupation or Use on Review
 
1 per home occupation
 
3 square feet - with staff approval or up to 32 square feet with City Council
approval
 
Exterior wall of house/ building or as other wise approved by City Council
 
yes, see Section 6.D.7
 
Permanent signs Section 6.D
 
yes


Ag zoning and R-3 multi-family zoning
 
1 per parcel
 
16 square feet
 
On private property
 
yes, see Section 6.D.7
 
Permanent signs Section 6.D
 
yes


Subdivisions
 
1 sign per entry
 
100 square feet
 
On private property
 
yes, see Section 6.D.7
 
Permanent signs Section 6.D
 
yes


*   Signs with more than one side are counted as one sign for square
footage purposes.

**   Signage for individual tenants to be allocated by the building owner.




 



         d.   Flexible material used for awning signs must be of
canvas or other material that is designed, sewn/assembled and fitted
specifically for use over an awning frame.  Plastic sheeting, vinyl, banners
and similar products not specifically designed for awning installation shall
not be permitted for use as an awning sign.



         e.   Flexible banner material installed as a permanent
sign must be installed in the following manner:



            (1)   Must be legible and without any sagging,
folds or wrinkles;



            (2)   Must be attached to an exterior building
wall so that the banner is flush with the wall;



            (3)   If not attached to a building, must be
attached to a fence, or a freestanding structure designed specifically to
hold the banner.



         f.   All electric design must be per the National
Electric Code, current edition as adopted by the State.



      3.   Multi tenant commercial building. A maximum of three (3)
wall or projecting signs for each business front based on the formula of two
(2) square feet for each lineal foot of frontage, but not exceeding one
hundred fifty (150) square feet per business, and one (1) sign on a shared
monument, all apportioned by the developer/owner. The developer/ owner shall
be entitled to one (1) monument sign, not exceeding three hundred (300)
square feet upon which tenants and the developer may place signs.



      4.   Kiosk tenant sign allowance: Each kiosk tenant that is
allowed one (1) sign on one exterior wall, not to exceed thirty (30) square
feet.  No pole sign shall be allowed.  This signage amount shall be for the
exclusive use of the kiosk tenant and shall not be included in the overall
sign allowance for the main building tenant(s) or other building tenants
unrelated to the requested sign.



      5.   Optional sign allowances for buildings ten thousand
(10,000) square feet and larger.  As an alternative to the requirements in
the Commercial and Industrial zoning districts, signage may be provided using
the following standards:



         a.   Buildings that have a footprint of ten thousand
(10,000) square feet and larger are permitted two (2) square feet of signage
for each lineal building foot on each frontage, which shall be the overall
maximum sign area for the lot. The maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square
feet as described in the Table 2 pertaining to commercial and industrial
districts shall not apply.



         b.   Only wall and monument signs are permitted.



         c.   The lot lines along Interstate 90 shall not be
considered as frontage in the calculation of sign area.



         d.   The design standards for monument signs are as
follows:



            (1)   The maximum height shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet in height above grade.



            (2)   Signs shall be supported by a solid base
that is built of masonry, metal, stone, brick, wood, or other similar opaque
material.  The sign base shall not be calculated in the sign square footage
provided it contains no lettering, logos or other advertising.



            (3)   Sign lighting shall comply with Section
6.D.7.a. - j.



            (4)   Signs shall be placed within a landscaped
setting having a minimum one thousand seven hundred and fifty (1,750) points
as described in the landscape material points table of Chapter 19 of the city
code.



            (5)   If this option is applied, all existing
signage must comply with the standards described above in paragraphs 5a. - d.
including removal of signs not permitted such as pole, pylon or post-mounted
signs.



      6.   An additional sign area bonus may be given for all signs
that are installed as monument signs.  To qualify for this bonus the sign
must be a maximum of twenty (20) feet in total height and have one thousand
seven hundred fifty (1,750) landscape points installed with the sign.  For
this credit, the area of the signage is calculated using the formula of two
(2) square feet for each linear foot of building front and up to a maximum of
one hundred fifty (150) square feet.  The result is then multiplied by 1.20
to determine the final size of the sign.  Example:  75 feet of building
front x 2 = 150 square feet.  Bonus is 150 x 1.20 = 180 square feet of
signage.



      7.   Standards for all illuminated and electronic message
signs.



         a.   No flashing or blinking light shall be used to
display a message or image, or be used during the change from one message or
image to another.



         b.   Electronic message signs shall not exceed forty
(40) square feet.



         c.   Light levels created by signage shall not exceed
0.3 foot candles above ambient light levels as measured using a foot candle
meter at a distance from the sign face as described in subsection d.
"Distances Required for Measuring Sign Illumination".  No sign shall produce
a light level that exceeds the ambient light level at the property line.



         d.   The distances required for measuring sign
illumination shall be according to Table 3.



         e.   No such illuminated sign shall interfere with the
traveled way of streets or obscure traffic signs or devices .



         f.   Light measurements shall be taken with the meter
held facing the sign with the sign turned off, and again with the sign turned
on.  For electronic message centers, the sign shall be turned on to a full
white image for a message center capable of displaying a white color, or a
full amber or red image for a message center capable of displaying only an
amber or red color. The difference between the off and the white, amber or
red message measurements shall not exceed the light levels described in
Section 6.D.7.c.



         g.   All electronic message signs shall revert
immediately to a black screen if the sign malfunctions.



         h.   All electronic message signs shall automatically
adjust in brightness in direct correlation with ambient light conditions.



 


TABLE 3 - Distances for Measuring Sign Illumination




Distance from Sign

 

Sign Area





thirty-two (32) feet
 
ten (10) square feet


thirty-nine (39) feet
 
greater than ten (10) square feet and not more than fifteen (15) square feet


forty-five (45) feet
 
greater than fifteen (15) square feet and not more than twenty (20) square
feet


fifty (50) feet
 
greater than twenty (20) square feet and not more than twenty-five (25)
square feet


fifty-five (55) feet
 
greater than twenty-five (25) square feet and not more than thirty (30)
square feet


fifty-nine (59) feet
 
greater than thirty (30) square feet and not more than thirty-five (35)
square feet


sixty-three (63) feet
 
greater than thirty-five (35) square feet




 



         i.   All externally mounted sign lighting fixtures shall
be located to prevent the light source from being visible except from the
sign face, and shall not exceed a total of one thousand seven hundred fifty
(1750) lumens.



         j.   Enforcement of sign illumination  standards.



            (1)   In the case of noncompliance with the
requirements of this section, the zoning administrator shall provide written
notice to the owner of the sign and the owner of the property upon which it
is located, which notice shall state the reason(s) such sign is in
noncompliance and set forth a period of thirty (30) days for compliance or
removal of the sign.



            (2)   In circumstances when sign illumination
creates a nuisance to an adjoining property, the following procedures and
standards shall apply:



               (a)   A complaint must either initiated by
the City of Spearfish or by the owner of real property affected, and the
complaint shall be provided in writing to the city administrator or designee.



               (b)   In addition to the standards for light
levels described in Section 6.D.7.c the sign shall not exceed luminance of
five thousand (5,000) NITS during daylight hours and five hundred (500) NITS
evening hours (evening defined as the period starting one (1) hour after
sunset and one (1) hour before sunrise).



               (c)   The city shall notify the sign owner
of corrective measures required, if any.



      8.   Maintenance, removal responsibility. The responsibility
for keeping a sign in safe repair and properly maintained, or for the removal
of a sign if and when it is abandoned, no longer functional, unsafe, or
unmaintained is joint and several of the owner of the sign and the owner of
the property upon which it is located.



      9.   Projection, clearance and height.



         a.   Signs located within twenty-five (25) feet of a
public street intersection shall not exceed two and one half (2.5) feet tall
if the sign rests directly on the ground or is attached to a foundation on
the ground.  If supported by a post(s) or pole(s) it shall have a minimum
vertical clearance of ten (10) feet above the crown of the roadway, per
Figure 3.



         b.   Signs and awnings that extend out from an exterior
wall over a public sidewalk shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of
eight (8) feet, and shall not materially impede adjacent parking or street
traffic.



         c.    The height of a sign that is not attached to a
building shall not exceed thirty-fiv e (35) feet above grade to the highest
portion of the sign and shall not include filled grade beneath the sign to
increase sign height.







 



   E.   Prohibited signs.



      1.   Roof signs. Exceptions to this are signs on mansard
roofs, canopies and patio covers that are lower than the highest building
roofline, and similar roofs where an architectural feature is specifically
designed for signage.  See illustration and definitions of roof sign.



      2.   Illuminated signs containing flashing, intermitting or
moving light, that interfere with the traveled way of streets or obscure
traffic signs or devices.  See Section 6.D.7 for sign illumination standards.



      3.   Signs that constitute pedestrian or vehicular traffic
hazards or which could be confused with any governmental regulatory,
directional or warning sign.



      4.   Signs with moving parts; signs and logos printed on or
attached to a moving surface (does not include images and text painted on the
body of a licensed motor vehicle).



      5.   Tethered, airborne devices located within the required
front setback.



      6.    No sign may contain any offensi ve or sexuall y explicit
langua ge, depict the nude human form or anatom y, contain any flashin gs,
intermi ttent or moving lights nor exceed more than forty (40) square feet as
prescribed in Section 6.D.1.







 



   F.   Nonconforming signs.  The intent of this ordinance is to
regulate the installation of new signs, and ensure the eventual compliance of
all signage within the corporate limits of the city.  The following
regulations shall regulate nonconforming signage in the city. Signs that do
not conform to the terms of this ordinance as of September 17, 2009, shall be
considered nonconforming and shall be permitted to exist as such unless any
one of the following circumstances 1. - 5. occur, and upon which, the
nonconforming status expires and the subject signage shall comply with the
terms of the sign regulations of the zoning ordinance. This permission to
exist only applies to signs that were installed before the city's first sign
code was adopted, and signs that have become nonconforming due to various
amendments passed after the adoption of the first sign code. This permission
does not apply to signs which were installed prior to the effective date
noted in this paragraph, if a permit was required for such sign but was not
obtained.



      1.   Changes are made to modify the overall height, shape,
illumination, square footage, location, or support structure of the signage.



      2.   Maintenance or replacement costs including labor and
materials exceed fifty (50) percent of the sign value as determined by an
insurance adjustor.



      3.   Additional support, fasteners, parts, support structures
or a new sign face are needed to extend the useful life of the sign.



      4.   The sign is determined to not be structurally sound by
the city building official during periods of both active use and non-use,
defined below.



      5.   The use of the property changes to a different permitted
use as described by the list of uses allowed by the zoning district in which
the sign is located.



      6.   On September 17, 2024, all signs not complying with the
regulations of the sign provisions of the zoning ordinance shall be modified
to comply with the terms of the sign regulations.



      7.   Appeals of the zoning administrator's interpretation of
land use in Section 6.F.5. above shall be according to Article VI, Section 6,
Appeals.



      8.   Active-use is defined as a sign or structure that uses
words, phrases, letters, pictures, logos or other descriptive method to
advertise a business located on the same site.



      9.   Non-use is defined as a sign or structure that lacks
words, phrases, letters, pictures, logos or other descriptive method to
advertise a business located on the same site.



   G.   Permit process.  All requests for a sign permit, when
required, shall provide the following:



      1.   Dimensions and location of sign(s), plus any necessary
details required to correctly identify the sign being issued a permit.



      2.   Permanent signs shall require a permit fee according to
Article II Chapter 6-29 of the Revised Codes of the City of Spearfish.



      3.   Applicants requesting a Type A temporary sign permit
shall provide the following:



         a.   A copy of commercial liability certificate with
minimum coverage of $1 million each occurrence and $2 million aggregate.



         b.   $10 one-time fee.



         c.   Sign owner to complete a hold harmless agreement
form provided by the city.



   H.   Definitions.  For purposes of this section the following terms
are defined:



      Ambient light level. The existing illumination intensity of an
outdoor location, measured in foot-candles, before a new light source is
introduced to the same outdoor location.



      Animation. The use of movement or some element thereof, to depict
action or create a special effect or scene.



      Banner. A sign made out of cloth, vinyl, plastic, or similar
flexible material affixed to a pole, wire or rope which is located outdoors
and which communicates a message to the public.  Awning signs are not
banners; see related prohibition regarding the use of banners installed on an
awning frame, Section D.2.d.



      Business. A commercial entity formed for the purpose of offering
the public tangible goods, property, personal or professional services, in
exchange for compensation of the same.



      Central Core Downtown. Property that is zoned on the City of
Spearfish official zoning map as Central Core (CC).



      Commercial and Industrial Districts. Property that is zoned on
the City of Spearfish  official zoning map as Central Core (CC) Central
Commercial (C1), Highway Service Commercial (C2), Commercial Office (C3),
Light Restrictive Industrial (I-LR), Heavy Industrial (I-H), Airport (APZ).



      Electronic message sign. A sign capable of displaying words,
symbols, figures or images that can be electronically changed by remote or
automatic means.



      Flashing. A pattern of changing light illumination where the sign
illumination alternates suddenly between fully illuminated and fully
non-illuminated in periods of less than one (1) second.



      Frame effect. A visual effect on an electronic message center
where a solid border appears around text or animation, and acts as a
transition from one message to the next.



      Freestanding.  A support system that is not connected to any
other object or building, and has a permanent foundation in the ground.



      Frontage. For sign permitting purposes, a public street is
considered to constitute a frontage when it abuts a property and from which a
defined and functional vehicular access is derived.



      Kiosk tenant. A business meeting the criteria below:



      a.   A business that cannot meet the definition of a
multi-tenant commercial building, and performs transactions and sales that
are completely separate transactions from the building owner or the main
building tenant.



      b.   The business holds a South Dakota sales tax license or
other relevant state-issued license/charter and a copy shall be provided to
the city at the time the sign permit.



      c.   A business that occupies interior space within a building
where the space occupied is not more than twelve hundred (1,200) square feet.



      LED/LCD.  Acronyms for light emitting diodes (LED) or liquid
crystal display, respectively.



      Light level. A measure of illumination intensity cast onto any
surface, and measured in foot-candles.



      Logo. An illustration, word(s), letters, or symbol designed to
represent a business, brand or product.



      Multi-tenant commercial building. A structure housing three (3)
or more businesses, each having an individual exterior or interior access. 
The terms of this definition does not apply to the central core zoning
district.



      Rally or seasonal vendor. Any person or business that is
temporarily offering goods and/or services to the public on a parcel of land
owned by the holder of a vendors license.



      Residential District. Any property zoned Single Family (R-1)
Duplex (R-2) and Multi Family (R-3), or zoned Development Review District
(DRD) and developed or conceptually planned as residential.



      Sandwich board. A sign that cannot be inserted into the ground
and by design is intended to stand up without any roping or tying off to
another structure.



      Sign(s).  Any visual medium or method which is used or intended
to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for the purpose of
communicating information or ideas to the public and which is visible from an
offsite location and considered to be a customarily incidental, appropriate
and subordinate land use to the principal use of land and buildings located
on the same lot.



      Sign, awning.  A sign that is printed on fabric, or a on a solid
surface that forms a roof-like structure extending from the vertical surface
of a building.



      Sign, election. Any sign that is posted as part of a political
campaign or a municipal, county, state or national election.



      Sign, home occupation.  A sign that is used for the
identification of a business located within a home that is occupied by the
business owner.



      Sign, monument. A freestanding ground sign, supported wholly by a
base structure and containing one



(1) or more signs of individual businesses on the property; not including a
signs defined as pole or pylon signs.







 



      Sign, permanent.  Sign that is attached to a building or to a
free standing support of any type having an in-ground foundation.



      Sign, pole, pylon, or post-mounted. A sign that is supported
above the ground by one more vertical members and the area beneath the sign 
face is more than fifty percent (50%) open to the passage of light and air.







 



      Sign, real estate. Any sign that is posted on a property being
offered for sale or lease. 



      Sign, roof. Any sign erected or constru cted wholly upon the roof
of any building and shall include all areas of the roof surfacing material,
and areas above the uppermost parapet line, or any line so established by the
roof plane.  Signs mounted on a mansard roof or on a canopy cover over a
patio, sidewalk, are not considered to be roof signs, however the uppermost
part of the sign may not be taller than any portion of the roof.







 







 



      Sign, temporary. Any sign that is:



      a.   A sign placed for the purposes of promoting or directing
attention to a special event or activity that does not have permanent signage;



      b.   A supplementary sign used by a business that currently
has existing permanently mounted signs.



      Sign, window.



      a.   Any decal, lettering, applique, sticker, or painted
message that is attached directly to the  interior or exterior glass surface
on a building window. 



      b.   Any form of communication that is not physically attached
to the interior glass surface, but is displayed in a window for public
viewing.



      Sign area. As used in the sign ordinance, shall be term used to
indicate the maximum allowable sign size.  See Section 6.D.1, Sign
Standards, for calculating sign area.



      Sign brightness. The level to which the human eye perceives the
intensity of light coming from a sign and described to be within a range of
dim to moderate to glaring when compared with the ambient light level of the
outdoor spaces surrounding the sign.



      Sign face. The message portion of a sign which communicates
information by any means. A sign face does not include frames or support
structures.



      Special event.  For the purposes of signage, any type of
activity that the general public is invited to attend and for which there is
not an existing sign that either could be modified or used to advertise the
activity.  Examples include:  open house events, garage sales, health
fairs, public gatherings on private or public property, auctions, etc. The
definition of event does not include promotional sales or other activity that
held at the site of an established business and where the business has
existing signage.



      Streaming video. The use of live action footage shot with a video
camera or similar device which is sized to fit and be displayed by an
electronic message sign or similar device.



      Subdivision sign. A sign marking the entrance to a neighborhood
which also may be used for marketing purposes.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 999, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 1006, 5-16-05; Ord.
No. 1007, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 1018, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 1099, 7-20-09; Ord. No.
1146, 10-17-11; Ord. No. 1171, 6-3-13; Ord. 1200, 11-17-14)



Section 7.  Nonconforming uses.



   A.   General provisions. A nonconforming use of a building and land
at the time of the adoption of this ordinance is deemed to be "grandfathered"
and may be continued although the use does not conform with district
regulations. Such use may be extended throughout the building, provided no
structural alterations, except those required by law or ordinance, are made.



   B.    Continued use.



   1.   Whenever a district is changed, any existing nonconforming use
in the changed district may be continued, provided all other regulations
governing the use are complied with;



   2.   A nonconforming use, if converted to a conforming use, shall
not be changed back to a nonconforming use;



   3.   Where a building or signs located in a district restricted
against its use has been wholly or partially destroyed by fire or other
calamity, a permit shall be granted for its reconstruction within a period
not to exceed twelve (12) months from the date of its destruction;



   4.   Where a nonconforming use has existed and it is not exercised
or continued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, the use shall
cease to exist. Thereafter, uses shall conform to the district in which such
premises or building is located.



   5.   Where a nonconforming use exists, it cannot change to another
nonconforming use of different quality and characteristics unless the use is
more compatible with the characteristics of the neighborhood in which it is
located. Where a nonconforming use has changed to a more compatible use, it
shall not be changed back to a less compatible use.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 8.  Telecommunications facilities.



   A.   General provisions.  This section establishes criteria under
which wireless communications infrastructure will be permitted in the City of
Spearfish.  Wireless antenna equipment and supporting structures are
intended to be located in areas where they are the least obtrusive and most
compatible with the surrounding environment.



   B.   Exemptions.  Ordinary maintenance of existing
telecommunications facilities and support structures, as defined herein,
shall be exempt from zoning and permitting requirements. In addition, the
following facilities are not subject to the provisions of this ordinance:



   1.   Antennas used by residential households solely for broadcast
radio and television reception;



   2.   Satellite antennas used solely for residential or household
purposes;



   3.   COWs (Carrier on Wheels) placed for a period of not more than
one hundred twenty (120) days at any location within the City of Spearfish
after a declaration of an emergency or a disaster by the Governor or by the
responsible official of the City of Spearfish or Lawrence County;



   4.   COWs (Carrier on Wheels) placed for a period of not more than
two weeks at any location within the City of Spearfish in order to serve a
community event declared as such by the City Council;



   5.   Commercial television and AM/FM radio broadcast towers and
associated facilities;



   6.   Ham radio and amateur radio facilities.



   C.   Administrative approval and use permit approval. 
Telecommunications facilities are permitted in all zoning districts by either
an administrative approval or use permit, according to the standards of the
Telecommunications Facility Approval Matrix.



   D.   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, the following
terms are defined:



      Accessory equipment.  Any equipment serving or being used in
conjunction with a telecommunications facility or support structure. This
equipment includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment,
power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets
and storage sheds, shelters or other structures.



      Administrative approval.  Zoning approval that the zoning
administrator or designee is authorized to grant after administrative review.



      Antenna.  Any structure or device used to collect or radiate
electromagnetic waves for the provision of cellular, paging, personal
communications services (PCS) and microwave communications. Such structures
and devices include, but are not limited to, directional antennas, such as
panels, microwave dishes and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas,
such as whips.



      Architecturally integrated.  A telecommunications facility that
is primarily an architectural structure and the purpose of the facility for
providing wireless services is not readily apparent to a casual observer.



      Camouflaged.  A telecommunications facility that resembles a
tree, or naturally occurring environmental feature, or, if the facility is a
flag pole, antennas are snug or stealth mounted, and a flag is attached to
the pole.



      Carrier.  A company authorized and licensed under the Federal
1996 Telecommunications Act to provide wireless communications services to
the public.



      “Carrier on Wheels” or “Cell on Wheels” (“COW”).  A
portable self-contained cell site that can be moved to a location and set up
to provide personal wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis. A
COW is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the
antenna support structure.



      Co-location. The act of siting telecommunications facilities in
the same location on the same support structure as other telecommunications
facilities. Co-location also means locating telecommunications facilities on
an existing structure (for example: buildings, water tanks, towers, utility
poles, etc.) without the need to construct a new support structure.



      Downtown Historic.  For the purposes of locating
telecommunication facilities, there are two areas that define the key
historic settings in Spearfish.  This area includes the following blocks of
Original Town including all rights of way and alleys: All of Blocks 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 28, 29, 30, 41, 42, 43, and the east
½ of Block 6, east ½ of Block 23, east ½ of Block 27, east ½ of Block 44,
and the west ½ of Block 31, and the west ½ of block 40 and all of Block 41
of Uhling Addition.  (Commercial areas are Kansas to Grant Street and Canyon
to 7th Street.  The residential areas are from Kansas to Illinois and from
7th Street to 11th Street, except the block located at the northeast corner
of 10th and Jackson.)  These areas represent the most significant
concentration of historic property in Spearfish and act as the main gateway
to the community.  For these reasons, telecommunications facilities must be
more sensitively designed.



      I-90 Corridor.  For the purposes of locating telecommunication
facilities, the I-90 Corridor is defined as extending 660 feet from the I-90
right of way on both sides of the highway, starting at the north city limit
line, and ending at the Exit 14 bridge.  This is the prime view corridor and
scenic gateway of the Spearfish Valley and has been previously recognized as
such when billboards were prohibited from this area.



      Major modifications.  Improvements to existing
telecommunications facilities or support structures that result in a
substantial change to the facility or structure. Major modifications shall
include any one of the following:  1)  extending the height of the support
structure by more than ten percent (10%) of its current height, 2) the
support structure does not meet the definition of “Replacement” as
defined in this ordinance.  Co-location of new telecommunications facilities
to an existing support structure without replacement or extension of the
structure shall not constitute a major modification.  Major modifications
shall require use permit approval.



      Minor modifications.  Improvements to existing
telecommunications facilities, and support structures, that result in some
material change to the facility or support structure but of a level, quality
or intensity that is less than a “substantial” change. Such minor
modifications include, but are not limited to, extending the height of the
support structure by less than ten percent (10%) of its current height, and
the expansion of the compound area for additional accessory equipment. 
Final height shall be within the same height category as the original height
as described in Table A Design Points.  Heights that are specified in the
Telecommunications Facility Approval Matrix do not apply to facilities that
exist as of July 27, 2006.



      Monopole.  A single, freestanding pole-type structure supporting
one or more antenna.



      Ordinary maintenance.  Ensuring that telecommunications
facilities and support structures are kept in good operating condition.
Ordinary maintenance includes inspections, testing and modifications that
maintain functional capacity, aesthetic and structural integrity; for
example, the strengthening of a support structure’s foundation or of the
support structure itself. Ordinary maintenance includes replacing antennas
and accessory equipment on a like-for-like basis within an existing
telecommunications facility and relocating the antennas of approved
telecommunications facilities to different height levels on an existing
monopole or tower upon which they are currently located. Ordinary maintenance
does not include minor and major modifications.



      Publicly owned building. A building or structure owned by a city,
state, county, or public school district.



      Replacement.  Constructing a new support structure of equal
height and proportions to a preexisting support structure in order to
accommodate collocation and removing the pre-existing support structure.



      Stealth telecommunications facility.  Any telecommunications
facility that is integrated as an architectural feature of a structure so
that the purpose of the facility for providing wireless services is not
readily apparent to a casual observer.



      Support structure(s).  A structure primarily designed to support
telecommunications facilities including, but not limited to, monopoles,
towers and other freestanding self- supporting structures.



      Telecommunications facility(ies). Any unmanned facility
established for the purpose of providing wireless transmission of radio
frequency signals, writings, sounds, messages, voice, data, images or other
information of any nature by radio, lightwaves, electromagnetic means or
other similar means, including, but not limited to, wireless telephone
service, personal communications service (PCS), wireless internet and paging
service.  A telecommunication facility consists of one or more antennas,
equipment cabinet, a support structure, and accessory equipment.



      Tower.  A lattice-type structure, guyed or freestanding, that
supports one or more antennas.



   E.   Approval processes and facility design requirements.  All
facilities will be reviewed according to the Telecommunications Facility
Approval Matrix, which lists the various locations, zoning districts, and
applications that will be permitted by administrative approval, or use permit
approval.  All applications for architectural integration shall be reviewed
in compliance with the City of Spearfish publication: Architectural
Integration Design Guidelines For Telecommunications Facilities.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPROVAL MATRIX



 





 

Location - Zone - Application

 

Permitted Use - Administrative Approval

 

Use Permitted on Review  Must meet Use Permit Criteria and

 

Maximum Location Points



1
 
Downtown Historic:

all residential zoning districts (Overrides all categories below.  Existing
poles and towers follow rules in row 11)
 
N/A
 
AI/C, Max Ht AES:  10 feet, Max Ht AGL: 45 feet
 
N/A


2
 
Downtown Historic:

CC, C1 (Overrides all categories below.  Existing poles and towers follow
rules in row 11)
 
N/A
 
AI/C, Max Ht AES:  10 feet, Max Ht AGL: 60 feet, major and minor
modifications
 
N/A


3
 
Rural Large Lot Single Family RLS-1, Single Family R1, and residential uses
in the PUD and DRD (Existing poles and towers follow rules in row 11)
 
N/A
 
AI/C, Max Ht AES:  10 feet, Max Ht AGL: 45 feet
 
N/A


4
 
I-90 Corridor (overrides AG, commercial uses in the PUD, DRD, C1, C2, C3,
I-LR, I-H, and PR districts.  Existing poles and towers follow rules in row
11)
 
AI/C,

minor modifications, Max Height: 60 feet above ground level.  If a flag
pole, must be S/SE Mt, and flag attached.
 
Facility must be less than or equal to the Maximum Location Points

S/SE Mt
 
11


5
 
Two & Multi-Family Residential:  R2, R3.  (Existing poles and towers follow
rules in row 11)
 
N/A
 
AI/C, Max Ht AES:  10 feet, Max Ht AGL: 45 feet
 
N/A


6
 
Parks (Existing poles and towers follow rules in row 11)
 
N/A
 
Facility must be less than or equal to the Maximum Location Points

major modifications
 
14


7
 
School, City Facility or Publicly Owned Building/Structure.  (Existing poles
and towers follow rules in row 11)
 
AI/C,

minor modifications,

Max Height: 60 feet above ground level
 
Facility must be less than or equal to the Maximum Location Points

major modifications
 
15




 



 


8

 
AG (Existing poles and towers follow rules in row 11)
 
AI/C,

minor modifications,

Max Height: 60 feet above ground level
 
Facility must be less than or equal to the Maximum Location Points

major modifications
 
16


9
 
Commercial Non-Downtown Historic: C1, C2, C3, and non-residential uses in the
PUD & DRD. (Existing poles and towers follow rules in row 11)
 
AI/C, minor modifications,

Max Height: 60 feet above ground level
 
Facility must be less than or equal to the Maximum Location Points,

major modifications

if over 90 feet, setback 660 feet from I-90
 
17


10
 
Industrial Parks: I-LR & I-H (Existing poles and towers follow rules in row
11)
 
S/SE Mt, Max Ht AGL: 125 feet for new facilities with room for co-location on
facility, minor modifications

660 foot setback from I-90
 
Facility must be less than or equal to the Maximum Location Points,

major modifications

660 foot setback from I-90
 
18


11
 
Existing Poles & Towers (ball field lights, utility poles and towers, flag
poles, telecommunications towers
 
minor modifications
 
S/SE Mt, major modifications
 
N/A



 



Key:



AI/C = Architecturally integrated or camouflaged.



Max Ht AES = Maximum height above existing structure.



Max Ht AGL = Maximum height above ground level for new and existing
structures.



S/SE Mt = (antenna) stealth or snug exterior mount. 



   Stealth mount: antennas that are not visible on the exterior of the
support structure. 



Snug mount: antennas that are directly attached to the support structure,
projecting less than 18 inches from the mounting surface.



   F.   Use permit criteria. The planning commission and city council
must find that the application complies with the following criteria to
determine if the requested equipment will be permitted:



   1.   The sum of design points in Table A are less than the maximum
location points in Table B.



   2.   The application is in compliance with the intent of the
ordinance as demonstrated by the following:



      a.   The facility would not be recognized as a
telecommunications facility by virtue of its architecturally integrated or
camouflaged appearance, or its visibility is significantly limited.



      b.   There are technical reasons that will not permit the
telecommunications facility to be designed with architectural integration or
camouflaged application, if applicable.  A detailed narrative explaining the
reason(s) shall be submitted to the city.



      c.   There have been at least two mitigating factors applied
to the installation, as described in Table A.



      d.   Special circumstance(s) exist that reduce the impact of
the facility.



      e.   Ground equipment and support structure color blends with
the surrounding setting.



   Table A - Design Points



 




Characteristic

 
Points


Height Points


Facility height over 120 feet up to 150 feet above existing grade
 
25


Facility height over 90 feet up to 120 feet above existing grade
 
20


Facility height over 60 feet up to 90 feet above existing grade
 
15


Facility height up to 60 feet above existing grade
 
10


Mitigating Factors (subtract from the height points for each factor)


Antenna are snug mounted, exterior
 
-1


Antenna are stealth mounted, interior
 
-2


Room for co-located antenna or is a major modification of an existing pole or
tower
 
-4


660 feet or greater from R-1, R-2, R-3, DRD, or PUD zoning, or any existing
residential structures
 
-6


Verticality Proximity  (see note 1) or camouflaged
 
-8


Antenna is located on pre-existing structure, tower or monopole
 
-10


Antenna architecturally integrated, or on a pre-existing structure (see new
definition for architecturally integrated)
 
Subtract all height points




 



Note 1: Located within 35 feet of a structure with 75% of the height of
proposed facility height



Table B - Maximum Location Points



 


Location

 
Maximum Points


I-90 Corridor  (see definitions) overrides all other categories below
 
11


Parks
 
14


School, Ball Field, City Facility, or Publicly Owned Building/structure
 
15


Agricultural (A-1) and open space (PR)
 
16


C-1, C-2, C-3
 
17


Industrial Parks (Light and Heavy)
 
18



 



   G.   Application submittal requirements.  All applications for both
administrative review and use permit review must contain the following:



   1.   Application form completed and signed by applicant.



   2.   Copy of lease agreement or a letter from a wireless
communications carrier indicating the intent to use the property for a
telecommunications facility.



   3.   Letter of authorization from property owner giving permission
for the carrier's authority to pursue zoning application.



   4.   Letter(s) of preliminary approval from the FAA, State Historic
Preservation Office, and other relevant agencies.



   5.   Drawings that accurately illustrate:



      a.   Site plan showing the location of all equipment with
setbacks and adjacent uses and zoning clearly labeled.



      b.   Elevation drawings with dimensions of all improvements
clearly labeled.



   6.   In the case of a new telecommunications facility, a statement
from the carrier which documents how many additional carriers can
co-locate.  If co-location is not possible, a statement must include such
technical information and other justifications as are necessary to document
the reasons why co-location is not a viable option.



   7.   A list of all existing structures and sites considered as
alternatives to the proposed location. The applicant shall provide a written
explanation why the alternatives considered were either unacceptable or
infeasible due to technical, physical, or financial reasons.  If an existing
tower or monopole is listed among the alternatives, applicant must
specifically address why the modification of such structure is not a viable
option.



   H.   Abandonment, removal, and speculative approvals.



   1.   Any telecommunications facility or support structure that is
not operated for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months shall be
considered abandoned.



   2.   The owner of the telecommunications facility or support
structure shall remove the facility within six (6) months of its
abandonment.  The City of Spearfish shall ensure and enforce removal by
means of its existing regulatory authority. 



   3.   No approval will be given for a telecommunications facility
that is speculative in nature which is defined as being one where a specific
carrier has not been identified at the time of application to the City of
Spearfish according to the requirements described in paragraph G of the
application submittal requirements.



   I.   Telecommunications facilities and support structures in
existence on the date of adoption of this ordinance.



   1.   Telecommunications facilities that were legally permitted on or
before the date this ordinance was enacted shall be considered a permitted
and lawful use as a non-conforming antenna and accessory equipment.



   2.   Non-conforming antennas or accessory equipment: Ordinary
maintenance may be performed on non-conforming antennas and accessory
equipment. However, if the proposed alteration would intensify a non-
conforming characteristic of the facility, the following sections 3-5 apply.



   3.   Minor modifications to non-conforming telecommunications
facilities may be permitted upon the granting of administrative approval by
the zoning administrator.



   4.   Major modifications to non-conforming telecommunications
facilities may be permitted only upon the granting of a use permit approval
by the city council.



   5.   Ordinary maintenance may be performed on a non-conforming
support structure.



(Ord. No. 1030, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 1165, 11-19-12)



Section 9.  Photovoltaic (PV) energy conversion systems.



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to:



   1.   Oversee the permitting of PV systems.



   2.   Preserve and protect public health, safety, and site
compatibility without decreasing the efficiency of a photovoltaic energy
conversion system.



   B.   Definition.



      Photovoltaic/PV. An assembly of materials and equipment used to
convert solar radiation into electricity. 



   C.   Standards for photovoltaic (PV) systems. PV systems shall be
permitted as accessory uses to the main use of the property or structure, and
according to these standards:



   1.   Maximum height.



      a.   In residential districts, shall not exceed the maximum
building height for the district.



      b.   In all other districts, may exceed maximum building
height for a height only as recommended by the manufacturer for proper
angling of the PV array.



   2.   Ground mounted collectors, battery storage areas, and related
equipment must comply with all building setbacks as required for primary
uses, and shall not follow the setback exceptions as described in Article V,
Section 2.A.



   3.   PV powered landscape lighting, irrigation controllers, and
other small PV powered devices shall not be subject to the requirements in
paragraph C.2. above.



   4.   Approval of PV systems shall be administratively given through
the issuance of a building permit provided the applicant has submitted the
standard City of Spearfish building permit submittal information and fees
required.



(Ord. No. 1122, 8-16-10)



Section 10.  Portable storage containers.



   A.   Purpose and intent. The unregulated use, maintenance, and
placement of portable storage containers (PSC's) within the City of Spearfish
create potentially unsightly and incompatible conditions. The following
regulations are established to allow the use of PSC's to allow residents and
business owners flexibility in their use, with reasonable limits to promote
compatibility with adjoining land uses.



   B.   Definition of a portable storage container.



   1.   Portable storage containers (PSC's). Standardized prefabricated
metal structures originally designed for, or used in, the packing, storage,
shipping, movement or transportation of cargo, freight, goods, equipment or
commodities. The PSC is fully enclosed with a floor, walls, ceiling, and a
sealed door to withstand harsh environmental conditions and is transported
from place to place by being loaded on a flatbed trailer.



   2.   All trailers required to be titled and licensed in order to be
towed on a highway are exempt from this definition. Structures designed for
human occupancy according to HUD's standards are exempt from this definition.



   C.   Permitted temporary placement of PSC's - all zoning districts.



   1.   PSC's are permitted on private property when a city-issued
building or grading permit is in effect for that same property. PSC's for
city construction projects on city property or in the public right-of-way are
permitted with city engineer approval.



   2.   If not in relation to a construction site, a maximum of one PSC
is allowed without a permit to be located within a public right-of-way for a
period of maximum of seventy-two (72) hours.



   3.   The time period in section 2. above may be extended to a
maximum of thirty (30) days with the zoning administrator's approval provided
that the PSC is on private property and the side setback requirements of the
zoning district are met. The PSC shall be deemed as a temporary permitted use.



   4.   Maximum number of PSC's allowed for temporary use:



      a.   One (1) PSC of any size is allowed per twelve hundred
(1200) square feet of building area.



      b.   Up to three (3) PSC's are allowed with the Zoning 
Administrator's approval.



   D.   Permitted permanent placement of PSC's.



   1.   A PSC shall be permitted to be permanently placed in the C-1,
C-2, C-3, light and heavy industrial, and airport zoning districts. 
Permanent placement is prohibited in RLS-1, AG, R-1, R-2, R-3, CC, DRD, and
parks recreation open space districts.



   2.   PSC's shall be governed by the city's adopted building codes.



   3.   PSC's shall be located on property where the primary permitted
use is established and shall comply with the area regulations of the
applicable zoning district and shall not unreasonably create an impact to
parking spaces or parking lot driveways.



   4.   A PSC shall be placed so that it is set back the same distance
from the street as the existing building. For lots having two (2) or more
street frontages, at least one (1) frontage must comply with this requirement
and the PSC can be placed at the building setback for the remaining frontages.



   5.   A maximum of two (2) PSC's are allowed to be stacked vertically.



   6.   A maximum of two (2) PSC's are permitted.



   7.   The containers shall be maintained at all times from all types
of visible deterioration such as rusting, peeling paint, graffiti, etc. The
owner of the portable storage container shall be responsible for its
maintenance.



   E.  Exemptions from these regulations - the following are exempt from
the regulations of this Section 10:



   1.   Businesses that offer PSC's for sale or rent to the public and
the PSC's are stored from time to time at the business owner's commercial,
industrial or airport zoned property. The aforementioned requirements for
setbacks, permits, and placement locations shall not apply.



   2.   PSC's that are part of a construction contractor's business
equipment inventory, and are stored from time to time at the contractor's
place of business located in a commercial, industrial or airport zoned
property.



   3.   PSC's that are used in connection with an emergency as declared
by public safety officials.



   4.   PSC's that comply with the adopted building, fire, plumbing and
mechanical codes of the City of Spearfish, and are used for residential and
non-residential occupancy and not storage.



   F.    Non-conforming PSC's:



   1.   PSC's that exist as of October 15, 2018 that do not comply to
these standards must do so by October 15, 2019.



(Ord. No. 1293, 10-15-18)



ARTICLE VI. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



Section 1. Organization.



   A.   Administrative officer. The provisions of this ordinance shall
be administered by the zoning administrator, who shall:



   1.   Maintain and keep current zoning maps and records of
amendments, variances and uses permitted on review.



   2.   Conduct inspections as prescribed by this ordinance.



   3.   Interpret the provisions of this ordinance.



   B.   Spearfish City Council. The Spearfish City Council shall:



   1.   Establish rules of procedure that are necessary to the
performance of its functions under this ordinance.



   2.   Review and decide all applications and amendments, uses on
review and variances brought forth by the public in accordance with this
article.



   C.   Spearfish Planning Commission. The Spearfish Planning
Commission shall:



   1.   Establish rules of procedure that are necessary to the
performance of its function under this ordinance.



   2.   Review and make recommendation to the city council on all
applications brought forth by the public in accordance with this article, or
as required by state statutes not specifically identified herein.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 999, 2-7-05)



Section 2. Variances.*



   *Editor's note—Ord. No. 1267 repealed and replaced Article VI,
Section 2, variances, adopted August 18, 2003 as part of the new zoning
ordinance, Ord. No. 969.



   A.   Generally. A variance modifies the strict application of a
particular zoning regulation in unique and individual cases where the
application of the regulation would result in a practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship. Variances are to be granted under exceptional
circumstances and shall only be for the minimum necessary relief.



   B.   Applicability.



   1.   Variances may not be granted to allow a use prohibited or
ineligible for a Conditional Use Permit.



   2.   A variance may be granted for the development standards found
within the area regulations of each zoning district that apply to
maximum/minimum numerical distances, maximum/minimum numerical quantities,
ratios, square footage type standards, and parking standards.



   C.   Application and Approval Procedure.



   1.   A property owner may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a
variance, using forms available from the Zoning Administrator. Fees, as set
forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council, shall
accompany the application.



   2.   Upon receiving a complete application for variance, the Zoning
Administrator shall place the application on the Planning Commission's
regular agenda.



   3.   The Planning Commission shall review the variance request, set
forth its findings, forward its recommendation to the Board of Adjustment,
and set the date of the Board of Adjustment's public hearing.



   4.   A minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date of the Board of
Adjustment's public hearing, the applicant shall post a sign measuring 18 by
24 inches on the property for which the variance is requested, notifying the
public of the date and time of the public hearing. The zoning administrator
shall provide the applicant with the sign. The applicant shall be responsible
for ensuring the sign remains posted on the property until the public hearing
is held.



   5.   Legal notice of the Board of Adjustment public hearing shall be
published in the official city newspaper ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
The notice shall contain the date, time, and place of the public hearing.



   6.   The Board of Adjustment shall issue its decision within thirty
(30) days of the public hearing. A variance shall be considered approved if
the application receives an affirmative vote by a two-thirds (2/3) majority
of present and voting members of the Board of Adjustment. As a condition of
approval, the Board of Adjustment may impose, consistent with the general
purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance, appropriate conditions and
safeguards to any variance granted.



   7.   The decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be documented by
written findings of fact and conclusions of law based on the evaluation
criteria.



   D.   Evaluation Criteria. A variance shall be approved only if the
applicant is able to satisfy each of the following three (3) criteria:



   1.   The requested variance is not contrary to the public interest,
as determined by the Board of Adjustment. In order to fulfill the public
interest, the proposed variance must not:



      a.   Alter the essential character of the locality; or



      b.   Endanger public safety.



   2.   The requested variance must result from special physical
conditions on the property, which:



      a.   Are natural or man-made surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions that do not result from persons presently having an
interest in the property; or



      b.   Because the property is situated within any of the
following downtown core neighborhoods and has a lot width of seventy-five
feet (75 ft.) or less, or a square footage of less than eight thousand
(8,000) square feet:



         i.   Original Town Plat.



         ii.   Uhlig Addition.



         iii.   Ramsdell Addition.



         iv.   West Addition.



         v.   Schar's Addition.



   3.   A literal enforcement of the provisions will result in
unnecessary hardship.



      a.   Because of the special physical conditions of the
property, unusual hardship that would serve no public purpose would result to
the owner if required to act in strict conformity with the provisions of the
zoning regulations and the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary
to enable the reasonable use of the property.



      b.   The hardship must be unique to a particular piece of
property to justify a variance, and not shared by all property in a
particular zone.



   E.   Recording. If the variance is granted, the Zoning Administrator
shall cause the Resolution approving the variance to be recorded in the
Office of the Lawrence County Register of Deeds once a building permit has
been issued and construction has commenced. The variance shall thereafter run
with the land.



   F.   Denial. If an application for a variance is denied,
reapplication shall not be permitted for a period of one (1) year, unless the
Zoning Administrator determines that the nature of the application has
materially changed.



   G.   Expiration.



   1.   A variance shall automatically expire in one of the following
circumstances:



      a.   A building permit has not been issued within 18 months of
the variance approval.



      b.   A building permit has been issued, but construction has
not commenced within one year of permit issuance.



   2.   This section is expressly made retroactive to apply to
variances granted prior to the passage of this Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 1267, 9-18-17)



Section 3. Conditional use permits (CUP)*.



   *Editor's note—Ord. No. 1225 hereby repeals and replaces Article VI,
Section 3, authorizing uses permitted on review, adopted August 18, 2003, as
part of the new zoning ordinance, Ord. No. 969, and as amended by Ord. No.
999, adopted February 7, 2005, and Ord. No. 1031, adopted June 19, 2006.



   A.   Generally.



   1.   Each zoning district enumerates certain uses permitted by right
and certain conditional uses.  A conditional use is a use that is not
permitted by right, but which may be permitted in a zoning district, based
upon the review of compliance with specific criteria, public hearing, and
imposed conditions.



   2.   The City of Spearfish recognizes that diversity and the
blending of compatible uses is essential to a healthy and dynamic community.
Toward that end, the following procedure is established to properly integrate
conditional uses with permitted uses in various zoning districts, which the
common council finds to be in accordance with the objectives of the
comprehensive plan.



   3.   Each category of conditional use is listed in individual zoning
districts.  If a use is not identified on the list of conditional uses, or
if the zoning administrator is unable to make an interpretation that a
proposed use is analogous to those listed, the use is not permitted in that
particular zoning district.



   B.   Approving authority.  Application for a CUP shall be approved
or denied by the planning commission following a recommendation from the
zoning administrator.  A CUP shall be considered approved by the planning
commission if the application receives an affirmative vote by a simple
majority of the present and voting members.



   C.   Evaluation criteria. In either making a recommendation to
approve or deny, or acting to approve or deny an application for a CUP, the
following criteria shall be considered:



   1.   The proposed use shall comply with other ordinances. A CUP may
not be issued to allow a use otherwise prohibited specifically identified as
being eligible for a CUP;



   2.   The proposed use shall be eligible for a CUP based on the
zoning district;



   3.   The proposed use shall comply with the setback, lot coverage,
height and other requirements of the zoning district, unless the subject
property is currently legally nonconforming or a request for a variance is
simultaneously submitted with the application for a CUP;



   4.   The proposed use shall be compatible with the location,
physical character, and topographic features of the property;



   5.   Buffering measures along parcel boundaries shall exist or be
incorporated to mitigate any visual impact of outdoor use areas onto adjacent
property;



   6.   If applicable, lighting from all sources shall be designed so
that it does not unreasonably affect adjacent property;



   7.   The proposed use shall not create an unreasonable public safety
issue relating to the property or its surroundings, nor increase the risks of
an existing public safety issue;



   8.   The proposed use shall have adequate pedestrian and vehicular
access, circulation and parking, including those related to bicycle
transportation and transportation by persons with physical disabilities;



   9.   The proposed use shall not result in any unusual or
unreasonable parking impacts.



   10.   The proposed use shall not result in an unusual or
unreasonable number of vehicle trips per day as measured against the
character of the neighborhood of the subject property and the street network
serving it;



   11.   The proposed use shall not result in an unusual or
unreasonable level of noise;



   12.   Adequate public services and utilities shall be available to
accommodate the proposed use; and



   13.   Additional imposed conditions, if any, will mitigate any
probable adverse impacts of the proposed use.



   D.   Application and approval procedure.



   1.   A property owner or a designated representative may apply for a
CUP, using forms available from the zoning administrator. Fees shall be
required as established by city council resolution.  The zoning
administrator shall review the application for completeness and select the
date of the planning commission's public hearing.



   2.   The zoning administrator shall send, by first-class mail
postmarked a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date of the planning
commission public hearing, a notice to the owner of record of each parcel
situated within one hundred forty (140) feet of the subject property,
exclusive of rights-of-way, of the nature of the request and the date, place,
and time of the public hearing of the planning commission.



   3.   A minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date of the public
hearing, the applicant shall post a sign on the property for which the CUP is
requested, notifying the public of the date and time of the public hearing.
Sign size and content shall be according to the site posting guidelines
adopted by the city council.  The applicant shall be responsible for
acquiring the sign and following the procedures as indicated in the
guidelines.



   4.   Prior to the public hearing, the zoning administrator shall
review the merits of the application and forward his or her recommendation to
the planning commission, together with any recommended conditions regarding
the location, character or other features of the proposed use as the zoning
administrator may deem advisable in the furtherance of the general purposes
of this section. In his or her recommendation, the zoning administrator shall
fully set forth the findings to support his or her recommendation and
conditions.



   5.   The planning commission shall hold its public hearing, having
given ten (10) days' notice of the date, place and time of the hearing in the
city’s designated legal newspaper.



   6.   Within thirty (30) days of its public hearing, the planning
commission shall issue its approval or denial fully, setting forth the
findings to support its decision to approve or deny. The planning commission
may approve the CUP application with added conditions it may deem advisable
in the furtherance of the general purposes of this section or another city
ordinance.



   7.   The findings of the planning commission shall be documented in
a written statement that includes:



      a.   A listing of the criteria from Article VI, Sec. 3C.,
along with an explanation as to whether each criterion has or has not been
met. In circumstances where an individual criterion does not apply, an
explanation shall be provided of why it does not apply.



      b.   The voting record of the planning commission, the date of
the planning commission’s action, and the signature of the planning
commission chair.



   E.   Appeal. The planning commission’s action taken on a CUP may
be appealed to the board of adjustment by any person aggrieved by the
decision, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality
affected by the decision, according to the following procedure:



   1.   Notice of appeal must be filed with the zoning administrator
within ten (10) days of the decision of the planning commission.  The notice
of appeal shall specify the grounds of the appeal, which shall include
specific reference to the planning commission's finding(s) alleged to be in
error or how the city failed to regularly pursue its authority. If a notice
of appeal is accepted by the zoning administrator, the approval of the CUP in
question shall be stayed until the appeal is finally resolved by the issuance
of the board of adjustment’s decision.



   2.   At its next meeting, the planning commission shall set a public
hearing before the board of adjustment.



   3.   The zoning administrator shall compile the record and forward
it to the board of adjustment no later than ten (10) days before the public
hearing.



   4.   The record shall be a public document and will consist of the
CUP application, staff report, minutes of the planning commission meeting
where the CUP was considered, findings of fact and conclusion of law adopted
by the planning commission, and any relevant attachments or exhibits.



   5.   The zoning administrator shall send, by first-class mail
postmarked a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date of the board of
adjustment public hearing, a notice to the following:



      a.   Each person who provided his or her mailing address while
offering testimony during the planning commission hearing when the CUP was
first approved.



      b.   Each owner of record of each parcel situated within one
hundred forty (140) feet of the subject property, exclusive of rights-of-way.



      c.   The notice shall include the date, place, and time of the
public hearing of the board of adjustment.  The notice shall include a
statement that copies of the record of the planning commission’s decision
are available for review and photocopying at the office of the zoning
administrator.



   6.   It shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the
board of adjustment to reverse or modify the decision of the planning
commission.



   F.   Denial. If an application for a CUP is denied, reapplication
shall not be permitted for a period of one (1) year, unless the zoning
administrator determines that the nature of the application has materially
changed.



   G.   Review. Upon receipt of a written complaint filed by a party
directly affected and upon a determination by the zoning administrator that
the complaint states sufficient cause to review a CUP, or at the zoning
administrator’s independent determination that sufficient cause exists to
review a CUP, the zoning administrator may request that the planning
commission conduct a format review of a CUP.  A written complaint shall
contain a detailed description of an impermissible use not allowed by the
existing zoning or not permitted by the CUP.



   H.   Revocation.  A CUP may be revoked by the planning commission
only for cause, consisting of failure to maintain the standards or conditions
under which the CUP was issued, and according to the following procedure:



   1.   A notice of intent to revoke a CUP shall be sent by the zoning
administrator to the person that holds the CUP. The notice shall be in
writing and sent via certified mail or hand delivery, and shall specify the
area or areas of failure to meet requirements and maintain conditions that
may have been imposed and provide a deadline for compliance.



   2.   If, prior to the deadline, proof of compliance is made by the
holder of the CUP, the CUP shall be continued in force.



   3.   Upon notice of intent to revoke, the holder of a CUP has the
right to request a public hearing. If such a request is made, the planning
commission shall hold a public hearing on the matter and make a final
determination on the revocation.



   4.   If, upon receiving a notice of intent to revoke, the holder of
a CUP requests a public hearing, the zoning administrator shall send, by
certified mail postmarked a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date of the
planning commission revocation public hearing, a notice of the date, place,
and time of such public hearing to such holder and to each owner of record of
each parcel situated within one hundred forty (140) feet of the subject
property, exclusive of rights-of-way.



   5.   If, following notice, the holder of a CUP does not assert his
or her right to a public hearing, the CUP shall be deemed to be revoked on
the thirty-first (31st) day following the notice.



   I.   Expiration. A CUP shall automatically expire if:



   1.   The use for which it was approved ceased for a period of two
(2) years; or



   2.   The use for which it was approved has not been undertaken and
completed according to the terms and conditions of the CUP within one (1)
year of approval or within one (1) year of the time specified in the CUP for
completion, whichever is later.  A CUP is considered approved upon the
effective date of the planning commission’s or board of adjustment’s
approval, whichever is later.



   J.   Amendments.  A CUP may be amended.  Amendments are considered
major or minor and are addressed in the following manner:



   1.   Major amendments must be reviewed by the planning commission,
under the provisions of this section.  The notice, hearing, criteria, fee
and other provisions apply as though the application is for a new CUP. A
major amendment is one where:



      a.   A new conditional use is proposed;



      b.   The applicant proposes any change to specific conditions
approved by the planning commission in the initial approval or as modified by
the board of adjustment;



      c.   The structure or site is substantially enlarged by
increasing the gross square footage by more than twenty percent (20%); or



      d.   The zoning administrator determines that the amendment is
major.



   2.   Minor amendments may be reviewed and approved by the zoning
administrator. A minor amendment is one where the zoning administrator
determines that the proposed amendment or modification to the site will not
have a significant adverse impact on neighboring properties, the street
network, or the appearance of the property, and is otherwise in conformance
with the spirit of the initial approval.  The zoning administrator shall
consider the criteria outlined in this section to determine if the proposed
amendment or modifications still meet the requirements of a CUP.



   K.   Transfer.



   1.   A CUP may be transferred from the original holder to a new
holder, subject to the conditions and restrictions of the original CUP.  Any
proposed change in use must be submitted to the zoning administrator as an
amendment.  To transfer to a new holder, a letter providing the new CUP
holders contact name(s), address and telephone number, shall be submitted to
the zoning administrator who shall then update the CUP record accordingly.



   2.   Conditional use permits (formerly known as “use permits” or
“uses permitted on review”) issued before the effective date of this
section shall be governed by the approvals and conditions given at the time
of approval.  However, any proposed amendments or revocation proceedings
shall be governed by this section.



(Ord. No. 1225, 12-21-15; Ord. No. 1277, 4-2-18)



Section 4. Reserved.



   Editor's note—Ord. No. 1269, adopted September 18, 2017, repealed
Article VI, Section 4, authorizing redevelopment and infill projects by
review, adopted August 18, 2003 as part of the new zoning ordinance, Ord. No.
969.



Section 4.1  Development lot agreements.



   A.   An owner wishing to enter into a development lot agreement
shall submit the following to the City of Spearfish:



      1.   A completed development lot agreement application form.



      2.   A copy of the deeds for all lots pertaining to the
agreement.



      3.   An exhibit depicting the existing structures, proposed
improvements, and easements on the lots to be affected by the development
agreement. This exhibit shall illustrate that all easements and the terms of
the zoning ordinance can be satisfied.



      4.   A filing fee as established in the fee schedule adopted
by resolution by the City Council.



   B.   Upon satisfactory completion of the requirements in 4.1A, the
City of Spearfish and the owner shall sign the development lot agreement, and
the City of Spearfish shall file such agreement with the Lawrence County
Register of Deeds prior to the issuance of a building permit (if permit is
required).



   C.   All properties with existing accessory uses and/or structures
located on adjacent lots to the main use as of January 27, 2011, are hereby
considered to be legal non-conforming, and may continue in use without being
required to enter into a development lot agreement. All future accessory
uses/structures shall be required to submit according to the provisions of
4.1A and 4.1B.



   D.   Owners that wish to release a development lot agreement shall
do so by completing the Development Lot Agreement Application Form for Zoning
Administrator approval, and shall demonstrate they meet the following
criteria, where applicable:



   1.   All accessory structures and uses that were permitted by the
development lot agreement no longer exist.



   2.   A building permit for the main/primary permitted use is issued
for a lot having an accessory use/structure affected by the development lot
agreement.



   E.   Upon approval, the Zoning Administrator shall then file a
Release of Development Lot Agreement with the Lawrence County Register of
Deeds.



(Ord. No. 1129, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 1195, 7-7-14)



Section 5. Amendments.



   This ordinance may be amended, supplemented, revised or repealed from
time to time as conditions warrant, subject to the following standards and
procedures:



   A.   Standards for amendments. A proposed amendment shall be
considered on its own merits using the following criteria as a guide.



   1.   Text or map amendments. Proposed amendments shall:



      a.   Be necessary because of substantially changed or changing
conditions of the area and district affected, or in the ordinance generally.



      b.   Be consistent with the intent and purposes of the
ordinance.



      c.   Not directly or indirectly adversely affect any other
part of the ordinance.



      d.   Be consistent with and not in conflict with the Spearfish
comprehensive plan.



   2.   Errors or oversights as may be found in the ordinance as
originally adopted shall be corrected under the normal amendment procedure.



   B.   Text amendment request. Text amendment requests shall be filed
with the zoning administrator. Requests may be initiated by the planning
commission or city council.



   1.   General. The proposed amendment shall be presented at a
regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission, at which time the
commission may initiate a study of the amendment. If no study is deemed
necessary, a public hearing shall be set.



   2.   Hearing by the planning commission. The planning commission
shall publish legal notice not less than ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. At the close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall
forward its recommendation to the city council.



   3.   Hearing by city council. The city council shall publish twice
for two (2) successive weeks notice of a final public hearing on the
amendment. After taking into account all pertinent information and the
recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall make a
final determination within thirty (30) days from the date of the hearing.



   C.   Rezoning request. An application for a rezoning shall be filed
with the zoning administrator. Rezoning requests may be initiated by either
the property owner or a designated representative, or by an appropriate
governmental agency. If by a designated representative, the designation shall
be in writing, signed by the property owner, and filed with the application.



   1.   The applicant shall appear before the planning commission to
present the application, at which time the planning commission may initiate a
study of the request. If in the opinion of the planning commission a study is
not required, a public hearing shall be set.



   2.   Notification procedure. The applicant shall notify by certified
letter, at least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing, the owners
of equity of all property in the city limits within two hundred (200) feet,
exclusive of streets and alleys, from any part of the property subject to the
rezoning, of the date, place and time of the public hearing. Such
notification shall fully set forth a description of the development plan for
the property, if any, in the event the rezoning request is approved.



   3.   Hearing by the planning commission. The planning commission
shall publish legal notice not less than ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing.



   At the close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall
forward its recommendation to the city council.



   5.   Hearing by city council. The city council shall publish twice
for two (2) successive weeks notice of a final public hearing on the
application. After taking into account all pertinent information and the
recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall make a
final determination within thirty (30) days of the date of the hearing.



   D.   Concurrent annexation /zoning designation requests. The
boundaries of the corporate limits of the City of Spearfish may be amended
from time to time, upon a concurrent annexation/zoning designation request by
either a property owner or a designated representative. If by a designated
representative, the designation must be in writing, signed by the property
owner and filed with the application request. The applicant shall comply with
the following procedures:



   1.   Application. The applicant shall present a concurrent
annexation/zoning designation application request with the required fee to
the zoning administrator.



   2.   Optional planning commission review. If determined appropriate
by the zoning administrator, the applicant shall appear before the planning
commission to present the application, at which time the planning commission
may initiate a study of the request which may include, but not be limited to,
the compatibility of the proposed development and zoning designation to:
surrounding land use and zoning, topography, access, and the availability of
municipal services. If in the opinion of the planning commission a study is
not required, a public hearing shall be set.



   Public hearing by the planning commission. The planning commission
shall publish legal notice not less than ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. Prior to the public hearing, the applicant shall provide
documentation that property owners in the city limits within two hundred
(200) feet have been notified by certified mail of the date, place and time
of the hearing. At the close of the public hearing, the planning commission
shall forward its recommendation to the city council.



   3.   City council review. If planning commission review of the
request is not required by the zoning administrator, the request shall be
presented to the city council.



   4.   Hearing by city council. The city council shall publish twice
for two (2) successive weeks notice of a final public hearing on the
application. After taking into account all pertinent information and if
applicable, the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council
shall make a final determination within thirty (30) days of the date of the
hearing.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 6. Appeals.



   Within thirty (30) days of the zoning administrator's decision, a
person may appeal, in writing, to the city council. The appeal shall be
accompanied by fees as set forth in Article VI, Section 7. Upon receipt of an
appeal and fee, the city council shall consider and decide within thirty (30)
days.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 7. Fees.



   Fees as described in this zoning ordinance are established in the fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1195, 7-7-14)



Section 8. Pending ordinance rule.



   An applicant may be denied a permit, plat, replat, rezone, variance,
use on review permit, or other use of property for a use allowed by this
ordinance if, at the time of application, an amendment is pending, which if
adopted, would proscribe the proposed use.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 9. Complaints regarding violations.



   Any person directly affected may file a written complaint alleging a
violation of this ordinance. The complaint shall state the basis for the
violation, how the complainant is affected, and be filed with the zoning
administrator, who shall timely investigate and take appropriate action as
provided by this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 10. Penalties.



   Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of
a violation of any provision of this ordinance, rule or regulation, adopted
or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each violation and each day upon which any
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty
provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall
apply to the amendment of any section herein, whether or not such penalty is
reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty described
above, the city may pursue other remedies, including but not limited to,
abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, civil action, and revocation of
licenses or permits. The owner or owners of real estate within the district
affected by the regulation of this ordinance may also pursue such remedies.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 1060, 7-2-07)



Section 11. Validity.



   Should any section, clause or provision of this ordinance be declared
by the court to be unconstitutional or invalid, such shall not affect the
validity of the ordinance as a whole or any other part, other than the part
judged invalid.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 12. Minimum requirements.



   In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this
ordinance, these provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted
for the promotion of the public health, convenience, safety, and the general
welfare in the City of Spearfish.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 13. Conflict with public and private provisions



   Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other provisions of these regulations, or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever
provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement or restriction. Restrictive covenants may be taken
into consideration by the city in the issuance of building permits. As a rule
of law, the city may not enforce covenants.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 14. Repealer



   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before
July 1, 1994 not included, recognized and continued in force by reference
therein and specifically Ordinance No. 770, Appendix A of the Revised
Ordinances of the City of Spearfish, South Dakota, are repealed.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 15. Construction of repealer.



   The repeal provided for in section 14 hereof shall not be construed to
revise any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 16. Reference to revised ordinance.



   Additions or amendments to the 2003 Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Spearfish when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the common
council to make the same a part of the 2003 Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed
to be incorporated in the 2003 Zoning Ordinance so that reference to the 2003
Zoning Ordinance includes the additions and amendments.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



Section 17. Future amendments.



   Ordinances adopted after October 1, 2003 that amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the 2003 Zoning Ordinance shall be
construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the 2003 Zoning
Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 969, 8-18-03)



CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE



1972 CODE



This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1972
Code, as supplemented which are included herein and which are adopted with
the adoption of this Code and effective upon the effective date of this Code.
Sections of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been
omitted as repealed.



 


1972 Code Section

 

Section this Code





 
 
 


2-75, 2-76
 
2-122


14-1
 
7-25


14-2
 
7-24


14-3
 
7-2


14-33—14-36
 
7-46—7-49


14-40—14-44
 
7-50—7-54


22-48
 
11-86


30-6
 
17-169




 



1982 CODE



This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982
Code, as supplemented which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code,
as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded,
obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of
ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following
this table.



 


1982 Code Section

 

Section this Code





1-100
 
1-1


1-200
 
1-2


1-300
 
2-1


1-400
 
1-14


1-500
 
1-15


1-600
 
1-16


1-700
 
1-3


1-800
 
1-7


1-900
 
1-8


1-1000
 
1-9


1-1100
 
1-12


1-1200
 
1-13


2-200
 
2-21


2-201—2-205
 
2-41—2-45


2-206
 
2-47


2-207
 
2-46


2-208—2-211
 
248—2-51


2-213—2-215
 
2-52—2-54


2-216
 
2-23


2-218
 
2-55


2-300
 
2-22


2-301—2-303
 
2-116—2-118


2-305—2-307
 
2-119—2-121


2-400—2402
 
2-2


3-100
 
3-1


3-200—3-206
 
3-26—3-32


4-100—4-102
 
4-1—4-3


4-104
 
4-4


4-106—4-108
 
4-5—4-7


4-200
 
4-21


4-210
 
4-22


4-220
 
4-23


4-230
 
4-24


4-240
 
4-25


5-100
 
5-3


5-110
 
5-1


5-120
 
5-4


5-130
 
5-5


5-140
 
5-6


5-200
 
5-31


5-210
 
5-1


5-220
 
5-32


5-230
 
5-33


5-240
 
5-34


5-250
 
5-35


5-300
 
5-51


5-310
 
5-52


5-320
 
5-53


5-330
 
5-54


5-340
 
5-55


5-350, 5-351
 
5-56, 5-57


5-360
 
5-58


5-400
 
5-76


5-410
 
5-77


5-420
 
5-78


5-430
 
5-79


5-440
 
5-80


5-450
 
5-81


6-100—6-103
 
14-251—14-254


6-200
 
14-156


6-210
 
13-31


 
 
14-157


6-211, 6-212
 
14-158, 14-159


6-230
 
14-206, 14-207


 
 
14-235


6-231
 
14-181


6-232
 
14-207


6-233
 
14-160


 
 
14-208


6-234
 
14-209


 
 
14-231


6-235
 
14-162


6-236
 
14-163


 
 
14-233


6-236.1
 
14-188


6-237
 
14-234


6-240, 6-241
 
14-182, 14-183


6-242
 
14-161


6-250—6-252
 
14-184—14-186


7-100—7-110
 
14-101—14-111


8-100
 
10-76


8-101
 
10-78


8-200—8-205
 
10-196—10-201


8-206, 8-207
 
10-202


8-208
 
10-203


8-209—8-217
 
10-205—10-213


11-104
 
10-31


11-110(6)
 
10-32


11-201
 
10-79


11-203
 
12-26


11-205
 
10-204


11-206
 
10-77


12-100
 
6-26


12-101
 
6-30


12-102, 12-103
 
6-28, 6-29


12-104
 
6-51


12-200
 
10-121


12-201
 
10-123, 10-124


12-202
 
10-125


12-210
 
10-126


12-220
 
10-127


12-230
 
10-128


12-300—12-304
 
6-76—6-80


12-305
 
14-27


12-400
 
6-32


12-500—12-502
 
14-76—14-78


12-510
 
14-79


12-520, 12-521
 
14-80, 14-81


12-532
 
14-82


13-100
 
10-146


14-200
 
10-231


14-202—14-206
 
10-232—10-236


15-100
 
9-1


16-100
 
13-1


16-110
 
13-2


16-120
 
7-1


16-140
 
13-28


16-150
 
13-29


16-160
 
13-30


16-200
 
13-26


16-210
 
13-27


16-300
 
13-51


16-301
 
13-54


16-302
 
13-53


16-400—16-404
 
10-251—10-255


16-405
 
13-35


16-406
 
10-256


17-100, 17-101
 
9-26, 9-27


17-120, 17-121
 
9-28, 9-29


17-130—17-132
 
9-30—9-32


18-110
 
14-26


18-120
 
14-27


18-130
 
14-28


18-140
 
14-29


18-150
 
14-30


18-160
 
14-31


18-200, 18-201
 
14-51, 14-52


18-210
 
14-53


18-220
 
14-54


18-230
 
14-55


18-240
 
14-56


18-250
 
14-57


18-260
 
14-58


18-270
 
14-59


18-300
 
14-131


18-310—18-316
 
14-132—14-138


18-400—18-402
 
14-32


19-100
 
18-1


19-102, 19-103
 
18-2, 18-3


19-105—19-107
 
18-4—18-6


19-109—19-115
 
18-7—18-13


19-116
 
18-38


19-117
 
18-40


19-118
 
18-37


19-120
 
18-14


19-121
 
18-16


19-122
 
18-15


19-123
 
18-36


19-124
 
18-62


19-200—19-202
 
18-217—18-219


19-204—19-210
 
18-236—18-242


19-211
 
18-262


19-212
 
18-264


19-218
 
18-216


19-219—19-221
 
18-41—18-43


22-200
 
11-26


22-201
 
11-27, 11-28


22-204
 
6-1


22-206, 22-207
 
11-29


22-208
 
2-161


22-300—22-303
 
11-46—11-49


22-400—22-404
 
11-66—11-70


22-500
 
11-88


22-510
 
11-87


22-600
 
7-3


23-100
 
17-1


23-103
 
14-34


23-104
 
17-170


23-200—23-203
 
17-51—17-54


23-300
 
17-55


23-301
 
17-56


 
 
17-58


23-302
 
17-57


23-400—23-405
 
17-59—17-64


23-500—23-503
 
17-81—17-84


23-504, 23-505
 
17-85


23-506, 23-507
 
17-86, 17-87


23-600—23-612
 
17-131—17-143


23-701, 23-702
 
17-144, 17-145


23-800—23-807
 
17-106—17-113


23-900
 
17-211


23-901, 23-902
 
17-212


23-903—23-908
 
17-213—17-218


23-1000, 23-1001
 
17-236, 17-237


23-1100—23-1104
 
17-146—17-150


23-1200
 
17-151


23-1201
 
17-157


23-1202, 23-1203
 
17-152, 17-153


23-1300—23-1302
 
17-256—17-258


23-1303(B)
 
17-259


23-1305—23-1307
 
17-260—17-262


23-1400—23-1402
 
17-154—17-156


23-1411—23-1421
 
17-158—17-168


23-1500—23-1505
 
17-281—17-286


23-1520—23-1524
 
17-306—17-310


23-1530, 23-1531
 
17-331, 17-332


23-1537—23-1540
 
17-333—17-336


23-1543—23-1546
 
17-337—17-340


23-1600—23-1606
 
17-361—17-367


23-1700—23-1704
 
17-386—17-390


24-100—24-103
 
17-426—17-429


24-200—24-202
 
17-501—17-503


24-203, 24-204
 
17-504


24-205—24-210
 
17-505—17-510


24-300—24-312
 
17-446—17-458


25-100
 
17-476


25-110
 
17-477


25-200—25-206
 
17-478—17-484


27-100
 
2-141


27-101—27-103
 
2-142


27-104, 27-105
 
2-143


27-107—27-109
 
2-144


 
 
 




 



CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES



This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted
since the 1982 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Ordinances
adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1982 Code, as
supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede the 1982
Code, but which were never included in the 1982 Code, as supplemented, for
various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed,
superseded or not of a general and permanent nature.



 

Ordinance Number
 
Date
 
Section
 


 
Section this Code




324
 
9-17-73
 
 
 


 
2-143


456
 
3-17-60
 
 
 


 
App. A, Arts. I—VI


 
 
4-15-80
 
6
 


 
App. A, Art. VI, § 6


 
 
 
 
11
 


 
App. A, Art. VI, § 11


457
 
4-15-80
 
Art. I, § 3, Art. I, § 4
 


 
15-2, 15-3


 
 
 
 
Art. II
 


 
15-1


 
 
 
 
Art. III, § 1
 


 
15-4


 
 
 
 
Art. III, § 2—Art. III, § 7
 


 
15-21—15-26


 
 
 
 
Art. IV, § 1—Art. IV, § 16
 


 
15-76—15-91


 
 
 
 
Art. V
 


 
15-46


 
 
 
 
Art. V, § 1—Art. V, § 4
 


 
15-47—15-50


 
 
 
 
Art. VI, § 1—Art. VI, § 3
 


 
15-66—15-68


 
 
 
 
Art. VII
 


 
15-5


486
 
7-20-81
 
30-258, 30-259
 


 
17-311


498
 
6-7-82
 
 
 


 
18-262


511
 
9-20-82
 
Art. I, § 1—27
 


 
18-61


 
 
 
 
Art. II, § 1—Art. II, § 4 
 


 
18-63—18-66


 
 
 
 
Art. III, § 1—Art. III, § 7
 


 
18-106—18-112


 
 
 
 
Art. IV, § 1—Art. IV, § 8
 


 
18-131—18-138


 
 
 
 
Art. IV, § 10, Art. IV, § 11
 


 
18-139, 18-140


 
 
 
 
Art. V, § 1—Art. V, § 11
 


 
18-156—18-166


 
 
 
 
Art. VI, § 1
 


 
18-9


 
 
 
 
Art. VII, § 1—Art. VII, § 4
 


 
18-86—18-89


 
 
 
 
Art. VIII
 


 
18-67


512
 
9-20-82
 
1—12
 


 
18-186—18-197


 
 
 
 
App. A—App. C
 


 
18-261—18-263


513
 
10-18-82
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, § 3(D)(4)a.

App. A, Art. IV, § 6(D)(3)

App. A, Art. IV, § 6(D)(5)

App. A, Art. IV, § 7(G)

App. A, Art. V, § 1(C)(1),

App. A, Art. V, § 1(C)(2)


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 2(A)(13),

App. A, Art. V, § 2(A)(14)


518
 
11-10-82
 
 
 


 
14-1


520
 
11-15-82
 
 
 


 
6-51


522
 
12-20-82
 
 
 


 
6-26


524
 
2-22-83
 
 
 


 
4-23


528
 
3-7-83
 
 
 


 
6-26


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
6-29


535
 
4-18-83
 
 
 


 
18-216


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-236, 18-237


536
 
4-18-83
 
 
 


 
6-29


537
 
4-18-83
 
14-200
 


 
10-231


 
 
 
 
14-202, 14-203
 


 
10-232, 10-233


 
 
 
 
14-205,14-206
 


 
10-235, 10-236


541
 
5-16-83
 
9-107
 


 
19-26


 
 
 
 
9-108
 


 
19-53


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
19-72


 
 
 
 
9-109, 9-110
 


 
19-71


 
 
 
 
9-111—9-113
 


 
19-73—19-75


 
 
 
 
9-114
 


 
10-96


 
 
 
 
9-115
 


 
19-54


545
 
8-15-83
 
 
 


 
7-3


546
 
9-19-83
 
 
 


 
18-216


550
 
11-7-83
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 2(A)(15)c.


556
 
2-21-84
 
 
 


 
10-128


559
 
4-16-84
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. VI, § 2

App. A, Art. VI, § 4

App. A, Art. VI, § 7


561
 
3-19-84
 
19-109
 


 
18-7


 
 
 
 
19-123
 


 
18-36


564
 
9-4-84
 
 
 


 
15-6


572
 
6-17-85
 
23-1525, 23-1526
 


 
17-407, 17-408


575
 
7-15-85
 
11-207
 


 
10-1


576
 
8-5-85
 
1, 2
 


 
16-51, 16-52


 
 
 
 
2A, 2B
 


 
16-53


 
 
 
 
3—6
 


 
16-54—16-57


 
 
 
 
8
 


 
16-58


579
 
9-3-85
 
 
 


 
5-6


581
 
10-21-85
 
 
 


 
6-26

6-29

6-51


584
 
10-21-85
 
 
 


 
18-216


587
 
1-6-86
 
 
 


 
18-262


589
 
2-3-86
 
520
 


 
14-80


592
 
5-5-86
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. II

App. A, Art. IV, § 2

App. A, Art. IV, § 3(C)(8)

App. A, Art. IV, § 4(B)(4)

App. A, Art. V, § 1(D)(2)

App. A, Art. V, § 3(A)(3)r.

App. A, Art. VI, § 4


594
 
4-7-86
 
 
 


 
18-40


595
 
5-5-86
 
 
 


 
14-181


596
 
9-2-86
 
 
 


 
15-22, 15-23


599
 
9-15-86
 
6-200
 


 
14-156


 
 
 
 
6-210–6-213
 


 
14-157–14-160


 
 
 
 
6-220
 


 
14-161


 
 
 
 
6-221–6-224
 


 
14-231–14-234


 
 
 
 
6-230
 


 
14-235


 
 
 
 
6-231
 


 
14-206, 14-207


 
 
 
 
6-232
 


 
14-207


 
 
 
 
6-233, 6-234
 


 
14-208, 14-209


 
 
 
 
6-235, 6-236
 


 
14-162, 14-163


 
 
 
 
6-240–6-242
 


 
14-181–14-183


 
 
 
 
6-250–6-253
 


 
14-184–14-187


601
 
9-15-86
 
18-500, 18-501
 


 
14-33


602
 
9-15-86
 
 
 


 
14-140


603
 
10-6-86
 
 
 


 
18-236, 18-237


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-262


607
 
1-19-87
 
9-10
 


 
19-71


 
 
 
 
9-106
 


 
19-26


 
 
 
 
9-107
 


 
19-51–19-53


 
 
 
 
9-109–9-111
 


 
19-73–19-75


 
 
 
 
9-112
 


 
10-96


 
 
 
 
9-113
 


 
19-54


611
 
2-17-87
 
5-420
 


 
5-78


613
 
4-6-87
 
6-236.1
 


 
14-188


626
 
11-2-87
 
 
 


 
18-216


628
 
11-16-87
 
1–3
 


 
2-96


 
 
 
 
4, 5
 


 
2-97


 
 
 
 
6
 


 
2-98


631
 
12-21-87
 
16-200
 


 
13-26


 
 
 
 
16-210
 


 
13-27


 
 
 
 
16-220
 


 
13-31


 
 
 
 
16-221
 


 
13-52


 
 
 
 
16-222
 


 
13-32


 
 
 
 
16-230, 16-231
 


 
13-33, 13-34


 
 
 
 
16-300
 


 
13-51


 
 
 
 
16-301
 


 
13-54


 
 
 
 
16-310
 


 
13-53


 
 
 
 
16-400
 


 
10-251


 
 
 
 
16-402, 16-403
 


 
10-253, 10-254


634
 
3-21-88
 
1
 


 
16-78


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
16-83


 
 
 
 
1(2E)–1(2H)
 


 
16-79–16-82


 
 
 
 
1(2C)
 


 
16-76, 16-77


635
 
6-6-88
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. II

App. A, Art. IV, § 5(C)(4)

App. A, Art. IV, § 5(B)(16)

App. A, Art. IV, § 6(C)(2)

App. A, Art. IV, § 6(B)(16)

App. A, Art. IV, § 7(C)(3)

App. A, Art. IV, § 7(D)(1)

App. A, Art. V, § 6

App. A, Art. V, § 6(A)


639
 
8-15-88
 
 
 


 
6-26

6-29

6-31


643
 
10-3-88
 
1.1–1.4
 


 
8-3–8-6


 
 
 
 
2.0
 


 
8.1


 
 
 
 
3.1—3.6
 


 
8-7—8-12


 
 
 
 
4.1—4.3
 


 
8-31—8-33


 
 
 
 
4.4-1, 4.4-2
 


 
8-34, 8-35


 
 
 
 
5.1
 


 
8-51


 
 
 
 
5.1-1—5.1-4
 


 
8-52—8-55


 
 
 
 
5.2
 


 
8-76


 
 
 
 
5.2-1—5.2-3
 


 
8-77—8-79


 
 
 
 
5.3
 


 
8-56


644
 
11-21-88
 
23-1801—23-1805
 


 
17-406


645
 
11-21-88
 
9-108
 


 
19-53


 
 
 
 
9-108(8)
 


 
19-72


649
 
3-6-89
 
18-39, 18-40
 


 
18-216


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-236, 18-237


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-240


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-285


650
 
3-6-89
 
1
 


 
13-53


651
 
3-20-89
 
 
 


 
19-26


654
 
6-19-89
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. II


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Art. V, § 1


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 1(A)


656
 
6-5-89
 
 
 


 
4-3


657
 
6-19-89
 
16-500
 


 
13-43


 
 
 
 
16-501
 


 
13-42




 


 

16-502, 16-503

 


 

13-44, 13-45





 


 

16-504

 


 

13-47





 


 

16-505

 


 

13-46



659
 
7-3-89
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, §§ 2(B)(7), 3(B)(4), 4(B)(5)


660
 
7-3-89
 
18-500—18-503
 


 
14-35


664
 
12-4-89
 
 
 

Rpld

 
801—8-12, 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
8-31—835,


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
8-51—8-56,


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
8-76—8-79


 
 
 
 
1.0—5.0
 

Added

 
8-1—8-12, 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
8-31—8-35


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
8-51—8-56,


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
8-76—8-79


665
 
11-20-89
 
 
 


 
16-58


666
 
1-2-90
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. III, § I[1], App. A, Art. IV, §§ 8—8B


672
 
3-19-90
 
1—6
 


 
Adopting Ord., p. vii


675
 
4-2-90
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 2(A)(15)


678
 
4-16-90
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 6(B),(C)


682
 
6-18-90
 
 
 


 
10-204


683
 
6-18-90
 
 
 


 
10-214, 10-215


684
 
6-18-90
 
 
 


 
10-1


685
 
6-18-90
 
 
 


 
10-270—10-284


689
 
8-6-90
 
 
 


 
13-36


690
 
10-15-90
 
 
 


 
10-270


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
10-272


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
10-274


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
10-279


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
10-283


691
 
11-19-90
 
 
 


 
13-53(1), (4)




 


 


 


 

18-236(2),  18-237(2)





 


 


 


 

18-285



695
 
1-22-91
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V,§ 3(A)(2)h—1


697
 
3-4-91
 
 
 


 
14-77


698
 
3-18-91
 
 
 


 
19-100—19-108


699
 
4-15-91
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. III, § 1


 
 
 
 
 
 

Rpld

 
App. A, Art. IV, § 10


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. VI, § 5(A), (B)


700
 
4-15-91
 
 
 


 
14-181, 14-207


703
 
6-3-91
 
 
 


 
14-83, 14-84


704
 
6-3-91
 
 
 


 
19-51


707
 
8-26-91
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 6


712
 
10-21-91
 
 
 


 
16-51—16-57


 
 
 
 
 
 

Rpld

 
16-58


714
 
12-2-91
 
 
 


 
13-53(1), (4)


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-15(a)


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-38, 18-39


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-216(5)d


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-236, 18-237


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-262


 
 
 
 
 
 

Rpld

 
18-285


716
 
1-6-92
 
 
 


 
15-6


717
 
1-6-92
 
2-162—2-164
 


 
2-176—2-178


718
 
2-18-92
 
2-165—2-167
 


 
2-179, 2-180


719
 
3-16-92
 
 
 


 
15-6


721
 
4-6-92
 
 
 


 
16-78—16-82


 
 
 
 
 
 

Rpld

 
16-83


723
 
5-18-92
 
 
 


 
4-26


725
 
6-1-92
 
 
 


 
6-1


730
 
7-20-92
 
 
 


 
2-141—2-144


734
 
12-7-92
 
2.30
 


 
2-123


737
 
2-16-93
 
 
 


 
13-53


738
 
3-1-93
 
 
 


 
14-35(a)


739
 
3-15-93
 
 
 


 
8-31—8-34


741
 
5-3-93
 
 
 


 
2-119


746
 
10-4-93
 
 
 


 
14-101, 14-112


748
 
11-15-93
 
 
 


 
4-27


749
 
11-15-93
 
 
 


 
4-28


751
 
12-6-93
 
2.10
 


 
2-123


752
 
12-6-93
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 6A.6.e.


753
 
2-7-94
 
 
 


 
10-124, 10-128


756
 
4-4-94
 
 
 


 
8-80


760
 
8-1-94
 
 
 


 
18-217, 18-219


765
 
11-21-94
 
 
 


 
13-53


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-236, 18-237


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-262(b), (d)


770
 
5-1-95
 
 
 


 
App. A


771
 
4-17-95
 
 
 


 
18-40(a), 18-216(1)


776
 
9-5-95
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. II


778
 
8-7-95
 
 
 


 
5-36


779
 
8-21-95
 
 
 

Rpld

 
10-233


780
 
8-21-95
 
 
 


 
14-135(a)


785
 
11-6-95
 
 
 


 
5-79—5-81


786
 
12-18-95
 
 
 


 
18-38, 18-240, 18-262(d)(2)a.


787
 
12-18-95
 
 
 


 
13-53


795
 
2-18-96
 
 
 


 
18-282


797
 
3-18-96
 
 
 


 
18-36(4)


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
18-36(5)


799
 
4-15-96
 
 
 


 
14-162


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
14-164


800
 
5-6-96
 
 
 


 
17-455


801
 
5-20-96
 
 
 


 
2-161


802
 
6-17-96
 
 
 

Added

 
17-287


803
 
7-1-96
 
 
 

Added

 
Art. IV, § 7, B.18.


804
 
7-1-96
 
 
 


 
Art. V, § 3, 3.1.


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
Art. V, § 3, 3.q.


809
 
9-16-96
 
 
 

Added

 
5-12


813
 
11-18-96
 
 
 


 
App. A, §§ II, V.3.A.p.


814
 
12-2-96
 
1
 


 
13-27


 
 
 
 
2
 


 
13-31


 
 
 
 
3
 


 
13-32


 
 
 
 
4
 


 
13-33


 
 
 
 
5
 


 
13-51


 
 
 
 
6
 


 
13-52


 
 
 
 
7
 


 
13-53


817
 
2-17-97
 
 
 

Rpld

 
14-35


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
14-36—14-42


822
 
4-21-97
 
 
 


 
11-100—11-107


826
 
9-15-97
 
 
 

Rpld

 
11-47(5)


829
 
10-6-97
 
 
 


 
15-6


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. II


830
 
10-20-97
 
 
 


 
19-76


835
 
11-17-97
 
 
 


 
14-101


838
 
2-2-98
 
 
 


 
6-26—6-29


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
6-30—6-31.1,


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
6-32,


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
6-76, 6-76.1,


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
6-79, 6-80


842
 
3-16-98
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 3q.,r., 6


844
 
6-1-98
 
 
 


 
14-32


849
 
10-5-98
 
 
 


 
18-240


851
 
12-21-98
 
 
 


 
13-1, 13-27(2)a.


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
13-31, 13-33,


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
13-34, 13-36


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
13-52, 13-53


854
 
12-21-98
 
 
 


 
5-54(1)


860
 
4-19-99
 
 
 


 
14-162(2), 14-165


863
 
6-21-99
 
1
 

Rpld

 
10-270—10-284


 
 
 
 
2
 

Added

 
10-270—10-274


865
 
6-21-99
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. VI, § 6


868
 
9-7-99
 
 
 


 
18-8, 18-17,


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-216(6), 18-243


869
 
9-20-99
 
 
 


 
10-128(a)


871
 
10-18-99
 
 
 


 
10-128(a)


873
 
11-15-99
 
 
 


 
13-46, 13-48


878
 
4-3-00
 
 
 


 
6-51, 7-46


879
 
4-17-00
 
 
 


 
10-96


880
 
4-17-00
 
 
 


 
10-121, 10-123,


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
14-132, 14-135


881
 
5-1-00
 
 
 


 
17-288


885
 
7-17-00
 
 
 


 
2-181


893
 
12-4-00
 
 
 


 
6-32


894
 
2-20-01
 
 
 


 
10-121—10-123


 
 
 
 
 
 

Rpld

 
10-124


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
10-125—10-127


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Ch. 10, Art. VI(tit.), 10-146


 
 
 
 
 
 

Rpld

 
10-231-10-236


896
 
3-19-01
 
 
 


 
4-6(f)


897
 
3-19-01
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 6.B.1.b.5.


898
 
6-18-01
 
 
 


 
4-8


899
 
7-16-01
 
 
 


 
1-14


901
 
9-17-01
 
 
 


 
14-60


903
 
10-1-01
 
 
 


 
18-262(a), (d)(1)—(3),


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
(5), (7)a., b.


913
 
2-19-02
 
 
 


 
App. A, § 2 D.2.b.


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
App. A, § 3 D.2.b.


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
App. A, § 4 D.2.b.


914
 
2-19-02
 
1
 

Rpld

 
15-1—15-6, 15-21-15-26, 15-46-15-50, 15-66—15-68


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
15-76—15-91


 
 
 
 
2(Art. 1)
 

Added

 
15A-1


 
 
 
 
2(Art. II A—E)
 


 
15A-2—15A-6


 
 
 
 
2(Art. III)
 


 
15A-21


 
 
 
 
2(Art. III A., B.)
 


 
15A-22, 15A-23


 
 
 
 
2(Art. IV A., B.)
 


 
15A-41, 15A-42


 
 
 
 
2(Art. V A—C.)
 


 
15A-61-15A-63


 
 
 
 
2(Art. VI)
 


 
15A-81


 
 
 
 
2(Art. VIA—P.)
 


 
15A-82—15A-97


919
 
4-1-02
 
 
 


 
7-4


920
 
4-1-02
 
 
 


 
11-1


921
 
4-2-02
 
                           
 

Rpld

 
14-58, 14-59


922
 
4-1-02
 
 
 


 
14-76


923
 
6-3-02
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 12


927
 
8-5-02
 
 
 


 
14-156—14-165


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
14-166—14-169


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
14-181—14-188


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
14-206—14-209


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
14-210


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
14-231, 14-234, 14-235


929
 
8-19-02
 
 
 


 
16-51, 16-55, 16-57, 16-58


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
16-60


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
16-76, 16-78


 
 
 
 
 
 

Rpld

 
16-79


969
 
8-18-03
 
 
 

Rpld

 
App. A


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
App. A


979
 
3-19-04
 
 
 


 
7-5


980
 
4-9-04
 
 
 


 
10-80—10-84


982
 
5-21-04
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, § 9


984
 
6-11-04
 
 
 


 
17-287


986
 
6-25-04
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 1


988
 
7-23-04
 
 
 


 
14-168


989
 
8-20-04
 
 
 


 
6-26, 6-27, 6-29, 6-51, 7-46


992
 
9-24-04
 
 
 


 
5-12


995
 
11-5-04
 
 
 


 
18-244


996
 
11-5-04
 
 
 


 
18-18


999
 
2-7-05
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. I, § 1, App. A, Art. II, App. A. Art. IV, § 10, App. A. Art.
V, § 1, App. A, Art. V, § 2, App. A, Art, V, § 6, App. A. Art, VI, § 1


1006
 
5-16-05
 
 
 

Added

 
10-300—10.318


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
App. A. Art, IV, § 13


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
App. A. Art, V, § 6


1007
 
6-6-05
 
 
 


 
App. A. Art, V, § 6


1009
 
7-5-05
 
 
 


 
15A-23


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
15A-24


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
15A-41


1010
 
7-5- 05
 
 
 

Added

 
8-36


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
8-55


1012
 
8-1-05
 
 
 

Rpld

 
16-53


1014
 
8-1-05
 
 
 


 
17-310


1015
 
8-15-05
 
 
 

Added

 
14-301—14-320


1016
 
8-15-05
 
 
 

Added 

 
18-245


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-40, 18-217, 18-236, 18-237, 18-240, 18-245, 18-262


1018
 
9-6-05
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. II, § 3, App. A, Art. V, § 6,


1024
 
12-19-05
 
 
 


 
4-9


1026
 
5-15-06
 
 
 


 
13-46


1027
 
6-19-06
 
 
 

Added

 
4-10


1029
 
6-19-06
 
 
 

Added

 
17-312, 17-313


1030
 
6-19-06
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, §§ 1b—7, 9, 10
Added App. A, Art. V, § 8


1032
 
6-19-06
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, § 8


1035
 
9-5-06
 
 
 

1 Rpld

 
4-1—4-10, 4-21—4-28




 


 


 

2 Added

 

4-1—4-18



1037
 
10-2-06
 
 
 


 
18-236, 18-237, 18-262


1038
 
10-2-06
 
 
 

Rpld

 
14-187


1039
 
11-6-06
 
 
 

Added

 
11-89


1041
 
12-4-06
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 3


1043
 
1-2-07
 
 
 


 
Ch. 13, Art. III (title)


1044
 
1-2-07
 
 
 


 
14-137, 14-140


1045
 
4-2-07
 
 
 


 
15A-95


1046
 
1-2-07
 
 
 


 
18-10, 18-13, 18-65, 18-138, 18-197


1047
 
1-2-07
 
 
 


 
18-216, 18-262


1048
 
2-20-07
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, §§ 5, 7


1049
 
2-20-07
 
 
 

Added

 
6-101 - 6-108


1053
 
3-5-07
 
 
 


 
15A-23, 15A-42


1059
 
7-2-07
 
 
 


 
10-196


1060
 
7-2-07
 
 
 


 
1-14, 10-318, 17-312, App. A, Art. VI, § 10


1061
 
7-16-07
 
 
 


 
7-4


1064
 
7-2-07
 
 
 


 
6-26, 6-27, 6-29, 6-31, 6-51, 7-46




 


 


 

Added

 

6-52



 
 
 
 
 
 

Rpld

 
6-31.1


1065
 
7-16-07
 
 
 


 
18-262


1067
 
8-20-07
 
 
 


 
7-1


1073
 
10-15-07
 
 
 


 
13-53, 18-236, 18-237, 18-262



1081

 

4-21-08

 


 


 

App. A, Art. IV, § 7



1087
 
11-17-08
 
 
 


 
18-236, 18-237, 18-262


1088
 
11-17-08
 
 
 


 
13-53


1094
 
6-15-09
 
 
 


 
2-145


1095
 
6-15-09
 
 
 


 
2-146


1096
 
7-6-09
 
 
 


 
4-9, 4-11, 4-18


1099
 
7-20-09
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 6


1102
 
9-8-09
 
 
 


 
2-161, 13-46, 18-40, 18-243


1103
 
9-21-09
 
 
 


 
13-53


1108
 
9-21-09
 
 
 


 
4-18


1109
 
10-5-09
 
 
 


 
18-236—18-240


1110
 
12-7-09
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, § 14


1112
 
11-2-09
 
 
 


 
14-37, 14-39, 14-41, 14-81


1114
 
12-21-09
 
 
 


 
2-142, 2-143, 2-144


1115
 
1-4-10
 
 
 


 
2-147


1116
 
2-1-10
 
 
 


 
13-44, 13-47, 13-48


1118
 
2-16-10
 
 
 

Added

 
8-37


1121
 
8-2-10
 
 
 

Rpld

 
10-96—10-120


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
10-96, 10-97


1122
 
8-16-10
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, §§ 1b, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
App. A, Art. V, § 9


1124
 
9-20-10
 
 
 


 
4-1—4-14


1125
 
10-4-10
 
 
 


 
2-41


1126
 
10-4-10
 
 
 


 
6-1, 6-26—6-32, 6-51, 6-76—80


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
7-46


1127
 
10-18-10
 
 
 


 
18-219


1129
 
1-3-11
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. II


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
App. A, Art. VI, § 4.1


1132
 
2-22-11
 
 
 


 
18-262


1133
 
3-21-11
 
 
 


 
4-13


1134
 
4-4-11
 
 
 


 
14-112


1137
 
7-5-11
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. II


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, § 5


1138
 
8-25-11
 
 
 


 
4-1—4-15


1143
 
9-19-11
 
 
 


 
10-302, 10-303, App. A, Art. IV, § 13


1144
 
9-19-11
 
 
 


 
Ch. 13


1146
 
10-17-11
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. V, § 6


1147
 
11-21-11
 
 
 


 
18-18


1148
 
11-21-11
 
 
 


 
6-102—6-106, 6-108


1149
 
12-5-11
 
 
 


 
2-142—2-144


1151
 
1-3-12
 
 
 


 
6-29


1152
 
2-21-12
 
 
 


 
10-123


1153
 
3-19-12
 
 
 

Rpld

 
Ch. 8


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 

8-1—8-5



8-6



8-7—8-14



8-31—8-38



8-51—8-81


8-82—8-83


1154
 
9-17-12
 
 
 


 
18-65, 18-66


1157
 
7-2-12
 
 
 


 
4-1—4-14


1159
 
7-16-12
 
 
 


 
7-6


1160
 
8-20-12
 
 
 


 
15A-5


1163
 
10-15-12
 
 
 

Added

 
18-8, 18-38


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
18-19, 18-20


1164
 
11-5-12
 
 
 


 
18-244


1165
 
11-19-12
 
 
 


 
14-30, 15A-85, 15A-95, App. A, Art. V, §§ 1, 2, 8


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
14-85, App. A, Art. IV, § 1a


1166
 
12-3-12
 
 
 

Rpld

 
18-285


1169
 
1-22-13
 
 
 


 
2-147


1170
 
1-22-13
 
 
 


 
6-26, 6-27, 6-31, 6-51, 7-46


1175
 
4-1-13
 
 
 


 
2-119


1171
 
6-3-13
 
 
 


 
App. A. Art. V, § 6


1180
 
7-1-13
 
 
 


 
18-36, 18-62


1181
 
9-3-13
 
 
 


 
18-36, 18-62


1183
 
12-16-13
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, § 10


1186
 
1-6-14
 
 
 


 
5-12


1188
 
3-3-14
 
 
 


 
17-331 —17-341


1189
 
3-17-14
 
 
 


 
6-29


1192
 
6-16-14
 
 
 
 
 
4-8


1193
 
7-7-14
 
 
 
 
 
13-27


1195
 
7-7-14
 
 
 
 
 
App A., Art. II
App A. Art. IV, § 3
App. A, Art. IV, § 4
App. A, Art. VI, § 4.1
App. A, Art. VI, § 7


1207
 
3-3-15
 
 
 


 
18-217


1208
 
3-3-15
 
 
 


 
18-282


1213
 
7-6-15
 
 
 


 
2-41


1215
 
8-3-15
 
 
 


 
4-6, 4-8, 4-10, 4-13, 4-14


1219
 
12-21-15
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. III, § 1


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
App. A, Art. IV, § 7a


1221
 
12-21-15
 
 
 


 
14-131—14-138, 14-140


 
 
 
 
 
 

Rpld

 
14-139


1222
 
12-21-15
 
 
 


 
15A-24


1223
 
12-21-15
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. II


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. IV, §§ 1a, 1b


1225
 
12-21-15
 
 
 

Rpld

 
App. A, Art. VI, § 3


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
App. A, Art. VI, § 3


1226
 
12-21-15
 
 
 


 
17-332, 17-334


1227
 
1-4-16
 
 
 

Rpld

 
7-21—7-34


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
7-21—7-41


1230
 
2-1-16
 
 
 


 
6-26, 6-27, 6-31, 6-51, 6-52, 7-46


1231
 
1-19-16
 
 
 


 
14-30


1232
 
1-19-16
 
 
 

Added

 
2-99—2-106


1233
 
2-19-16
 
 
 

Added

 
2-107—2-115.01


1234
 
2-16-16
 
 
 


 
2-147


1235
 
3-21-16
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. VI, § 10


1239
 
3-21-16
 
 
 


 
App. A, Art. VI, §§ 3, 4


1242
 
5-2-16
 
 
 

Rpld

 
2-200—2-249


1243
 
5-2-16
 
 
 

Added

 
2-250—2-270


1244
 
7-5-16
 
 
 

Added

 
2-115.21—2-115.25


1245
 
11-21-16
 
 
 
 
 
4-13


1249
 
8-1-16
 
 
 

Added

 
5-13


1255
 
11-21-16
 
 
 
 
 
2-119


1260
 
5-1-17
 
 
 
 
 
App. A, Art. IV, § 8


1263
 
8-21-17
 
 
 
 
 
4-13


1266
 
9-18-17
 
 
 
 
 
App. A, Art. IV, § 10


1267
 
9-18-17
 
 
 

Rpld

 
App. A, Art. VI, § 2


 
 
 
 
 
 

Added

 
App. A, Art. VI, § 2


1269
 
9-18-17
 
 
 

Rpld

 
App. A, Art. VI, § 4


1273
 
3-19-18
 
 
 
 
 
7-3


1275
 
4-2-18
 
 
 
 
 
App. A, Art. II


1276
 
4-2-18
 
 
 
 
 
App. A, Art. IV, §§ 1a., 1b., 2, 3, 4


1277
 
4-2-18
 
 
 
 
 
App. A, Art. VI, §3


1278
 
5-7-18
 
 
 
 
 
App. A, Art. IV, §§ 2, 3, 4


1279
 
5-7-18
 
 
 
 
 
12-1


1280
 
5-7-18
 
 
 
 
 
2-124—2-126


1282
 
8-20-18
 


 

Added

 
10-400—10-409


1283
 
8-6-18
 

   

 
 
 
4-1, 4-6, 4-8—4-10, 4-13, 4-14


1284
 
8-20-18
 
 
 
 
 
App. A, Art. II


1285
 
8-20-18
 
 
 
 
 
App. A, Art. IV, §§ 1b, 5—7a


1287
 
8-20-18
 
 
 
 
 
App. A, Art. V, § 2


1289
 
8-20-18
 


 

Rpld

 
10-270—10-274


1290
 
8-20-18
 


 

Rpld

 
7-25, 7-26, 7-28, 7-30, 7-36, 7-41


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7-21—7-35


1293
 
10-15-18
 
 
 
Added
 
App. A, Art V. § 10


1295
 
11-19-18
 
 
 
 
 
14-164, 14-167, 14-169, 14-181, 14-186, 14-188


1296
 
12-3-18
 


 
 
 

App. A, Art. IV



§§ 8, 9




1298

 

2-4-19

 


 


 

6-1, 6-26—6-32, 6-51, 6-52, 6-76—6-80, 6-101—6-108, 7-46, 7-47



Rpld 6-29.1, 6-109





 


 


 


 
 




 



STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE



This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes
following the text, of references to the state law or related matters.



 

SDCL Section
 
Section this Code




 
 
 


6-5-5
 
16-58


9-1-1
 
1-2


9-1-1 et. seq.
 
Ch. 2


9-1-2
 
Ch. 2


9-1-4
 
2-2


9-2-7
 
2-141


Ch. 9-8
 
Ch. 2


9-8-1
 
2-21


9-8-1 et, seq.
 
Ch. 2, Art. II


9-8-1—9-8-4
 
2-21


9-8-3
 
2-22


 
 
2-47


 
 
2-53


9-8-4—9-8-11
 
2-21


9-8-7
 
2-47


9-8-8
 
Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2


 
 
2-44


 
 
2-50


Ch. 9-13
 
Art. V


 
 
2-147


9-13-14
 
2-146


9-13-14.2
 
2-146


9-13-27
 
2-145


9-13-27.1
 
2-145


9-14-1
 
2-116


9-14-6
 
2-117, 2-118


9-14-13
 
2-120


Ch. 9-15
 
2-122


9-16-1 et seq.
 
2-122


9-19-3
 
1-14 , 8-83


9-19-7
 
Ch. 7, Art. III


9-19-13
 
16-82


9-19-16
 
1-1


9-19-17
 
1-1


 
 
1-12


9-20-15
 
16-82


9-21A
 
16-1, 162


9-29-1
 
8-3


9-29-3
 
Ch. 11, Art. III


9-29-6, 9-29-7
 
Ch. 4


9-29-11
 
5-3


9-29-12
 
Ch. 5


 
 
Ch. 5. Art. II, Div. 2


9-29-13
 
Ch. 9, Art. II


9-30-3
 
Ch. 3


9-30-4
 
Ch. 17


9-30-5 et seq.
 
9-27


Ch. 9-31
 
Ch. 17


Ch. 9-32
 
Ch. 9, Art. II


9-32-13
 
Ch. 14, Art. Vl


Ch. 9-34
 
Ch. 10, Art. II


9-34-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 10


9-34-7
 
Ch. 10, Art. VIII


 
 
10-201


9-34-8
 
Ch. 10, Art. VII, Ch. 10, Art. VIII


 
 
10-201


9-34-12
 
Ch. 10, Art. IX


9-34-13
 
Ch. 10, Art.. III


 
 
10-79


9-34-15
 
Ch. 10, Art. III


Ch. 9-36
 
8-1


9-36-8
 
8-37


Ch. 9-38
 
Ch. 14, Art. VII


9-45-1
 
Ch. 14


 
 
Ch. 14, Art. II


 
 
14-26


9-45-2
 
Ch. 14, Art. II


 
 
14-27


9-45-14
 
14-26


9-46-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 14, Art. III


9-47-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 18


 
 
Ch. 18, Art. II


9-47-16
 
18-301


9-48-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 18, Art. III


9-51-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 17, Art. VI, Div. 3


Ch. 9-55
 
App. A, Art. IV, § 14


9-55-2
 
App. A, Art. IV, § 14


Ch. 10-45
 
Ch. 16, Art. II, Div. 2


 
 
16-52


 
 
16-56, 16-57


 
 
16-78, 16-81


Ch. 10-46
 
16-55, 16-57


Ch. 10-52
 
16-51, 16-54


 
 
16-56


10-52-1
 
Ch. 16, Art. 1I, Div. 2


10-52-2.6
 
16-52


10-52-11
 
16-53(a)


10-52-12
 
16-53(a)


10-52A
 
16-76, 16-84, 16-81


10-52A-2
 
16-76, 16-80


10-52A-10
 
16-84


11-3-6
 
15A-22


11-10-5
 
6-26


15-6-6(a)
 
1-2


19-48-15
 
18-301


Ch. 21-10
 
9-28


Tit. 22
 
Ch.. 11


22-11-4
 
11-27


22-11-8
 
11-28


Ch. 22-13
 
Ch. 11, Art. III


22-14-1
 
11-86


22-14-7
 
11-88


22-34-25
 
7-2


22-37-2
 
11-70


22-37-20 et seq.
 
11-67


Tit. 23
 
Ch. 11


23-29-2.2
 
17-261


Ch. 29-10
 
Ch. 9, Art. II


Tit. 32
 
Ch. 17


32-14-1
 
17-1


32-14-2
 
17-57


32-14-3
 
Ch. 17


32-14-5
 
Ch. 17, Art. V, Div. 3


 
 
17-168


32-15-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 17, Art. X


32-15-10
 
17-428


32-15-17
 
17-429


32-15-18
 
17-158


32-17-1
 
17-426


32-17-4
 
17-426


32-17-25
 
17-476


32-18-1 et seq.
 
17-427


32-20-6.1
 
17-166


32-20-6.5
 
17-484


32-20A-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 17, Art. XI


32-20A-1(7)
 
17-446


32-20A-2
 
17-453


32-20A-10
 
17-454


32-20B-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 17. Art. XII


32-20B-5
 
17-478


32-21-28, 32-21-29
 
17-63


32-23-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 17. Art. IV


32-24-1
 
17-156


32-24-8, 32-24-9
 
17-154, 17-155


Ch. 32-25
 
Ch. 17, Art. V


 
 
Ch. 17, Art. V, Div. 2


32-25-1—32-25-17
 
17-216


32-25-3
 
17-211


32-25-5.1
 
17-217


32-25-14
 
17-214


32-25-16
 
Ch. 17


32-25-23
 
17-218


32-26-1—32-26-3
 
17-131—17-133


32-26-5 et seq.
 
17-134


32-26-9
 
17-136


32-26-14
 
17-261


32-26-15
 
17-145


32-26-17, 32-26-18
 
17-147, 17-148


32-26-18.1
 
17-157


32-26-19
 
17-144


32-26-20
 
17-149


32-26-21.1
 
17-161


32-26-22.1
 
17-151


32-26-23, 32-26-24
 
17-152, 17-153


32-26-26
 
17-140


32-26-31
 
17-143


32-26-34
 
17-141


32-26-35
 
17-139


32-26-36
 
17-138


32-26-37
 
17-142


32-26-40
 
17-162


32-26-43
 
17-165


32-26-44
 
17-167


Ch 32-27
 
Ch. 17, Art. VII


32-27-1
 
17-363


32-27-3, 32-27-4
 
17-364, 17-365


Ch. 32-28
 
Ch. 17, Art. III


32-28-1—32-28-5
 
17-111


32-28-6—32-28-8
 
17-112


Ch. 32-29
 
Ch. 17, Art. V, Div. 4


32-29-2
 
Ch. 17


 
 
17-256


32-29-2.1
 
17-259


32-29-3
 
17-260


Ch. 32-30
 
Ch. 17, Art. VI


32-30-2.1
 
17-282


32-30-2.5
 
17-170


32-30-3
 
17-64


32-30-5
 
17-281


32-30-6
 
17-284


32-30-6.1
 
17-283


32-30-6.3
 
17-286


32-30-11.1
 
17-311


32-30-12 et seq.
 
Ch. 17, Art. XIII


32-30-12.1
 
Ch. 17, Art. XIII


32-30-13
 
17-503


32-30-14
 
17-502


32-30-15
 
17-504


32-30-16
 
17-505, 17-506


32-30-16.1
 
17-509, 17-510


32-30-17, 32-30-18
 
17-507, 17-508


32-30-20
 
17-160


32-31-4
 
17-216


32-31-7, 32-31-8
 
17-163, 17-164


32-32-1
 
17-386


32-32-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 17, Art. VIII


32-32-2
 
17-387


32-32-4, 32-32-5
 
17-388


32-32-6, 32-32-7
 
17-389, 17-390


Ch. 32-33
 
17-59


32-33-2
 
17-59


Ch. 32-34
 
Ch. 17, Art. II, Div. 3


32-34-3
 
17-82


32-34-4
 
17-85


32-34-7
 
17-86


32-34-10
 
17-87


32-34-23
 
17-87


Ch. 34-27
 
Ch. 14, Art. VI


34-45-12
 
16-58


Ch. 34A-6
 
13-43


Tit. 35
 
Ch. 4


 
 
4-1


 
 
4-2


 
 
4-3


 
 
4-5


 
 
4-7


35-1-1
 
4-1


 
 
16-78


35-1-4
 
4-2


35-1-5.3
 
4-8


 
 
4-12


 
 
4-13


35-1-12
 
4-11


35-2-1.2
 
4-3


 
 
4-4


 
 
4-8


 
 
4-14


35-2-3
 
4-14


35-2-6.2
 
4-5


35-2-10
 
4-7


35-4-2
 
4-1


 
 
4-8


 
 
4-9


35-4-2(6)
 
4-8


35-4-2.1
 
4-8


 
 
4-10


35-4-77.1
 
4-13


35-4-81
 
4-8


 
 
4-10


35-4-81.2
 
4-8


 
 
4-10


35-4-103
 
4-9


35-4-124
 
4-8


35-4-125
 
4-8


35-12
 
4-8


Tit. 36
 
Ch. 10, Art. II


36-1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 10


Ch. 36-16
 
Ch. 10, Art VI


 
 
10-146


36-25-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 10, Art. IX


36-25-15
 
Ch. 6


36-25-15.1
 
Ch. 6


36-25-16
 
Ch. 10, Art. IX


Tit. 37
 
Ch. 10, Art. II


Ch. 37-13
 
Ch. 10, Art. VIII


37-13-1
 
10-196


37-13-1 et seq.
 
10-201


37-13-2
 
10-197


37-16-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 10, Art. VII


Tit. 40
 
Ch. 5


Ch. 40-1
 
5-3


40-1-20
 
5-4


Ch. 40-12
 
Ch. 5, Art. III


40-12-5
 
5-7(d)


Ch. 40-34
 
Ch. 5, Art. II, Div. 2


42-4-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 10, Art. III


42-7A-41
 
4-10


46-1-6
 
8-32


50-7-2
 
2-99


50-7-13
 
2-99


 
 
 




 


