THE
CLEVELAND
MUNICIPAL
CODE
Prepared by the
MUNICIPAL TECHNICAL ADVISORY SERVICE
INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE
THE UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE
in cooperation with the
TENNESSEE MUNICIPAL LEAGUE
March 1996
Change 17, July 23, 2018
CITY OF CLEVELAND, TENNESSEE
MAYOR
Kevin Brooks
VICE MAYOR
Avery L. Johnson, Sr.
COUNCIL MEMBERS
Tom Cassada
Bill Estes
Dale Hughes
David May, Jr.
Charlie McKenzie
Ken Webb
CITY MANAGER
Joe Fivas
ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
Shawn McKay
ii
Change 7, March 24, 2003
PREFACE
The Cleveland Municipal Code contains the codification and revision of the
ordinances of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee. By referring to the historical
citation appearing at the end of each section, the user can determine the
origin of each particular section. The absence of a historical citation means
that the section was added by the codifier. The word "modified" in the
historical citation indicates significant modification of the original ordinance.
The code is arranged into titles, chapters, and sections. Related matter is
kept together, so far as possible, within the same title. Each section number
is complete within itself, containing the title number, the chapter number,
and the section of the chapter of which it is a part. Specifically, the first
digit, followed by a hyphen, identifies the title number. The second digit
identifies the chapter number, and the last two digits identify the section
number. For example, title 2, chapter 1, section 6, is designated as section 2-
106.
By utilizing the table of contents and the analysis preceding each title and
chapter of the code, together with the cross references and explanations
included as footnotes, the user should locate all the provisions in the code
relating to any question that might arise. However, the user should note that
most of the administrative ordinances (e.g. Annual Budget, Zoning Map
Amendments, Tax Assessments, etc...) do not appear in the code. Likewise,
ordinances that have been passed since the last update of the code do not
appear here. Therefore, the user should refer to the city's ordinance book or
the city clerk for a comprehensive and up to date review of the city's
ordinances.
Following this preface is an outline of the ordinance adoption procedures, if
any, prescribed by the city's charter.
The code has been arranged and prepared in loose-leaf form to facilitate
keeping it up to date. MTAS will provide updating service under the
following conditions:
(1)That all ordinances relating to subjects treated in the code or which should
be added to the code are adopted as amending, adding, or deleting specific
chapters or sections of the code (see section 8 of the adopting ordinance).
(2)That one copy of every ordinance adopted by the city is kept in a separate
ordinance book and forwarded to MTAS annually.
iii
Change 7, March 24, 2003
(3)That the city agrees to reimburse MTAS for the actual costs of reproducing
replacement pages for the code (no charge is made for the consultant's work,
and reproduction costs are usually nominal).
When the foregoing conditions are met MTAS will reproduce replacement
pages for the code to reflect the amendments and additions made by such
ordinances. This service will be performed at least annually and more often
if justified by the volume of amendments. Replacement pages will be
supplied with detailed instructions for utilizing them so as again to make the
code complete and up to date.
The able assistance of Sandy Selvage, the MTAS Sr. Word Processing
Specialist who did all the typing on this project, and Tracy Gardner,
Administrative Services Assistant, is gratefully acknowledged.
Steve Lobertini
Codification Specialist
iv
Change 7, March 24, 2003
ORDINANCE ADOPTION PROCEDURES PRESCRIBED BY THE
CITY CHARTER
Style and passage of ordinances. The style of all city ordinances shall be: "Be
it ordained by the city council of the City of Cleveland." Each ordinance shall
be passed at two separate meetings on two separate days before the same is
operative. However, at least thirteen (13) days shall have lapsed between the
first and final passage of any ordinance. A reasonable number of written
copies of ordinances shall be available to the public at the meetings and at
city hall before the second and final passage by the city council. Ordinances,
resolutions and other measures of the city council shall be passed by an
affirmative vote of a majority of the council members present and voting.
Abstentions shall be counted neither as a yes nor a no vote. (art. IV, § 10)
v
Change 9, March 28, 2005 1-1
TITLE 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION1
CHAPTER
1. CITY COUNCIL.
2. MAYOR.
3. CITY CLERK.
4. CITY MANAGER.
5. CITY ATTORNEY.
CHAPTER 1
CITY COUNCIL2
SECTION
1-101. Regular meetings.
1-102. Adjourned meetings; extra sessions.
1-103. Quorum.
1-104. Order of business before city council.
1-105. Points of order.
1-106. Resolutions and ordinances to be written and seconded.
1-107. Discussion by council to be limited.
1-108. Requirements for passage of motions, resolutions and ordinances.
1-109. Method of voting on ordinances.
1Charter references
See the charter index, the charter itself, and footnote references to the
charter in the front of this code.
Municipal code references
Building, plumbing, electrical and gas inspectors: title 12.
Fire department: title 7.
Utilities: titles 18 and 19.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Zoning: title 14.
2Charter references
Compensation: art. IV, § 4.
Composition: art. IV, § 1.
General powers: art. II, § 1.
Qualifications: art. IV, § 3.
Quorum: art. IV, § 9.
Vacancies in office: art. IV, § 7.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 1-2
1-110. Method for placing items on the agenda.
1-111. [Repealed.]
1-101. Regular meetings. The city council shall meet in two (2) regular
monthly sessions on the second and fourth Mondays of each month in the year
or at such other convenient monthly meeting dates as may be fixed by said city
council. Both meetings shall be held at 3:00 p.m.
The meeting room for the city council shall be the Cleveland Municipal
Building at 190 Church Street, N.E., except for the regular meeting held on the
second Monday in September in any calendar year where a city election has
occurred in August of that same calendar year.
For those meetings held on the second Monday in September in any
calendar year where a city election has occurred in August of that same calendar
year, the meeting room shall be the Cleveland Bradley Regional Museum, also
known as the Museum Center at 5ive Points, located at 200 Inman Street East,
or such other location as the city council may establish by ordinance. (1981
Code, § 2-16, as amended by Ord. of 11/12/02; Ord. #2011-31, Jan. 2012; and
Ord. #2014-30, Aug. 2014)
1-102. Adjourned meetings; extra sessions. The city council shall
have the power to adjourn a regular meeting of the city council to such time as
they may designate. The mayor or 3 members of the council may direct the city
manager, in writing, to call a special meeting of the city council. The written
direction to the councilmen shall state the object or purpose of the meeting. The
city manager shall call the meeting for no earlier than 24 hours following the
receipt of his written notice from the mayor/or council members and shall
provide public notice and a written notice of the meeting to the mayor and all
members of the city council. Only business stated in the notice of this called
meeting can be transacted in the called meeting. (1981 Code, § 2-17, modified)
1-103. Quorum. A majority of all members of the city council, excluding
vacancies, shall, at all times, constitute a quorum for the transaction of all
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day. (1981 Code,
§ 2-18, modified)
1-104. Order of business before city council. The minutes of the
preceding meeting shall be read at each meeting unless the clerk shall, at least
forty-eight (48) hours prior to each meeting, submit to the city council a written
copy of said minutes and a majority of the entire council agrees to waive the
reading of said minutes; and after the same have been acted upon, the following
order shall be observed in the transaction of business:
(1) Hearing petitions and communications.
(2) Consent agenda.
(3) Unfinished business.
Change 14, October 10, 2011 1-3
(4) Reports of council members.
(5) New business and ordinances. (1981 Code, § 2-21, as replaced by
Ord. #2003-32, Nov. 2003)
1-105. General rules of order. The rules of order and parliamentary
procedure contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the
transaction of business by and before the city council at its meetings in all cases
to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with
provisions of the charter or this code. (1981 Code, § 2-23, modified)
1-106. Resolutions and ordinances to be written and seconded.
All resolutions and ordinances shall be reduced to writing, and distributed to the
council before or at the meeting in which they are introduced and debated.
(1981 Code, § 2-24, modified)
1-107. Discussion by council to be limited. No council member shall
be allowed to speak more than twice on the same ordinance, resolution or
motion, without the consent of the majority of the council. (1981 Code, § 2-25,
modified)
1-108. Requirements for passage of motions, resolutions and
ordinances. It shall only be necessary for motions and resolutions to be passed
one (1) time; all ordinances shall pass by a majority vote of the members present
and voting at two (2) separate meetings. However, at least twelve (12) days
shall have lapsed between the first and final passage of any ordinance. (1981
Code, § 2-26, modified, as replaced by Ord. #2011-15, Sept. 2011)
1-109. Method of voting on ordinances. In the passage of ordinances
the clerk shall call the roll of the council members, and they shall vote, via voice,
except when directed by the mayor to vote by public ballot. Also, upon the
request of any member, the vote shall be taken by public ballot. Council
members shall sign their respective public ballot and all public ballots taken by
the council shall be open for public inspection. (1981 Code, § 2-27, modified)
1-110. Method for placing items on the agenda. (1) The mayor, any
councilmember, or the city manager may have any item placed on the agenda
for either a work session or a meeting by notifying the city clerk by noon on the
Tuesday before the work session or meeting of the subject matter and all
attachments which will be presented to the city council as part of the request.
The city clerk shall include this information in the agenda packet for the city
council. No item may be added to the agenda after this deadline except by the
affirmative vote of at least a simple majority of those councilmembers present.
(2) Any citizen wishing to address the city council at either a work
session or a meeting on a matter not on the agenda, must notify the city clerk
by noon on the Tuesday before the work session or meeting of the subject matter
Change 14, October 10, 2011 1-4
and provide all attachments which will be presented to the city council as part
of the address. The city clerk shall include this information in the agenda
packet for the city council. No presentations may be made to the city council at
a work session or meeting unless the presenter has complied with the provisions
of this subsection. However, the city council, by the affirmative vote of at least
a simple majority of those councilmembers present, may agree to hear the
matter. (as added by Ord. of June 1998)
1-111. [Repealed.] (as added by Ord. of June 1998, and repealed by
Ord. of 8/13/2001)
Change 9, March 28, 2005 1-5
CHAPTER 2
MAYOR1
SECTION
1-201. Powers and duties.
1-202. Declaration of state of emergency - line of succession.
1-201. Power and duties. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of
the city council at which he is present, and in his absence, the vice-mayor shall
preside, and in the absence of the mayor and vice-mayor, the city council shall
designate one of their number to preside. The mayor shall be the ceremonial
head of the city. The mayor shall have a voice but no vote, and shall have veto
power over all actions of the city council except the appointment of a vice-mayor,
the appointment to fill a vacancy on the city council, or the declaration of a
vacancy. The mayor must exercise said veto within five (5) days of final
adoption by the city council. He shall notify each council member, if available,
of his actions, together with his reasons therefor within the five (5) day period.
The council shall have thirty (30) days or until the next regular council meeting,
whichever comes first, to override said veto. It shall require an affirmative vote
of at least five (5) members of the council to override the mayor's veto.
Abstentions shall be counted neither as a yes or a no vote.
1-202. Declaration of state of emergency - line of succession.
(1) Pursuant to the Mutual Aid and Emergency and Disaster
Assistance Agreement Act of 2004, codified at Tennessee Code Annotated
58-88-101, et seq., the mayor may declare a local state of emergency for the City
of Cleveland by execute order consistent with and governed by the provisions of
Tennessee Code Annotated 58-2-110(3)(A)(v).
(2) In the event the mayor is ill, out of town, or otherwise unavailable
to act, then the vice-mayor is hereby given the power to declare a local state of
emergency consistent with Tennessee Code Annotated 58-8-104.
(3) In the event the mayor and vice-mayor are both ill, out of town, or
otherwise unavailable to act, then the city manager is hereby given the power
to declare a local state of emergency consistent with Tennessee Code Annotated
58-8-104.
1Charter references
Compensation: art. IV, § 4.
Duties: art. IV, § 6.
Oath: art. IV, § 8.
Vacancy in office: art. IV, § 7.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 1-6
(4) In the event the mayor, vice mayor and city manager are all ill, out
of town, or otherwise unable to act in the event of an emergency, then either atlarge
city council member is hereby given the power to declare a local state of
emergency consistent with Tennessee Code Annotated 58-8-104. (as added by
Ord. #2004-46, Jan. 2005)
Change 9, March 28, 2005 1-7
CHAPTER 3
CITY CLERK1
SECTION
1-301. Appointment, compensation, and specific requirements, powers and
duties of office.
1-302. Shall keep minutes.
1-303. Shall be custodian of public records, bonds, etc.
1-304. Shall provide and certify copies of records, papers, etc.
1-305. Shall generally supervise and keep records of fiscal affairs.
1-306. Shall be treasurer.
1-307. Shall perform any other duties imposed.
1-308. Absence of city clerk.
1-301. Appointment, compensation, and specific requirements,
powers, and duties of office. The city clerk shall be appointed by the city
manager and shall be the head of the department of finance. He shall receive
a salary to be fixed by the city council and shall be bonded in such amount as
may be provided by ordinance. He shall by his signature and the city seal,
attest all instruments signed in the name of the city. He shall have power to
administer oaths.
1-302. Shall keep minutes. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to be
present at all meetings of the city council and to keep a full and accurate record
of all business transacted by the same, to be preserved in permanent book form.
(1981 Code, § 2-92, modified)
1-303. Shall be custodian of public records, bonds, etc. The city
clerk shall have custody of and preserve in his office, the city seal, the public
records, original rolls of ordinances, ordinance books, minutes of the city council,
contracts, bonds, title deeds, certificates and papers, all official indemnity or
surety bonds (except his own bond, which shall be in the custody of the city
manager), and all other bonds, oaths and affirmations and all other records,
papers and documents not required by the charter or by ordinance to be
deposited elsewhere, and register them by numbers, dates and contents, and
keep an accurate and modern index thereof. (1981 Code, §§ 2-93, 2-94, and 2-96,
modified)
1Charter references
Appointment: art. VI, § 1.
Compensation: art. VI, § 1.
Vacancy in office: art. VI, § 8.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 1-8
1-304. Shall provide and certify copies of records, papers, etc.
(1) The city clerk shall provide, and, when required by any office or
person, certify copies of records, papers and documents in his office and charge
therefor, for the use of the city, such fees as may be provided by ordinance; and
shall cause copies of ordinances to be printed, as may be directed by the city
council, and kept in his office for distribution.
(2) Schedule of reasonable charges for copies of public records.
(a) Copy charges: The city clerk may assess a charge of fifteen
cents (15¢) per page for each standard 8 1/2 x 11 or 8 1/2 x 14 black and
white copy produced.
The city clerk may assess a requestor a charge for a duplex copy
that is the equivalent of the charge for two (2) separate copies.
If a public record is maintained in color, the city clerk shall advise
the requestor that the record can be produced in color if the requestor is
willing to pay a charge higher than that of a black and white copy. If the
requestor then requests a color copy, the city clerk may assess a charge
of fifty cents (50¢) per page for each 8 1/2 x 11 or 8 1/2 x 14 color copy
produced.
If the requested records are being produced on a medium other
than 8 1/2 x 11 or 8 1/2 x 14 paper, such as maps, plats, electronic data,
audio discs, video discs, or any other format or material, the records shall
be duplicated to the requestor at the actual costs of the city. For these
items, the city clerk shall establish a schedule of charges documenting the
city's "actual cost" and state the calculation and reasoning for the
charges.
(b) Additional production charges. When assessing a fee for
items covered under the "additional production charges" section, the city
clerk shall utilize the most economical and efficient method of producing
the requested records.
Delivery of copies of records to a requestor is anticipated to be by
hand delivery when the requestor returns to the clerk's office to retrieve
the requested records. If the requestor chooses not to return to the clerk's
office to retrieve the copies, the clerk may deliver the copies through
means of the United States Postal Service and the cost incurred in
delivering the copies may be assessed in addition to any other permitted
charge. It is within the discretion of the city clerk to deliver copies of
records through other means, including electronically, and to assess the
costs related to such delivery.
If the city clerk utilizes an outside vendor to produce copies of
requested records because the city is legitimately unable to produce the
copies at the city, the cost assessed by the vendor to the city may be
recovered from the requestor.
If the city is assessed a charge to retrieve requested records from
archives or any other entity having possession of requested records, the
Change 15, August 11, 2014 1-9
city clerk may assess the requestor the cost assessed to the city for
retrieval of the records.
(c) Labor charges. "Labor" is defined as the time reasonably necessary
to produce the requested records and includes the time spent locating,
retrieving, reviewing, redacting, and reproducing the records.
"Labor threshold" is defined as the labor of the employee(s)
reasonably necessary to produce requested material for the first hour
incurred by the city in producing the material.
The city clerk is permitted to charge the hourly wage of the
employee(s) reasonably necessary to produce the requested records above
the "labor threshold." The hourly wage is based upon the base salary of
the employee(s) and does not include benefits. If an employee is not paid
on an hourly basis, the hourly wage shall be determined by dividing the
employee's annual salary by the required hours to be worked per year.
In calculating the charge for labor, the city clerk shall determine
the number of hours each employee spent producing a request. The city
clerk shall then subtract the one (1) hour threshold from the number of
hours the highest paid employee(s) spent producing the request. The city
clerk will then multiply the total number of hours to be charged for the
labor of each employee by that employee's hourly wage. Finally, the city
clerk will add together the totals for all the employees involved in the
request and that will be the total amount of labor that can be charged.
(d) Pre-payment. The city clerk may require payment for the
requested copies or duplication prior to the production of the copies or
duplication. (as amended by Ord. #2013-54, Dec. 2013)
1-305. Shall generally supervise and keep records of fiscal affairs.
The city clerk as the head of the department of finance, shall exercise a general
supervision over the fiscal affairs of the city, and general accounting supervision
over all the city's property, assets and claims, and the disposition thereof. He
shall be the general accountant and internal auditor of the city; he shall have
custody of all papers, records and vouchers relating to the fiscal affairs of the
city, and the records in his office shall show the financial operations and
condition, property, assets, claims and liability of the city, all expenditures
authorized and all contracts in which the city is interested. (1981 Code, § 2-97,
modified)
1-306. Shall be treasurer. The city clerk shall be the treasurer of the
city; as such it shall be his duty to collect, receive and receipt for the taxes and
all monies, other revenues and bonds from all departments of the city, and the
proceeds of its bond issues, and to disburse the same. (1981 Code, § 2-95,
modified)
Change 9, March 28, 2005 1-10
1-307. Shall perform any other duties imposed. The city clerk shall
also perform any other duties imposed upon him by the charter or by ordinance.
1-308. Absence of city clerk. In the temporary absence or disability
of the city clerk, the assistant city clerk, if such position be established, or
another employee within the finance department designated by the city
manager shall serve as acting city clerk.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 1-11
CHAPTER 4
CITY MANAGER1
SECTION
1-401. Duties and powers.
1-401. Duties and powers. The city manager shall be the chief
administrative officer of the city and shall exercise such authority and control
over such departments, officers and employees as the charter prescribes, and
shall perform all other duties required of him pursuant to the charter.
1Charter references
Appointment: art. V, § 1.
Bond: art. VIII, § 4.
Compensation: art. V, § 1.
Powers and duties: art. V, § 4.
Removal from office: art. V, § 6.
Vacancy in office: art. V, § 3.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 1-12
CHAPTER 5
CITY ATTORNEY1
SECTION
1-501. Appointment, duties, and compensation.
1-502. Additional counsel authorized.
1-503. When incompetent by reason of interest, etc.
1-504. Compensation.
1-501. Appointment, duties, and compensation. The city attorney
shall be appointed by the city council and shall direct the management of all
litigation in which the city is a party, including the function of prosecuting
attorney in the city court; represent the city in all legal matters and proceedings
in which the city is a party or interested, or in which any of its officers is
officially interested; attend all meetings of the city council; advise the city
council and committees or members thereof, the city manager, and the heads of
all departments and divisions as to all legal questions affecting the city's
interests; and approve as to form all contracts, deeds, bonds, ordinances,
resolutions and other documents to be signed in the name of or made by or with
the city. His compensation shall be as fixed by the city council and he shall
serve at the will of the city council. Residence in the city at the time of
appointment of a city attorney shall not be required as a condition of the
appointment, but within six (6) months following the appointment the city
attorney must become a resident of the City of Cleveland. (1981 Code, §§ 2-76
and 2-77, modified)
1-502. Additional counsel authorized. In all suits by or against the
corporation in which a large amount or an important principle is involved, the
city council may, if it deems it necessary, employ additional counsel, and
stipulate to pay reasonable fees. (1981 Code, § 2-78, modified)
1-503. When incompetent by reason of interest, etc. When the city
attorney is incompetent by reason of interest or otherwise to represent the city
in any matter arising, the city council shall have power to employ another
attorney to represent the city; and it shall contract in advance to pay only such
fee as is reasonable for the services such attorney may render. (1981 Code,
§ 2-79, modified)
1Charter references
Appointment: art. VII, § 2.
Compensation: art. VII, § 2.
Duties: art. VII, § 2.
Qualifications: art. VII, § 1.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 1-13
1-504. Compensation. The city attorney shall receive a fixed salary as
set by the city council. (1981 Code, § 2-80, modified)November 28, 2011
Change 17, July 23, 2018 2-1
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, ETC.
CHAPTER
1. MUNICIPAL AIRPORT AUTHORITY.
2. ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY BOARD.
3. BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES.
4. PARK ADVISORY BOARD.
5. JOHNSTON PARK ADVISORY BOARD.
6. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT FOR ALL BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
7. LEONARD FLETCHER PARK ADVISORY BOARD.
8. SENIOR CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT AUTHORITY1
SECTION
2-101. Created and composition.
2-102. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies.
2-103. Oath of office.
2-104. Authority.
2-101. Created and composition. There is hereby created and
established a Municipal Airport Authority for the City of Cleveland, Tennessee,
consisting of five commissioners of the authority, appointed by the City Council
of Cleveland, Tennessee (1981 Code, § 3-16, as replaced by Ord. #2004-36, Sept.
2004)
2-102. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies. The city council
shall appoint and approve the commissioners of the municipal airport authority
as provided by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 42-3-101 et seq., and otherwise, as
provided by the laws of the State of Tennessee. The commissioners who are first
appointed shall be designated to serve for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four
(4) and five (5) years, respectively. Thereafter, each commissioner shall be
appointed for a term of five (5) years. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by the
expiration of terms shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as
the original appointment. (1981 Code, § 3-17, as replaced by Ord. #2004-36,
Sept. 2004)
1Municipal code reference
Airport zoning regulations: title 14.
State law reference
Municipal airports: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 42-5-101 et seq.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 2-2
2-103. Oath of office. The commissioners of the municipal airport
authority shall, as provided by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 42-3-103, present
to the Tennessee Secretary of State an application signed, subscribed and sworn
to by each of said commissioners before an officer authorized by the laws of the
State of Tennessee, to take and certify oaths, who shall certify upon the
application that such officer personally knows the commissioners, and knows
them to be the officers as appointed in the application and that each subscribed
and swore thereto in the officer's presence, which will be set forth (without any
detail other than mere recital) the following:
(1) The Cleveland City Council, by ordinance or resolution, created a
municipal airport authority and thereafter appointed them as commissioners;
(2) The name and official residence of each of the commissioners,
together with a certified copy of the appointment evidencing their right to office,
the date and place of induction into, and taking oath of office, and that they
desire the municipal airport authority to become a public body corporate and
politic under this chapter;
(3) The term of office of each of the commissioners;
(4) The name which is proposed for the corporation; and
(5) The location of the principal office of the proposed corporation.
(1981 Code, § 3-18, as replaced by Ord. #2004-36, Sept. 2004)
2-104. Authority. The municipal airport authority is hereby vested with
all authority to control and regulate any and all operations of any municipal
airport located in the corporate jurisdiction of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee,
as provided by the laws of the State of Tennessee, and in accordance with the
rules adopted by the city council and/or duly created and established by the
municipal airport authority. (as added by Ord. #2004-36, Sept. 2004)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 2-3
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION
2-201. Created.
2-202. Membership.
2-203. Duties and responsibilities.
2-201. Created. There is hereby created an animal shelter advisory
board for the City of Cleveland, Tennessee, to be designated as the "animal
shelter advisory board." (1981 Code, § 5-101, modified)
2-202. Membership.1 The animal shelter advisory board shall consist
of seven (7) members, no more than two (2) of which shall be veterinarians. The
seven (7) members shall hold office for the term as follows: Two (2) for three (3)
years; three (3) for two (2) years; two (2) for one (1) year, and shall be appointed
by the city council for such terms. Thereafter, such members shall be appointed
for terms of three (3) years or until their successors are appointed; however, any
members may be removed for cause at any time by the city council. The animal
shelter advisory board shall serve without compensation. (1981 Code, § 5-102,
as amended by Ord. #2003-35, Dec. 2003)
2-203. Duties and responsibilities. The animal shelter advisory board
shall be responsible for advising the city manager and city council in the
formulating of written policies and procedures necessary for the operation of the
Cleveland Animal Shelter. (1981 Code, § 5-103, modified)
1Ordinance 2013-36 which passed second reading July 2013, provides that
the membership of the animal shelter advisory board be reduced from seven (7)
members to five (5) members during any period of time when a contract for
animal control services does not exist between the City of Cleveland and Bradley
County.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 2-4
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
SECTION
2-301. Definitions.
2-302. Creation and membership.
2-303. Meetings and organization.
2-304. Powers and duties; appointment of general manager.
2-305. Contracts, leases and agreements.
2-306. Reports to city council.
2-307. Annual budget.
2-308. Compensation.
2-309. Removal of board members.
2-310. Board to have jurisdiction over waterworks and sewerage works.
2-311. Board to assume debts and obligations of waterworks and sewerage
works and to pay tax equivalents to the city.
2-301. Definitions. As used in this chapter the following words shall
have the meanings ascribed thereto:
(1) "Board" shall mean the board of public utilities of the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee.
(2) "Member" shall mean an individual member of such board.
(3) "City council" shall mean the governing body of the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee.
(4) "System" shall mean the electric distribution system, the water
system and the sewer system of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
(5) "Act," unless otherwise specified, shall mean Chapter 33, of the
Public Acts of Tennessee, Extraordinary Session, 1935, as amended.
(6) "Person" shall mean either male or female and reference to the
male gender herein shall include the female gender. (1981 Code, § 23-171,
modified)
2-302. Creation and membership. The board of public utilities as
hereby created shall consist of five (5) members. No person shall be eligible to
be a member of the board unless he shall be a property holder and resident of
the City of Cleveland and shall have resided for at least one (1) year prior to his
appointment, and shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age. No regular
compensated officer or employee of the City of Cleveland shall be eligible for
appointment until at least one (1) year after the expiration of the term of his
public office, except that one (1) member of the board shall be chosen as
hereinafter provided from the city council.
The four (4) appointed members of the board shall be appointed so that
the term of one (1) member shall expire on July 1 of each year. All except initial
Change 15, August 11, 2014 2-5
appointees and those appointed to serve unexpired terms shall serve four-year
terms.
The fifth member of the board shall be the mayor or council member of
the City of Cleveland who is named and designated by the city council. His
tenure on said board shall be confined to his tenure of office as mayor or
councilman.
Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term only. New
members, either for the purpose of filling a vacancy or for a full term, shall be
selected and appointed by the city council. Each member shall hold his office
until his successor is appointed and qualified. (1981 Code, § 23-172, modified)
2-303. Meetings and organization. (1) The board shall within ten (10)
days after its selection nominate and elect a chairman who shall preside over its
meetings and a vice-chairman who shall preside in the absence or disability of
the chairman. The board shall also select a secretary and treasurer or it may
select one person to hold both offices who shall be designated as
secretary-treasurer. This office may be held by one of the members or some
competent person who is not a member of the board. If a member, he shall
receive no additional salary for such service; however, the board may provide for
the payment of a reasonable salary for the secretary and treasurer or
secretary-treasurer if such officer is not a member of the board nor a member
of the city council of the City of Cleveland. Said officer shall be selected upon
his merits and ability to perform the work required, and shall hold office at the
will of the board subject to the provisions hereof.
(2) A new election of officers of the board shall be held at the first
regular meeting of the board held following the appointment of a new member
for a full term. However, officers once elected shall hold office until their
successors are elected and qualified or until they cease to be members.
(3) The board shall have the right to adopt bylaws, rules and
regulations not inconsistent herewith and not inconsistent with the laws of the
land, the Charter and ordinances of the City of Cleveland, or the duly authorized
and executed contracts of the City of Cleveland or the board. The board may
provide for the time, place and manner of holding its regular and special
meetings, and all such meetings shall be public and no action shall be taken
except by a majority of the board. Three (3) members of the board shall
constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day. The
secretary-treasurer and general manager herein provided for shall attend all
meetings of the board and shall have a seat, and voice, but no vote, in such
meetings unless the secretary-treasurer is also a member of the board. Actions
of the board may be made by motion or resolution on single readings effective
immediately. (1981 Code, § 23-173, modified)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 2-6
2-304. Powers and duties; appointment of general manager.
(1) The board shall employ a competent and well qualified man to
serve as general manager of the system who shall have sufficient training and
experience to enable him to operate said system efficiently and economically,
and whose salary shall be fixed by the board. He shall be employed for such
length of time as the board may desire, not to exceed four (4) years at one time,
but he may be re-elected from time to time at the expiration of his term of office.
He may sooner be discharged at any regular meeting of the board for
incompetency, for default in office, failure to perform the duties of his office,
failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the board or for any
malfeasance or misfeasance in office. However, no employee of the board shall
be discharged because of political affiliations, and no person who is a member
of an immediate family of any member of the board, either by blood or marriage,
shall be employed by said board. It shall be the duty of the members of said
board and the employees thereof to operate the system in a manner most
consistent with sound economy and to public advantage, and to carry out the
duties of their respective office without political or personal favor and without
discrimination.
(2) The board shall have the power to select, employ and fix the
salaries of officers and employees of the system, but may delegate this power to
the general manager of the system except for the fixing of salaries of the general
manager and the secretary-treasurer.
(3) Said board shall have full charge of operating, equipping,
maintaining, extending and servicing said system, of making disbursements of
its funds in accordance with law and ordinances and contracts made and entered
into by the city, and of collecting all moneys due the system. It shall keep all
necessary and proper books and records of said funds, and of all records and
accounts of the system, and shall keep its funds in special bank account or
accounts kept for that purpose. It shall have them audited annually, and shall
have them always available for inspection by the duly authorized
representatives of the city. Said board shall require a fidelity bond with a
corporate surety from all officers or persons charged with the handling and
safekeeping of any of its funds. The cost of auditing, the cost of surety bonds
and other expenses required by this chapter which are necessary to the
operating of the system or the performance of the duties of the board shall be
paid by said board and shall be paid out of revenues collected by and from the
system. All disbursements made by the board shall be first approved by a
majority of the board.
(4) Said board shall have the right to extend or enlarge said system,
the right to contract and to be contracted with, the right to exercise the rights
of eminent domain, in the name of the City of Cleveland, by and with the
consent of the city council, the right to institute suit and defend suits brought
against it, the right to employ counsel, and in general to do all acts and things
necessary for the operation and maintenance of the system.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 2-7
(5) Said board shall be required to give full effect to the contracts with
the Tennessee Valley Authority, and others, with reference to the acquisition
and purchase of the distribution system, as well as the power contract between
the Tennessee Valley Authority and the City of Cleveland; shall collect all bills
when due and shall neither donate electric power or energy, water or sewer
service nor make any deviations from the established price thereof to any user
of electricity, water or sewer service. In order to comply with the provisions of
this subsection said board shall rigidly enforce the collection of bills for electric,
water and sewer service and shall, within the time prescribed by its rules and
regulations, discontinue the electric, water or sewer service for the nonpayment
of bills.
(6) Said board shall be subject to the advice, direction and supervision
of the city council, and the electric, water and sewer systems are under the
ultimate control of the city council acting by and through the utility board.
(7) The board shall fix rates to be charged for services rendered by the
system, which rates shall be fair, reasonable and uniform for all customers
within the same class and different rate schedules may be applied to different
classes of customers, as determined by the board. Rates within the city may be
less, but not greater than rates for the same service outside the city. The rates
for electric service shall be fixed in conformity with the resale rates that the city
is required to charge by the city's contractual obligations with the Tennessee
Valley Authority, either under the existing contractual rate or under the rates
as may be revised pursuant to said contract. (1981 Code, § 23-174, modified)
2-305. Contracts, leases and agreements. The board may, in the
operation of the system by itself or by its duly authorized officers and employees,
execute deeds and enter into leases, contracts and agreements, provided their
terms of such leases, deeds, contracts and agreements, shall not conflict with the
provisions of this chapter and shall be limited to a period of time, which will
expire on or before twenty (20) years from the date thereof; provided, however,
that longer term contracts may be made by and with the written authorization
of the city council. All contracts whereby the system agrees to supply electric
service for a longer period than one (1) year from the execution of such contracts
shall be subject to the condition that the rates at which such service is to be
provided after the expiration of one (1) year from the date of the contract, shall
conform to the rates being charged other customers for similar service. The time
limit prescribed in this paragraph for the duration of contracts and agreements
shall not apply to bond issues. The authority given the board by this section
shall not be construed to give the board authority to sell or lease all or a major
portion of this system unless the transaction is duly approved by the city
council, in conformity with the bond resolution, being an ordinance which shall
not be passed as an emergency ordinance. (1981 Code, § 23-175, modified)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 2-8
2-306. Reports to the city council. It shall be the duty of the board
to make semi-annual reports to the city council of the City of Cleveland showing
in detail the financial condition of the system, together with a complete
operating statement thereof for the period preceding, and shall furnish any
other information relative to said system, as may be required by the city council.
Said reports shall be kept on file at the city clerk's office and open to inspection
at all reasonable hours to taxpayers and the users of electricity, water or sewer
service within the system, as well as to their agents and attorneys. (1981 Code,
§ 23-176, modified)
2-307. Annual budget. The board shall prepare and adopt an annual
budget for the system which budget shall be approved by the city council before
the budget becomes effective. (1981 Code, § 23-177, modified)
2-308. Compensation. Members of the board shall receive no salary for
their services, but shall be required to meet at least once each month in regular
meeting. They shall each be entitled to receive a fee of two hundred dollars
($200.00) for each meeting actually attended, either regular or special; but not
to exceed twenty four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) total attendance compensation
per annum per member. All members of the board shall receive an additional
allowance not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month for the water
system and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month for the wastewater system
for attendance at meetings for each of these additional utilities but not to exceed
a total of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per annum per member for these two
additional utilities. But this limitation in payment of attendance fees shall in
no way affect the number of meetings which the board may hold in any one (1)
month. In addition to said allowance for attendance, board members shall be
paid for their actual and necessary traveling expenses, if any, in the
performance of the duties of their office. (1981 Code, § 23-178, as amended by
Ord. of 8/23/99)
2-309. Removal of board members. Any member of the board may be
removed for cause in the manner provided by the General Ouster Law of the
State of Tennessee. The city council of the City of Cleveland may by an
affirmative vote of the majority of the entire city council remove any member of
the board of public utilities for misfeasance or malfeasance, or any other
sufficient and just cause, not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, after due
trial before the city council following ten (10) days' notice in writing of the
specific charges against him. (1981 Code, § 23-179, modified)
2-310. Board to have jurisdiction over waterworks and sewerage
works. All jurisdiction over the municipal waterworks and sewerage works
now vested in the city council is hereby transferred to and conferred upon the
board of public utilities. The board shall keep separate accounts for the electric
Change 15, August 11, 2014 2-9
plant and each works, making due and proper allocation of all joint expenses,
revenues, and property valuations. (1981 Code, § 23-180, modified)
2-311. Board to assume debts and obligations of waterworks and
sewerage works and to pay tax equivalents to the city. The board of
public utilities shall assume responsibility for meeting all debts and obligations
of the waterworks and sewerage works. Further, the board shall pay to the
municipal general fund from the electric system each year a tax equivalent
payment covering the properties and operations of the electric works. This
payment shall be in addition to any debt service required to meet the bonded
indebtedness of the utilities and shall be in an amount determined by the city
council at the time of adoption of the annual budget. (1981 Code, § 23-181,
modified)
Change 105, JAuulgyu 1s0t ,1 210, 026014 2-10
CHAPTER 4
PARK ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION
2-401. Established; membership; terms.
2-401. Established; membership; terms. There is hereby established
a Park Advisory Board for the City of Cleveland, Tennessee, which shall consist
of seven (7) persons to be appointed by the city council to serve for terms of three
(3) years or until their successors are appointed, except that the members of the
board first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one
member shall expire annually. The members of said board shall serve without
pay. Vacancies in said board occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled by the city council. The board shall have all those powers and
duties set forth in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 11-24-10. The park advisory
board shall not be responsible for the supervision of staff, the hiring or dismissal
of staff, the expenditure of public funds, or enforcement of rules and regulations
governing parks and recreation facilities or programs. However, the park
advisory board may make recommendations to the city council, the city
manager, and the parks and recreation director on any matter pertaining to the
improvement, growth, operation, and expansion of the parks and recreation
programs operated by the City of Cleveland. (as replaced by Ord. #2006-2, Jan.
2006)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 2-11
CHAPTER 5
JOHNSTON PARK ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION
2-501. Established; membership; terms.
2-501. Established; membership; terms. There is hereby established
a park advisory board for the City of Cleveland, Tennessee, which shall consist
of eight persons to be appointed by the city council to serve for terms of three (3)
years or until their successors are appointed, except that the members of the
board first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one
member shall expire annually. The members of said board shall serve without
pay. Vacancies in said board occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled by the city council. The function of the Johnston Park Advisory
Board shall be to counsel and advise the recreation director of improvements
needed for the park.
Change 13, May 10, 2010 2-12
CHAPTER 6
ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT FOR ALL BOARDS
AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION
2-601. Attendance requirement for all boards and commissions appointed by the
mayor or city council.
2-601. Attendance requirement for all boards and commissions
appointed by the mayor or city council. (1) Intent and purpose;
applicability. It is the intent of the city council and the mayor that the
appointed members of all boards and commissions attend meetings as much as
possible in order to contribute effectively. However, it is also recognized that
appointed members may miss meetings from time to time due to various
reasons.
The purpose of this section is to provide for attendance requirements for
members of all boards and commissions appointed by either the city council or
the mayor.
This section is intended to be applicable to all boards and commissions
whose members are appointed by either the mayor or the city council. It is
recognized that the members of some boards and commissions are appointed by
the city council, and the members of some boards and commissions are
appointed by the mayor.
It is also recognized that the mayor has certain statutory authority over
the appointment and removal of members of the planning commission, and to
the extent that there is any conflict between any state statutory provisions
relating to the planning commission and this section, the provisions of state law
will take precedence and control.
(2) General rule applicable to members of all boards and committees.
The appointed term of any member who fails to comply with the applicable
attendance requirements set forth herein shall automatically expire and the
member shall then be replaced with another appointee, unless the member is
re-appointed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (3).
(3) Effect of removal; reappointment of removed members. As a
general rule, any member whose term expires due to lack of compliance with the
applicable attendance requirements for that board or commission shall not be
eligible for reappointment to said board or commission for at least one (1) year.
However, if a board member's term expires due to lack of attendance
caused by personal health reasons or other exceptional circumstances, the
member may be eligible for reappointment without waiting a full year. However,
to be eligible for reappointment without waiting a full year, the member must
petition the mayor or the city council in writing for reinstatement as a member
of said board or commission. The petition for reinstatement shall be addressed
Change 13, May 10, 2010 2-13
to the mayor if the mayor is responsible for making the appointment. The
petition for reinstatement shall be addressed to the city council if the city
council is responsible for making the appointment.
In the written petition, the member must demonstrate to the mayor or the
city council that the member's failure to comply with the applicable attendance
requirements was due to personal health reasons or other exceptional
circumstances, and that the member's health has improved or the other
exceptional circumstances have been resolved and that the member will be able
to meet the applicable attendance requirements if they are re-appointed.
Upon receipt of the member's written petition, the mayor or the city
council may re-appoint the member without waiting a full year if the mayor or
the city council determine, in the exercise of their discretion, that the member's
failure to meet the applicable attendance requirements was due to personal
health reasons or other exceptional circumstances and that the member will
likely be able to meet the applicable attendance requirements if they are
re-appointed.
Neither the mayor nor the city council are under any obligation to
re-appoint any member who is removed for failing to meet the applicable
attendance requirements.
(4) Attendance requirements for boards and commissions that hold
regular monthly meetings. Any member who misses one-half (1/2) of all
regularly scheduled monthly meetings within any six (6) month period (January
through June, or July through December) of a calendar year shall be removed
and their term shall automatically expire.
(5) Attendance requirements for boards and commissions that hold
regular meetings less than monthly (boards and commissions that hold regular
meetings every other month, or quarterly, or semi-annually). Any member who
misses two (2) consecutive regular meetings within one (1) calendar year
(January through December) shall be removed and their term shall
automatically expire.
(6) Boards and commissions that do not hold regular meetings but
meet on an as needed basis. Any member who misses two (2) consecutive
meetings within one (1) calendar year (January through December) shall be
removed and their term shall automatically expire. (as added by Ord. of
11/25/96; and replaced by Ord. #2007-39, Nov. 2007, Ord. #2007-45, Nov. 2007,
and Ord. #2009-06, Feb. 2009)
Change 10, July 10, 2006 2-14
CHAPTER 7
LEONARD FLETCHER PARK ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION
2-701. Purpose.
2-702. Created.
2-703. Powers.
2-701. Purpose. The late Leonard and Agnes Fletcher gave land known
as Leonard Fletcher Park to the City of Cleveland for public outdoor recreation,
education and scenic enjoyment. The land is intended to be kept insofar as
possible in its natural state with only minimal improvements necessary to
enable the public to enjoy the use of the property. The city council wishes to
establish a Leonard Fletcher Park Advisory Board to make recommendations
to the city council and the city manager concerning the Leonard Fletcher Park
consistent with and in accordance with the wishes of the late Leonard and
Agnes Fletcher. (as added by Ord. #2006-3, Jan. 2006)
2-702. Created. The Leonard Fletcher Park Advisory Board is hereby
established to be composed of seven (7) members. Six (6) members of this board
shall be appointed by the city council. The chairperson of the city parks
advisory board or his or her designee shall serve as the seventh member of this
advisory board.
The terms of the initial six (6) members appointed shall be as follows:
(1) Two (2) of the original six (6) members shall be appointed and serve
until December 31, 2009.
(2) Two (2) of the original six (6) members shall be appointed and serve
until December 31, 2010.
(3) Two (2) of the original six (6) members shall be appointed and serve
until December 31, 2011.
(4) The term of any member appointed after the original six (6)
members shall be three (3) years from the date of appointment.
All members shall serve without compensation. The Leonard Fletcher
Park Advisory Board shall elect annually from among its membership a
chairperson to preside over meetings of the Leonard Fletcher Advisory Board.
The board shall meet at least twice a year and on such other occasions as the
board deems necessary. (as added by Ord. #2006-3, Jan. 2006)
2-703. Powers. The Leonard Fletcher Park Advisory Board is vested
with the authority and responsibility to:
(1) Establish bylaws and procedural rules for the Leonard Fletcher
Park Advisory Board;
Change 10, July 10, 2006 2-15
(2) Prepare a master plan which includes recommendations to the city
council for the development of Leonard Fletcher Park;
(3) Review and plans for development of Leonard fletcher Park and
make recommendations to the city council pertaining to the development of
Leonard Fletcher Park; and
(4) Make recommendations to the city manager and/or the parks and
recreation director on any matter pertaining to the development or operation of
Leonard Fletcher Park. (as added by Ord. #2006-3, Jan. 2006)
Change 17, July 23, 2018 2-16
CHAPTER 8
SENIOR CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION
2-801. Creation.
2-802. Membership.
2-803. Term.
2-804. Meetings.
2-805. Duties.
2-806. Expenditures.
2-807. Attendance requirements.
2-801. Creation. There is hereby created a Senior Citizen Advisory
Committee for the City of Cleveland, Tennessee to be designated as the "senior
citizen advisory committee." (as added by Ord. #2017-06, March 2017)
2-802. Membership. The senior citizen advisory committee shall consist
of seven (7) members who at least sixty-two (62) years of age. Each member
must be a resident of the City of Cleveland at the time of their appointment.
The mayor will serve as the chairman of the seven (7) member committee.
The city manager shall appoint a staff member to be a liaison and a
secretary/clerk for the committee.
The committee will be composed of one resident from each of the five (5)
city council districts, and two (2) additional residents of the city who shall serve
at large. The members of the senior citizen advisory committee shall serve
without compensation.
Each council member shall select one (1) member to serve on the
committee. (as added by Ord. #2017-06, March 2017)
2-803. Term. Initially, the committee members from districts 1, 2, 3 and
4 will serve a two (2) year term, and the member from district 5 and both at
large members will serve a three (3) year term. All subsequent appointments
will serve a two (2) year term.
Should a member of the committee cease to be a resident of the City of
Cleveland during their term, they shall automatically cease to be a member of
the committee and they shall be replaced with a substitute member who is a
resident of the city. (as added by Ord. #2017-06, March 2017)
2-804. Meetings. After all committee members are appointed, the
committee shall meet monthly for four (4) consecutive months, and on such
other dates as the committee deems necessary. (as added by Ord. #2017-06,
March 2017)
Change 17, July 23, 2018 2-17
2-805. Duties. The duties of the senior citizen advisory committee are:
(1) To make recommendations to the city council concerning the
perceived needs of Cleveland's senior citizens;
(2) To make recommendations to the city council concerning the
establishment of priorities that are of importance or concern to Cleveland's
senior citizens; and
(3) To make recommendations to the city council on those issues
referred to the advisory committee by the city council. (as added by Ord.
#2017-06, March 2017)
2-806. Expenditures. The Senior Citizen Advisory Committee shall not
have the power or authority to expend any public funds. (as added by Ord.
#2017-06, March 2017)
2-807. Attendance requirements. Members of the committee are
subject to the attendance requirements of § 2-601 of the Cleveland Municipal
Code. (as added by Ord. #2017-06, March 2017)
3-1
TITLE 3
MUNICIPAL COURT1
CHAPTER
1. CITY JUDGE.
2. COURT ADMINISTRATION.
3. WARRANTS, CITATIONS, SUBPOENAS, ETC.
4. COURT COSTS.
CHAPTER 1
CITY JUDGE
SECTION
3-101. City judge.
3-102. Jurisdiction.
3-101. City judge. (1) Appointment and term. The city judge
designated by the charter to handle judicial matters within the city shall be
appointed by the city council for a term of 2 years, commencing in September
1996 and shall be subject to reappointment every two years thereafter.
(2) Qualifications. The city judge shall be a minimum of (30) years of
age, be licensed by the State of Tennessee to practice law, be a resident of the
State of Tennessee for five (5) years, and be a resident of the City of Cleveland
for one (1) year.
3-102. Jurisdiction. The city judge shall have the authority to try
persons charged with the violation of municipal ordinances, and to punish
persons convicted of such violations by levying a civil penalty not to exceed $500.
(1981 Code, § 2-187, modified)
1Charter reference
City court: art. XI.
3-2
CHAPTER 2
COURT ADMINISTRATION
SECTION
3-201. Offenders to be tried speedily.
3-202. Docket to be kept.
3-203. Entries on docket.
3-204. Prosecutor may be taxed with costs.
3-201. Offenders to be tried speedily. The city judge shall speedily
try all offenders arraigned before him, and shall use his discretion in granting
continuances. (1981 Code, § 2-189)
3-202. Docket to be kept. The city judge shall keep a docket in which
he shall enter and preserve the names of every person brought before him
charged with any offense; such docket shall also indicate the alleged offense.
(1981 Code, § 2-190)
3-203. Entries on docket. The city judge shall enter on the docket
required by § 3-202 his judgement in the case, to include, in case of conviction,
the amount of the fine and costs assessed and/or length of community service.1
(1981 Code, § 2-191, modified)
3-204. Prosecutor may be taxed with costs. In case of violation of
city laws, when the person swearing out the warrant withdraws the same, or
where the judge is of the opinion that the prosecution is malicious or frivolous,
the judge, in his discretion, may tax the prosecutor with the costs. (1981 Code,
§ 2-194)
1Charter reference
City court: art. XI, § 1.
3-3
CHAPTER 3
WARRANTS, CITATIONS, SUBPOENAS, ETC.
SECTION
3-301. Issuance of warrants.
3-302. Citations in lieu of arrest in non-traffic cases.
3-303. Summonses in lieu of arrest.
3-304. Issuance of subpoenas.
3-305. Issuance of executions, etc.
3-306. Witnesses may be attached if necessary.
3-301. Issuance of warrants.1 The city judge shall have the power to
issue warrants for persons charged with violating municipal ordinances. (1981
Code, § 2-193, modified)
3-302. Citations in lieu of arrest in non-traffic cases.2 Pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-63-101, et seq., the city council appoints the fire
inspectors in the fire department, animal control officer in the animal control
department, and the code enforcement officers in the inspection department
special police officers having the authority to issue citations in lieu of arrest.
Code enforcement officers shall include the environmentalist, plumbing
inspector, electrical inspector, and building inspector. The fire inspectors in the
fire department shall have the authority to issue citations in lieu of arrest for
violations of the fire code adopted in title 7, chapter 2 of this municipal code of
ordinances. The animal control officer in the animal control department shall
have the authority to issue citations in lieu of arrest for violations of the animal
control laws adopted in title 10 of their municipal code of ordinances. The code
enforcement officer in the inspection department shall have the authority to
issue citations in lieu of arrest for violations of the building, utility, housing, and
environmental codes adopted in title 12 of this municipal code of ordinances.
The citation in lieu of arrest shall contain the name and address of the
person being cited and such other information necessary to identify and give the
person cited notice of the charges against him, and state a specific date and
place for the offender to appear and answer the charges against him. The
citation shall also contain an agreement to appear, which shall be signed by the
1State law reference
For authority to issue warrants, see Tennessee Code Annotated, title
40, chapter 6.
2Municipal code reference
Issuance of citations in lieu of arrest in traffic cases: title 15,
chapter 7.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 3-4
offender. If the offender refuses to sign the agreement to appear, the special
officer in whose presence the offense was committed shall immediately arrest
the offender and dispose of him in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 7-63-104.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his agreement to appear in
court, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the citation in lieu of
arrest was issued. (1981 Code, § 2-202, modified)
3-303. Summonses in lieu of arrest. Pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 7-63-201, et seq., which authorizes the city council to designate
certain city enforcement officers the authority to issue ordinance summonses in
the areas of sanitation, litter control and animal control, the city council
designates the animal control officers in the animal control department and the
code enforcement officers in the inspection department to issue ordinance
summonses. The animal control officers shall have the authority to issue
ordinance summonses in the area of animal control. The code enforcement
officers shall have the authority to issue ordinance summonses in the areas of
building, plumbing, electrical or environmental codes, and in the areas of
sanitation and litter control. The code enforcement officers shall also have the
authority to issue ordinance summonses for violations of any of the property
maintenance regulations contained within Title 13 of the Cleveland Municipal
Code. These enforcement officers may not arrest violators, but upon witnessing
violations of any ordinance, law or regulation in any of these areas, may issue
an ordinance summons and give the summons to the offender. (1981 Code,
§ 2-202, modified, as amended by Ord. #2006-24, July 2006)
3-304. Issuance of subpoenas. The city judge may subpoena as
witnesses all persons whose testimony he believes will be relevant and material
to matters coming before his court, and it shall be unlawful for any person
lawfully served with such a subpoena to fail or neglect to comply therewith.
(1981 Code, § 2-195, modified)
3-305. Issuance of executions, etc. The judge may issue executions,
mittimuses, and all other processes necessary to carry into effect any and all
judgments by him rendered. (1981 Code, § 2-199)
3-306. Witnesses may be attached if necessary. Any witness may be
forced to attend the city court by attachment and arrest, in the same manner as
in the circuit courts of the state. (1981 Code, § 2-197)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 3-5
CHAPTER 4
COURT COSTS
SECTION
3-401. Court costs and litigation taxes.
3-402. Electronic citation fee.
3-401. Court costs and litigation taxes. (1) Court costs. (a) Court
costs for all non-parking offenses shall be $91.00.
(b) Court costs of $91.00 shall also be collected in parking cases
which involve a violation of Cleveland Municipal Code § 15-605(14)
(Parking in a fire lane) or Cleveland Municipal Code § 15-605(13)
(Parking in a handicap zone).
(c) Court costs shall not be collected in any other parking cases.
(d) In each case that the city collects court costs, $1.00 of the
court costs shall be remitted to the State of Tennessee in accordance with
the provisions of the Municipal Court Reform Act of 2004.
(2) Litigation taxes. (a) Overtime parking offenses. For every
violation for parking in excess of the time allowed (overtime parking) where the
city collects a fine or a civil penalty, the offender shall also pay a litigation tax
of one dollar ($1.00). This litigation tax is in addition to the applicable fine or
civil penalty. This one dollar ($1.00) litigation tax shall be collected even if the
offender does not appear in court to contest the parking citation, and instead
elects to pay the fine or civil penalty.
(b) All other municipal ordinance violations. The applicable
state litigation tax for all other municipal ordinance violations shall be
$13.75. This litigation tax shall be collected when a person charged with
violating a municipal ordinance is found guilty. This litigation tax is in
addition to any applicable court costs assessed under § 3-401(1) of the
Cleveland Municipal Code.
All funds derived from this thirteen dollar seventy-five cent
($13.75) litigation tax shall be forwarded by the city to the State of
Tennessee in accordance with the provisions of state law. (1981 Code,
§ 2-176, amended by Ord. of June 1995; Ord. of 3/25/2002; Ord. of 5/12/03;
Ord. of 5/27/03; and Ord. #2004-01, Jan. 2004; replaced by Ord. #2005-10,
March 2005, and Ord. #2005-18, May 2005, and amended by Ord.
#2015-33, Nov. 2015 )
3-402. Electronic citation fee. (1) Pursuant to the authority granted
to municipalities under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-207, and in
accordance with statutory requirements found in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-10-207, the city court clerk shall charge and collect an electronic citation fee
Change 16, December 14, 2015 3-6
of five dollars ($5.00) per citation which results in a conviction for any offense
described under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-207.
(2) Effective date This section shall take effect from and after its final
passage, the public welfare requiring it, and the citation fee described herein
shall apply to citations issued on or after March 1, 2015.
(3) Sunset provision. In accordance with the provisions of Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 55-10-207, the citation fee established herein shall terminate
five (5) years from March 1, 2015, and the citation fee shall not apply to any
citation issued on or after March 1, 2020. (as added by Ord. #2015-03, Feb.
2015)
4-1
TITLE 4
MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL
CHAPTER
1. SOCIAL SECURITY.
2. OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM.
CHAPTER 1
SOCIAL SECURITY1
SECTION
4-101. Intended to extend to all employees and officials not excluded by law
or this chapter.
4-102. Mayor authorized and directed to execute necessary agreements.
4-103. Withholdings from salaries or wages authorized.
4-104. Appropriations authorized for employer's contributions.
4-105. City to keep records and make reports.
4-106. All Cleveland Utility System employees, teachers and other employees
and officials not otherwise covered are hereby covered.
4-107. Employees not covered.
4-108. Effective date of coverage.
4-101. Intended to extend to all employees and officials not
excluded by law or this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the policy and
purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to the employees and officials
thereof, not excluded by law or this chapter, and whether employed in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the
system of federal old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the Federal
Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734, 81st
Congress, and Public Law 761, 83rd Congress and any amendment thereto that
may be enacted hereafter, and by Priv. Acts 1955, chapter 201, of the General
Assembly of Tennessee. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the
city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws
or regulations. (1981 Code, § 2-152)
4-102. Mayor authorized and directed to execute necessary
agreements. The mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to
execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 8-38-108--8-38-114.
4-2
executive director of old age insurance, as agent or agency, to secure coverage
of employees and officials as provided in § 4-101 of this chapter. (1981 Code,
§ 2-153)
4-103. Withholdings from salaries or wages authorized.
Contributions of withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials
for the purpose provided in § 4-101, hereof, are hereby authorized to be made
and required to be paid in the amounts and at such times as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the
state or federal agency designated by said laws or regulations. Such
contributions shall be collected by deducting the amount of such contributions
from wages and salaries as and when paid but failure to make such deductions
shall not relieve the officer or employee from liability for such contributions.
Refunds or corrections may be made in such contributions or withholdings to
correct errors of calculation. (1981 Code, § 2-154)
4-104. Appropriations authorized for employer's contributions.
There shall be and hereby is appropriated from available funds such amounts
as may from time to time be required by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations for employer's contributions, which shall be paid over to the state
or federal agency designated by said laws or regulations. (1981 Code, § 2-155)
4-105. City to keep records and make reports. The city shall keep
such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state and
federal laws or regulations. (1981 Code, § 2-156)
4-106. All Cleveland Utility System employees, teachers and other
employees and officials not otherwise covered are hereby covered. (1)
This chapter shall apply to all employees and officials of the Cleveland utilities.
(2) It shall also apply to all teachers, principals, supervisors,
attendance teachers, special education teachers, the city superintendent of
schools and all other employees of the city. In executing contracts and
agreements hereto with the state executive director of old age insurance, the
mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to exclude part-time, temporary and
emergency employees and officials. There is hereby excluded from this section
any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any
employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other
ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city,
except the retirement system or plan now in effect for employees and officials
of the Cleveland utilities. Also, excepted is the teacher's plan. This chapter and
any contracts or agreements executed pursuant thereto shall not operate to
affect the rights of any teacher, officer or employee under the teachers
retirement system of the state. (1981 Code, § 2-157, modified)
4-3
4-107. Employees not covered. There is hereby excluded from this
chapter any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or
any employee or official, compensation for which is on fee basis, or any position,
or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations. (1981 Code, § 2-158)
4-108. Effective date of coverage. (1) The effective date for the
coverage of teachers and other school system employees was January 1, 1956.
(2) The effective date for the coverage of the Cleveland Utility System
employees was July 9, 1956.
(3) The effective date for the coverage of all other city employees was
January 1, 1951. (1981 Code, § 2-159, modified)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 4-4
CHAPTER 2
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM1
SECTION
4-201. Title.
4-202. In general.
4-203. Coverage.
4-204. Standards authorized.
4-205. Variances from standards authorized.
4-206. Administration.
4-207. Funding the program plan.
4-208. Plan of operation for the occupational safety and health program plan
for the employees of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
4-209. [Deleted.]
4-210. [Deleted.]
4-211. [Deleted.]
4-212. [Deleted.]
4-213. [Deleted.]
4-214. [Deleted.]
4-215. [Deleted.]
4-216. [Deleted.]
4-217. [Deleted.]
4-218. [Deleted.]
4-219. [Deleted.]
4-220. [Deleted.]
4-221. [Deleted.]
4-222. [Deleted.]
4-223. [Deleted.]
4-201. Title. This Chapter shall be known as "The Occupational Safety
and Health Program Plan" for the employees of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee. (1981 Code, § 2-126, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004,
Ord. #2010-28, July 2010, and Ord. #2013-10, June 2013 )
4-202. In general. The City of Cleveland, Tennessee, in electing to
update the established program plan, will maintain an effective and
comprehensive occupational safety and health program plan for its employees
and shall:
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 50-3-101 et seq.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-5
(1) Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of employment
that includes:
(a) Top management commitment and employee involvement;
(b) Continually analyze the worksite to identify all hazards and
potential hazards;
(c) Develop and maintain methods for preventing or controlling
the existing or potential hazards; and
(d) Train managers, supervisors, and employees to understand
and deal with worksite hazards.
(2) Acquire, maintain and require the use of safety equipment,
personal protective equipment and devices reasonably necessary to protect
employees.
(3) Record, keep, preserve, and make available to the Commissioner
of Labor and Workforce Development, or persons within the Department of
Labor and Workforce Development to whom such responsibilities have been
delegated, adequate records of all occupational accidents and illnesses and
personal injuries for proper evaluation and necessary corrective action as
required.
(4) Consult with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development with regard to the adequacy of the form and content of records.
(5) Consult with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development, as appropriate, regarding safety and health problems which are
considered to be unusual or peculiar and are such that they cannot be achieved
under a standard promulgated by the state.
(6) Provide reasonable opportunity for the participation of employees
in the effectuation of the objectives of this program plan, including the
opportunity to make anonymous complaints concerning conditions or practices
injurious to employee safety and health.
(7) Provide for education and training of personnel for the fair and
efficient administration of occupational safety and health standards, and
provide for education and notification of all employees of the existence of this
program plan. (1981 Code, § 2-127, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004,
Ord. #2010-28, July 2010, and Ord. #2013-10, June 2013)
4-203. Coverage. The provisions of the occupational safety and health
program plan for the employees of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee shall apply
to all employees of each administrative department, commission, board, division,
or other agency whether part-time or full-time, seasonal or permanent. Effective
7/1/2016, the provisions of the occupational safety and health program plan will
not apply to employees of Cleveland City Schools, Cleveland Utilities, and the
Cleveland Bradley County 911 center. (1981 Code, § 2-128, as replaced by Ord.
#2004-34, Sept. 2004, Ord. #2010-28, July 2010, Ord. #2013-10, June 2013, and
Ord. #2016-14, May 2014)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 4-6
4-204. Standards authorized. The occupational safety and health
standards adopted by the City of Cleveland, Tennessee are the same as, but not
limited to, the State of Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Standards
promulgated, or which may be promulgated, in accordance with section 6 of
Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 (Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 50, chapter 3). (1981 Code, § 2-129, as replaced by Ord.
#2004-34, Sept. 2004, Ord. #2010-28, July 2010, and Ord. #2013-10, June 2013)
4-205. Variances from standards authorized. Upon written
application to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development of the
State of Tennessee, the City of Cleveland, Tennessee may request an order
granting a temporary variance from any approved standards. Applications for
variances shall be in accordance with Rules of Tennessee Department of Labor
and Workforce Development Occupational Safety and Health, VARIANCES
FROM OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS, chapter
0800-01-02, as authorized by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 50. Prior to
requesting such temporary variance, the City of Cleveland, Tennessee will notify
or serve notice to the city's employees, their designated representatives, or
interested parties and present them with an opportunity for a hearing. The
posting of notice on the main bulletin board shall be deemed sufficient notice to
employees. (1981 Code, § 2-130, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004,
Ord. #2010-28, July 2010, and Ord. #2013-10, June 2013)
4-206. Administration. For the purpose of this chapter, the city's
wellness, safety and risk manager (hereafter referred to herein as the "safety
director") is designated as the safety director of occupational safety and health
to perform duties and to exercise powers assigned to plan, develop, and
administer this program plan. The safety director shall develop a plan of
operation for the program plan in accordance with Rules of Tennessee
Department of Labor and Workforce Development Occupational Safety and
Health, SAFETY AND HEALTH PROVISIONS FOR THE PUBLIC SECTOR,
chapter 0800-01-05, as authorized by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 50. (1981
Code, § 2-131, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34, Sept, 2004, Ord. #2010-28, July
2010, and Ord. #2013-10, June 2013)
4-207. Funding the program plan. Sufficient funds for administering
and staffing the program plan pursuant to this chapter shall be made available
as authorized by the city council. (1981 Code, § 2-132, as replaced by Ord. #2004-
34, Sept. 2004, Ord. #2010-28, July 2010, Ord. #2013-10, June 2013)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 4-7
4-208. Plan of operation for the occupational safety and health
program plan for the employees of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee.1
SUB-SECTION PAGE
I. PURPOSE AND COVERAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-8
II. DEFINITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-9
III. EMPLOYER'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-11
IV. EMPLOYEE'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-11
V. ADMINISTRATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-13
VI. STANDARDS AUTHORIZED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-14
VII. VARIANCE PROCEDURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-15
VIII. RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-16
IX. EMPLOYEE COMPLAINT PROCEDURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-17
X. EDUCATION AND TRAINING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-18
XI. GENERAL INSPECTION PROCEDURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-20
XII. IMMINENT DANGER PROCEDURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-21
XIII. ABATEMENT ORDERS AND HEARINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-23
XIV. PENALTIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-23
XV. CONFIDENTIALITY OF PRIVILEGED INFORMATION . . . . . . 4-24
XVI. DISCRIMINATION INVESTIGATIONS AND SANCTIONS . . . . . 4-24
XVII. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS NOT EXCUSED . . . . . . . . 4-24
APPENDICES
1The program plan has been added in its original format.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 4-8
I. WORK LOCATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-26
II. NOTICE TO ALL EMPLOYEES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-27
III. PROGRAM PLAN BUDGET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-29
IV. ACCIDENT REPORTING PROCEDURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-30
I. PURPOSE AND COVERAGE
The purpose of this plan is to provide guidelines and procedures for
implementing the Occupational Safety and Health Program Plan for the
employees of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
This plan is applicable to all employees, part-time or full-time, seasonal or
permanent.
The City of Cleveland, Tennessee, is electing to update and maintain an
effective Occupational Safety and Health Program Plan for its employees to:
a. Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of employment.
b. Require the use of safety equipment, personal protective
equipment, and other devices where reasonably necessary to
protect employees.
c. Make, keep, preserve, and make available to the Commissioner of
Labor and Workforce Development, his designated representatives,
or persons within the Department of Labor and Workforce
Development to whom such responsibilities have been delegated,
including the Safety Director of the Division of Occupational Safety
and Health, adequate records of all occupational accidents and
illnesses and personal injuries for proper evaluation and necessary
corrective action as required.
d. Consult with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development or his designated representative with regard to the
adequacy of the form and content of such records.
e. Consult with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development regarding safety and health problems which are
considered to be unusual or peculiar and are such that they cannot
be resolved under an occupational safety and health standard
promulgated by the State.
f. Assist the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or
his monitoring activities to determine Program Plan effectiveness
and compliance with the occupational safety and health standards.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-9
g. Make a report to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development annually, or as may otherwise be required, including
information on occupational accidents, injuries, and illnesses and
accomplishments and progress made toward achieving the goals of
the Occupational Safety and Health Program Plan.
h. Provide reasonable opportunity for and encourage the participation
of employees in the effectuation of the objectives of this Program
Plan, including the opportunity to make anonymous complaints
concerning conditions or practices which may be injurious to
employees' safety and health.
II. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Program Plan, the following definitions apply:
a. COMMISSIONER OF LABOR and Workforce Development means
the chief executive officer of the Tennessee Department of Labor
and Workforce Development. This includes any person appointed,
designated, or deputized to perform the duties or to exercise the
powers assigned to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development.
b. EMPLOYER means the City of Cleveland, Tennessee and includes
each administrative department, board, commission, division, or
other agency of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee. Effective
7/1/2016, the provisions of the occupational safety and health
program plan will not apply to employees of Cleveland City
Schools, Cleveland Utilities, and the Cleveland Bradley County
911 center.
c. SAFETY DIRECTOR OF OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND
HEALTH or SAFETY DIRECTOR means the person designated
by the City to perform duties or to exercise powers assigned so as
to plan, develop, and administer the Occupational Safety and
Health Program Plan for the employees of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee.
d. INSPECTOR(S) means the individual(s) appointed or designated
by the Safety Director of Occupational Safety and Health to
conduct inspections provided for herein. If no such compliance
inspector(s) is appointed, inspections shall be conducted by the
Safety Director of Occupational Safety and Health.
e. APPOINTING AUTHORITY means any official or group of officials
of the employer having legally designated powers of appointment,
employment, or removal there from for a specific department,
board, commission, division, or other agency of this employer.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-10
f. EMPLOYEE means any person performing services for this
employer and listed on the payroll of this employer, either as
part-time, full-time, seasonal, or permanent. It also includes any
persons normally classified as volunteers provided such persons
received remuneration of any kind for their services. This
definition shall not include independent contractors, their agents,
servants, and employees. Effective 7/1/2016, the provisions of the
occupational safety and health program plan will not apply to
employees of Cleveland City Schools, Cleveland Utilities, and the
Cleveland Bradley County 911 center, and employees of Cleveland
City Schools, Cleveland Utilities and Cleveland Bradley County
911 center will no longer be included within the definition of
employee.
g. PERSON means one or more individuals, partnerships,
associations, corporations, business trusts, or legal representatives
of any organized group of persons.
h. STANDARD means an occupational safety and health standard
promulgated by the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development in accordance with Section VI (6) of the Tennessee
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 which requires
conditions or the adoption or the use of one or more practices,
means, methods, operations, or processes or the use of equipment
or personal protective equipment necessary or appropriate to
provide safe and healthful conditions and places of employment.
i. IMMINENT DANGER means any conditions or practices in any
place of employment which are such that a hazard exists which
could reasonably be expected to cause death or serious physical
harm immediately or before the imminence of such hazard can be
eliminated through normal compliance enforcement procedures.
j. ESTABLISHMENT or WORKSITE means a single physical
location under the control of this employer where business is
conducted, services are rendered, or industrial type operations are
performed.
k. SERIOUS INJURY or HARM means that type of harm that would
cause permanent or prolonged impairment of the body in that:
1. A part of the body would be permanently removed (e.g.,
amputation of an arm, leg, finger(s); loss of an eye) or
rendered functionally useless or substantially reduced in
efficiency on or off the job (e.g., leg shattered so severely
that mobility would be permanently reduced), or
2. A part of an internal body system would be inhibited in its
normal performance or function to such a degree as to
shorten life or cause reduction in physical or mental
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-11
efficiency (e.g., lung impairment causing shortness of
breath).
On the other hand, simple fractures, cuts, bruises, concussions, or
similar injuries would not fit either of these categories and would
not constitute serious physical harm.
l. ACT or TOSH Act shall mean the Tennessee Occupational Safety
and Health Act of 1972.
m. GOVERNING BODY means the City Council of the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee.
n. CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER means the City Manager of the
City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
III. EMPLOYER'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Rights and duties of the employer shall include, but are not limited to, the
following provisions:
a. Employer shall furnish to each employee conditions of employment
and a place of employment free from recognized hazards that are
causing or are likely to cause death or serious injury or harm to
employees.
b. Employer shall comply with occupational safety and health
standards and regulations promulgated pursuant to Section VI (6)
of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972.
c. Employer shall refrain from and unreasonable restraint on the
right of the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development to
inspect the employers place(s) of business. Employer shall assist
the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development in the
performance of their monitoring duties by supplying or by making
available information, personnel, or aids reasonably necessary to
the effective conduct of the monitoring activity.
d. Employer is entitled to participate in the development of standards
by submission of comments on proposed standards, participation
in hearing on proposed standards, or by requesting the
development of standards on a given issue under Section 6 of the
Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972.
e. Employer is entitled to request an order granting a variance from
an occupational safety and health standard.
f. Employer is entitled to protection of its legally privileged
communication.
g. Employer shall inspect all worksites to insure the provisions of this
Program Plan are complied with and carried out.
h. Employer shall notify and inform any employee who has been or is
being exposed in a biologically significant manner to harmful
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-12
agents or material in excess of the applicable standard and of
corrective action being taken.
i. Employer shall notify all employees of their rights and duties
under this Program Plan.
IV. EMPLOYEE'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Rights and duties of employees shall include, but are not limited to, the
following provisions:
a. Each employee shall comply with occupational safety and health
act standards and all rules, regulations, and orders issued
pursuant to this Program Plan and the Tennessee Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1972 which are applicable to his or her
own actions and conduct.
b. Each employee shall be notified by the placing of a notice upon
bulletin boards, or other places of common passage, of any
application for a permanent or temporary order granting the
employer a variance from any provision of the TOSH Act or any
standard or regulation promulgated under the Act.
c. Each employee shall be given the opportunity to participate in any
hearing which concerns an application by the employer for a
variance from a standard or regulation promulgated under the Act.
d. Any employee who may be adversely affected by a standard or
variance issued pursuant to the Act or this Program Plan may file
a petition with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development or whoever is responsible for the promulgation of the
standard or the granting of the variance.
e. Any employee who has been exposed or is being exposed to toxic
materials or harmful physical agents in concentrations or at levels
in excess of that provided for by any applicable standard shall be
provided by the employer with information on any significant
hazards to which they are or have been exposed, relevant
symptoms, and proper conditions for safe use or exposure.
Employees shall also be informed of corrective action being taken.
f. Subject to regulations issued pursuant to this Program Plan, any
employee or authorized representative of employees shall be given
the right to request an inspection and to consult with the Safety
Director or Inspector at the time of the physical inspection of the
worksite.
g. Any employee may bring to the attention of the Safety Director any
violation or suspected violations of the standards or any other
health or safety hazards.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-13
h. No employee shall be discharged or discriminated against because
such employee has filed any complaint or instituted or caused to be
instituted any proceeding or inspection under or relating to this
Program Plan.
i. Any employee who believes that he or she has been discriminated
against or discharged in violation of subsection (h) of this section
may file a complaint alleging such discrimination with the Safety
Director. Such employee may also, within thirty (30) days after
such violation occurs, file a complaint with the Commissioner of
Labor and Workforce Development alleging such discrimination.
j. Nothing in this or any other provisions of this Program Plan shall
be deemed to authorize or require any employee to undergo
medical examination, immunization, or treatment for those who
object thereto on religious grounds, except where such is necessary
for the protection of the health or safety or others or when a
medical examination may be reasonably required for performance
of a specific job.
k. Employees shall report any accident, injury, or illness resulting
from their job, however minor it may seem to be, to their
supervisor or the Safety Director within twenty-four (24) hours
after the occurrence.
V. ADMINISTRATION
a. The Safety Director of Occupational Safety and Health is
designated to perform duties or to exercise powers assigned so as
to administer this Occupational Safety and Health Program Plan.
1. The Safety Director may designate person or persons as he
deems necessary to carry out the Safety Director's powers,
duties, and responsibilities under this Program Plan.
2. The Safety Director may delegate the power to make
inspections, provided procedures employed are as effective
as those employed by the Safety Director.
3. The Safety Director shall employ measures to coordinate, to
the extent possible, activities of all departments to promote
efficiency and to minimize any inconveniences under this
Program Plan.
4. The Safety Director may request qualified technical
personnel from any department or section of government to
assist the Safety Director in making compliance inspections,
accident investigations, or as the Safety Director may
otherwise deem necessary and appropriate in order to carry
out the Safety Director's duties under this Program Plan.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-14
5. The Safety Director shall prepare the report to the
Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development
required by subsection (g) of Section 1 of this plan.
6. The Safety Director shall make or cause to be made periodic
and follow-up inspections of all facilities and worksites
where employees of this employer are employed. The Safety
Director shall make recommendations to correct any
hazards or exposures observed. The Safety Director shall
make or cause to be made any inspections required by
complaints submitted by employees or inspections requested
by employees.
7. The Safety Director shall assist any officials of the employer
in the investigation of occupational accidents or illnesses.
8. The Safety Director shall maintain or cause to be
maintained records required under Section VIII of this plan.
9. The Safety Director shall, in the eventuality that there is a
fatality or an accident resulting in the hospitalization of
three or more employees insure that the Commissioner of
Labor and Workforce Development receives notification of
the occurrence within eight (8) hours.
b. The administrative or operational head of each department,
division, board, or other agency of this employer shall be
responsible for the implementation of this Occupational Safety and
Health Program Plan within their respective areas.
1. The administrative or operational head shall follow the
directions of the Safety Director on all issues involving
occupational safety and health of employees as set forth in
this plan.
2. The administrative or operational head shall comply with
all abatement orders issued in accordance with the
provisions of this plan or request a review of the order with
the Safety Director within the abatement period.
3. The administrative or operational head should make
periodic safety surveys of the establishment under his
jurisdiction to become aware of hazards or standards
violations that may exist and make an attempt to
immediately correct such hazards or violations.
4. The administrative or operational head shall investigate all
occupational accidents, injuries, or illnesses reported to him.
The administrative or operational head shall report such
accidents, injuries, or illnesses to the Safety Director along
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-15
with their findings and/or recommendations in accordance
with APPENDIX IV of this plan.
VI. STANDARDS AUTHORIZED
The standards adopted under this Program Plan are the applicable standards
developed and promulgated under Section VI (6) of the Tennessee Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1972. Additional standards may be promulgated by
the governing body of this employer as that body may deem necessary for the
safety and health of employees. Note: 29 CFR 1910 General Industry
Regulations; 29 CFR 1926 Construction Industry Regulations; and the Rules of
Tennessee Department of Labor and Workforce Development Occupational
Safety and Health, CHAPTER 0800-01-1 through CHAPTER 0800-01-11 are the
standards and rules invoked.
VII. VARIANCE PROCEDURE
The Safety Director may apply for a variance as a result of a complaint from an
employee or of his knowledge of certain hazards or exposures. The Safety
Director should definitely believe that a variance is needed before the
application for a variance is submitted to the Commissioner of Labor and
Workforce Development.
The procedure for applying for a variance to the adopted safety and health
standards is as follows:
a. The application for a variance shall be prepared in writing and
shall contain:
1. A specification of the standard or portion thereof from which
the variance is sought.
2. A detailed statement of the reason(s) why the employer is
unable to comply with the standard supported by
representations by qualified personnel having first-hand
knowledge of the facts represented.
3. A statement of the steps employer has taken and will take
(with specific date) to protect employees against the hazard
covered by the standard.
4. A statement of when the employer expects to comply and
what steps have or will be taken (with dates specified) to
come into compliance with the standard.
5. A certification that the employer has informed employees,
their authorized representative(s), and/or interested parties
by giving them a copy of the request, posting a statement
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-16
summarizing the application (to include the location of a
copy available for examination) at the places where
employee notices are normally posted and by other
appropriate means. The certification shall contain a
description of the means actually used to inform employees
and that employees have been informed of their right to
petition the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development for a hearing.
b. The application for a variance should be sent to the Commissioner
of Labor and Workforce Development by registered or certified
mail.
c. The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development will
review the application for a variance and may deny the request or
issue an order granting the variance. An order granting a variance
shall be issued only if it has been established that:
1. The employer
i. Is unable to comply with the standard by the effective
date because of unavailability of professional or
technical personnel or materials and equipment
required or necessary construction or alteration of
facilities or technology.
ii. Has taken all available steps to safeguard employees
against the hazard(s) covered by the standard.
iii. Has as effective Program Plan for coming into
compliance with the standard as quickly as possible.
2. The employee is engaged in an experimental Program Plan
as described in subsection (b), section 13 of the Act.
d. A variance may be granted for a period of no longer than is
required to achieve compliance or one (1) year, whichever is
shorter.
e. Upon receipt of an application for an order granting a variance, the
Commissioner to whom such application is addressed may issue an
interim order granting such a variance for the purpose of
permitting time for an orderly consideration of such application.
No such interim order may be effective for longer than one
hundred eighty (180) days.
f. The order or interim order granting a variance shall be posted at
the worksite and employees notified of such order by the same
means used to inform them of the application for said variance (see
subsection (a)(5) of this section).
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-17
VIII. RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING
Recording and reporting of all occupational accident, injuries, and illnesses shall
be in accordance with instructions and on forms prescribed in the booklet. You
can get a copy of the Forms for Recordkeeping from the internet. Go to
ww.osha.gov and click on Recordkeeping Forms located on the home page.
The position responsible for recordkeeping is shown on the SAFETY AND
HEALTH ORGANIZATIONAL CHART, Appendix IV to this plan.
Details of how reports of occupational accidents, injuries, and illnesses will
reach the record keeper are specified by ACCIDENT REPORTING
PROCEDURES, Appendix IV to this plan. The Rule of Tennessee Department
of Labor and Workforce Development Occupational Safety and Health,
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH RECORD-KEEPING AND
REPORTING, CHAPTER 0800-01-03, as authorized by T.C.A., Title 50.
IX. EMPLOYEE COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
If any employee feels that the employee is assigned to work in conditions which
might affect the employee's health, safety, or general welfare at the present time
or at any time in the future, the employee should report the condition to the
Safety Director of Occupational Safety and Health.
a. The complaint should be in the form of a letter and give details on
the condition(s) and how the employee believes it affects or will
affect the employee's health, safety, or general welfare. The
employee should sign the letter but need not do so if the employee
wishes to remain anonymous (see subsection (h) of Section 1 of this
plan).
b. Upon receipt of the complaint letter, the Safety Director will
evaluate the condition(s) and institute any corrective action, if
warranted. Within ten (10) working days following the receipt of
the complaint, the Safety Director will answer the complaint in
writing stating whether or not the complaint is deemed to be valid
and if no, why not, what action has been or will be taken to correct
or abate the condition(s), and giving a designated time period for
correction or abatement. Answers to anonymous complaints will
be posted upon bulletin boards or other places of common passage
where the anonymous complaint may be reasonably expected to be
seen by the complainant for a period of three (3) working days.
c. If the complainant finds the reply not satisfactory because it was
held to be invalid, the corrective action is felt to be insufficient, or
the time period for correction is felt to be too long, the employee
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-18
may forward a letter to the Chief Executive Officer or to the
governing body explaining the condition(s) cited in the employee's
original complaint and why the employee believes the answer to be
inappropriate or insufficient.
d. The Chief Executive Officer or a representative of the governing
body will evaluate the complaint and will begin to take action to
correct or abate the condition(s) through arbitration or
administrative sanctions or may find the complaint to be invalid.
An answer will be sent to the complainant within ten (10) working
days following receipt of the complaint or the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the governing body following receipt of the
complaint explaining decisions made and action taken or to be
taken.
e. After the above steps have been followed and the complainant is
still not satisfied with the results, the employee may then file a
complaint with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development. Any complaint filed with the Commissioner of Labor
and Workforce Development in such cases shall include copies of
all related correspondence with the Safety Director and the Chief
Executive Officer or the representative of the governing body.
f. Copies of all complaint and answers thereto will be filed by the
Safety Director who shall make them available to the
Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or his
designated representative upon request.
X. EDUCATION AND TRAINING
a. Safety Director and/or Compliance Inspector(s):
1. Arrangements will be made for the Safety Director and/or
Compliance Inspector(s) to attend training seminars,
workshops, etc., conducted by the State of Tennessee or
other agencies. A list of Seminars can be obtained.
2. Access will be made to reference materials such as 29 CFR
1910 General Industry Regulations; 29 CFR 1926
Construction Industry Regulations; The Rules of Tennessee
Department of Labor and Workforce Development
Occupational Safety and Health, and other
equipment/supplies, deemed necessary for use in conducting
compliance inspections, conducting local training, wiring
technical reports, and informing officials, supervisors, and
employees of the existence of safety and health hazards will
be furnished.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-19
b. All Employees (including supervisory personnel):
A suitable safety and health training program for employees will be
established. This program will, as a minimum:
1. Instruct each employee in the recognition and avoidance of
hazards or unsafe conditions and of standards and
regulations applicable to the employees work environment
to control or eliminate any hazards, unsafe conditions, or
other exposures to occupational illness or injury.
2. Instruct employees who are required to handle or use
poisons, acids, caustics, toxicants, flammable liquids, or
gases including explosives, and other harmful substances in
the proper handling procedures and use of such items and
make them aware of the personal protective measures,
person hygiene, etc., which may be required.
3. Instruct employees who may be exposed to environments
where harmful plants or animals are present, of the hazards
of the environment, how to best avoid injury or exposure,
and the first aid procedures to be followed in the event of
injury or exposure.
4. Instruct all employees of the common deadly hazards and
how to avoid them, such as Falls; Equipment Turnover;
Electrocution; Struck by/Caught In; Trench Cave In; Heat
Stress and Drowning.
5. Instruct employees on hazards and dangers of confined or
enclosed spaces.
i. Confined or enclosed space means space having a
limited means of egress and which is subject to the
accumulation of toxic or flammable contaminants or
has an oxygen deficient atmosphere. Confined or
enclosed spaces include, but are not limited to,
storage tanks, boilers, ventilation or exhaust ducts,
sewers, underground utility accesses, tunnels,
pipelines, and open top spaces more than four feet (4)
in depth such as pits, tubs, vaults, and vessels.
ii. Employees will be given general instruction on
hazards involved, precautions to be taken, and on use
of personal protective and emergency equipment
required. They shall also be instructed on all specific
standards or regulations that apply to work in
dangerous or potentially dangerous areas.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-20
iii. The immediate supervisor of any employee who must
perform work in a confined or enclosed space shall be
responsible for instructing employees on danger of
hazards which may be present, precautions to be
taken, and use of personal protective and emergency
equipment, immediately prior to their entry into such
an area and shall require use of appropriate personal
protective equipment.
XI. GENERAL INSPECTION PROCEDURES
It is the intention of the governing body and responsible officials to have an
Occupational Safety and Health Program Plan that will insure the welfare of
employees. In order to be aware of hazards, periodic inspections must be
performed. These inspections will enable the finding of hazards or unsafe
conditions or operations that will need correction in order to maintain safe and
healthful worksites. Inspections made on a pre-designated basis may not yield
the desired results. Inspections will be conducted, therefore, on a random basis
at intervals not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days.
a. In order to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance, the Safety
Director and/or Compliance Inspector(s), if appointed, is
authorized:
1. To enter at any reasonable time, any establishment, facility,
or worksite where work is being performed by an employee
when such establishment, facility, or worksite is under the
jurisdiction of the employer and;
2. To inspect and investigate during regular working hours
and at other reasonable times, within reasonable limits, and
in a reasonable manner, any such place of employment and
all pertinent conditions, processes, structures, machines,
apparatus, devices, equipment, and materials therein, and
to question privately any supervisor, operator, agent, or
employee working therein.
b. If an imminent danger situation is found, alleged, or otherwise
brought to the attention of the Safety Director or Inspector during
a routine inspection, they shall immediately inspect the imminent
danger situation in accordance with Section XII of this plan before
inspecting the remaining portions of the establishment, facility, or
worksite.
c. An administrative representative of the employer and a
representative authorized by the employees shall be given an
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-21
opportunity to consult with and/or to accompany the Safety
Director or Inspector during the physical inspection of any
worksite for the purpose of aiding such inspection.
d. The right of accompaniment may be denied any person whose
conduct interferes with a full and orderly inspection.
e. The conduct of the inspection shall be such as to preclude
unreasonable disruptions of the operation(s) of the workplace.
f. Interviews of employees during the course of the inspection may be
made when such interviews are considered essential to
investigative techniques.
g. Advance Notice of Inspections.
1. Generally, advance notice of inspections will not be given as
this precludes the opportunity to make minor or temporary
adjustments in an attempt to create misleading impression
of conditions in an establishment.
2. There may be occasions when advance notice of inspections
will be necessary in order to conduct an effective inspection
or investigation. When advance notice of inspection is
given, employees or their authorized representative(s) will
also be given notice of the inspection.
h. The Safety Director need not personally make an inspection of
each and every worksite once every thirty (30) days. The Safety
Director may delegate the responsibility for such inspections to
supervisors or other personnel provided:
1. Inspections conducted by supervisors or other personnel are
at least as effective as those made by the Safety Director.
2. Records are made of the inspections, any discrepancies
found and corrective actions taken. This information is
forwarded to the Safety Director.
i. The Safety Director shall maintain records of inspections to
include identification of worksite inspected, date of inspection,
description of violations of standards or other unsafe conditions or
practices found, and corrective action taken toward abatement.
Those inspection records shall be subject to review by the
Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development or his
authorized representative.
XII. IMMINENT DANGER PROCEDURES
a. Any discovery, any allegation, or any report of imminent danger
shall be handled in accordance with the following procedures:
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-22
1. The Safety Director shall immediately be informed of the
alleged imminent danger situation and shall immediately
ascertain whether there is a reasonable basis for the
allegation.
2. If the alleged imminent danger situation is determined to
have merit by the Safety Director, the Safety Director shall
make or cause to be made an immediate inspection of the
alleged imminent danger location.
3. As soon as it is concluded from such inspection that
conditions or practices exist which constitutes an imminent
danger, the Safety Director or Compliance Inspector shall
attempt to have the danger corrected. All employees at the
location shall be informed of the danger and the supervisor
or person in charge of the worksite shall be requested to
remove employees from the area, if deemed necessary.
4. The administrative or operational head of the workplace in
which the imminent danger exists, or their authorized
representative, shall be responsible for determining the
manner in which the imminent danger situation will be
abated. This shall be done in cooperation with the Safety
Director or Compliance Inspector and to the mutual
satisfaction of all parties involved.
5. The imminent danger shall be deemed abated if:
i. The imminence of the danger has been eliminated by
removal of employees from the area of danger.
ii. Conditions or practices which resulted in the
imminent danger have been eliminated or corrected
to the point where an unsafe condition or practice no
longer exists.
6. A written report shall be made by or to the Safety Director
describing in detail the imminent danger and its abatement.
This report will be maintained by the Safety Director in
accordance with subsection (i) of Section XI of this plan.
b. Refusal to Abate.
1. Any refusal to abate an imminent danger situation shall be
reported to the Safety Director and Chief Executive Officer
immediately.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-23
2. The Safety Director and/or Chief Executive Officer shall
take whatever action may be necessary to achieve
abatement.
XIII. ABATEMENT ORDERS AND HEARINGS
a. Whenever, as a result of an inspection or investigation, the Safety
Director or Compliance Inspector(s) finds that a worksite is not in
compliance with the standards, rules or regulations pursuant to
this plan and is unable to negotiate abatement with the
administrative or operational head of the worksite within a
reasonable period of time, the Safety Director shall:
1. Issue an abatement order to the head of the worksite.
2. Post or cause to be posted, a copy of the abatement order at
or near each location referred to in the abatement order.
b. Abatement orders shall contain the following information:
1. The standard, rule, or regulation which was found to
violated.
2. A description of the nature and location of the violation.
3. A description of what is required to abate or correct the
violation.
4. A reasonable period of time during which the violation must
be abated or corrected.
c. At any time within ten (10) days after receipt of an abatement
order, anyone affected by the order may advise the Safety Director
in writing of any objections to the terms and conditions of the
order. Upon receipt of such objections, the Safety Director shall
act promptly to hold a hearing with all interested and/or
responsible parties in an effort to resolve any objections. Following
such hearing, the Safety Director shall, within three (3) working
days, issue an abatement order and such subsequent order shall be
binding on all parties and shall be final.
XIV. PENALTIES
a. No civil or criminal penalties shall be issued against any official,
employee, or any other person for failure to comply with safety and
health standards or any rules or regulations issued pursuant to
this Program Plan.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-24
b. Any employee, regardless of status, who willfully and/or repeatedly
violates, or causes to be violated, any safety and health standard,
rule, or regulation or any abatement order shall be subject to
disciplinary action by the appointing authority. It shall be the
duty of the appointing authority to administer discipline by taking
action in one of the following ways as appropriate and warranted:
1. Oral reprimand.
2. Written reprimand.
3. Suspension for three (3) or more working days.
4. Termination of employment.
XV. CONFIDENTIALITY OF PRIVILEGED INFORMATION
All information obtained by or reported to the Safety Director pursuant to this
plan of operation or the legislation (ordinance, or executive order) enabling this
Occupational Safety and Health Program Plan which contains or might reveal
information which is otherwise privileged shall be considered confidential. Such
information may be disclosed to other officials or employees concerned with
carrying out this Program Plan or when relevant in any proceeding under this
Program Plan. Such information may also be disclosed to the Commissioner of
Labor and Workforce Development or their authorized representatives in
carrying out their duties under the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health
Act of 1972.
XVI. DISCRIMINATION INVESTIGATIONS AND SANCTIONS
The Rule of Tennessee Department of Labor and Workforce Development
Occupational Safety and Health, DISCRIMINATION AGAINST EMPLOYEES
EXERCISING RIGHTS UNDER THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND
HEALTH ACT OF 1972 0800-01-08, as authorized by T.C.A., Title 50. The
agency agrees that any employee who believes they have been discriminated
against or discharged in violation of Tenn. Code Ann § 50-3-409 can file a
complaint with their agency or Safety Director within 30 days, after the alleged
discrimination occurred. Also, the agency agrees the employee has a right to file
their complaint with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development
within the same 30 day period. The Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development may investigate such complaints, make recommendations, and/or
issue a written notification of a violation.
XVII. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS NOT EXCUSED
a. Compliance with any other law, statute, ordinance, or executive
order, which regulates safety and health in employment and places
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-25
of employment, shall not excuse the employer, the employee, or
any other person from compliance with the provisions of this
Program Plan.
b. Compliance with any provisions of this Program Plan or any
standard, rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant to this
Program Plan shall not excuse the employer, the employee, or any
other person from compliance with the law, statue, ordinance, or
executive order, as applicable, regulating and promoting safety and
health unless such law, statute, ordinance, or executive order, as
applicable, is specifically repealed.
________________________________________________________________________
Signature: Safety Director, Occupational Safety and Health and Date Signed
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-26
APPENDIX - I WORK LOCATIONS
CITY OF CLEVELAND, TN WORK LOCATIONS CHART
Department Address Phone # # of Employees
Gen. Government
(council)
190 Church St., NE Cleveland, TN
37311
423-472-4551 10
Administration &
Finance
190 Church St., NE Cleveland, TN
37311
423-472-4551 14
Fire Department 555 S. Ocoee St., Cleveland, TN
37311
423-476-6713 90
Development &
Engineering
Services
185 2nd St., Cleveland, TN 37311 423-479-1913 14
Public Works
Department
474 2nd St., NE Cleveland, TN 37311 423-472-2851 43
Police Department 100 Church St., NE Cleveland, TN
37311
423-476-1121 96
Cleveland Jetport 251 Dry Valley Rd. Cleveland, TN
37323
423-472-4343 1
Animal Control 360 Hill St., Cleveland, TN 37311 423-479-2122 8
College Hill 264 Berry St., Cleveland, TN 37311 423-479-6370 3
Parks & Recreation 160 2nd St., NE Cleveland, TN 37311 423-472-4551 16
Cleveland Community
Ctr.
1334 Church St., SE Cleveland, TN
37311
423-559-3322 4
Waterville Golf Course 3855 Dalton Pk., Cleveland, TN
37323
423-559-3348 6
Stormwater 185 2nd St., NE Cleveland, TN 37311 423-479-1913 2
Fleet 3055 Fulbright Rd., Cleveland, TN
37312
423-476-1963 7
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-27
APPENDIX - II NOTICE TO ALL EMPLOYEES
NOTICE TO ALL EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY OF CLEVELAND,
TENNESSEE
The Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 provide job safety
and health protection for Tennessee workers through the promotion of safe and
healthful working conditions. Under a plan reviewed by the Tennessee
Department of Labor and Workforce Development, this government, as an
employer, is responsible for administering the Act to its employees. Safety and
health standards are the same as state standards and jobsite inspections will
be conducted to insure compliance with the Act.
Employees shall be furnished conditions of employment and a place of
employment free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to cause
death or serious injury or harm to employees.
Each employee shall comply with occupational safety and health standards and
all rules, regulations, and orders issued pursuant to this program plan which
are applicable to his or her own actions and conduct.
Each employee shall be notified by the placing upon bulletin boards or other
places of common passage of any application for a temporary variance from any
standard or regulation.
Each employee shall be given the opportunity to participate in any hearing
which concerns an application for a variance from a standard.
Any employee who may be adversely affected by a standard or variance issued
pursuant to this program plan may file a petition with the safety director or the
city manager.
Any employee who has been exposed or is being exposed to toxic materials or
harmful physical agents in concentrations or at levels in excess of that provided
for by an applicable standard shall be notified by the employer and informed of
such exposure and corrective action being taken.
Subject to regulations issued pursuant to this program plan, any employee or
authorized representative(s) of employees shall be given the right to request an
inspection.
No employee shall be discharged or discriminated against because such
employee has filed any complaint or instituted or caused to be instituted any
proceedings or inspection under, or relating to, this program plan.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-28
Any employee who believes he or she has been discriminated against or
discharged in violation of these sections may, within thirty (30) days after such
violation occurs, have an opportunity to appear in a hearing before the city
manager for assistance in obtaining relief or to file a complaint with the
Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development alleging such
discrimination.
A copy of the Occupational Safety and Health Program Plan for the Employees
of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee is available for inspection by any employee
at the City Municipal Building or Annex during regular office hours.
__________________________________________________
Signature: MAYOR AND DATE
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-29
APPENDIX - III PROGRAM PLAN BUDGET
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Be assured that the City of Cleveland, Tennessee has sufficient financial
resources available or will make sufficient financial resources available as may
be required in order to administer and staff its Occupational Safety and Health
Program Plan and to comply with standards.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 4-30
APPENDIX - IV ACCIDENT REPORTING PROCEDURES
Employees shall report all accidents, injuries, or illnesses to their supervisors
as soon as possible, but not later than two (2) hours after their occurrence. The
supervisor will provide the administrative head of the department with a verbal
or telephone report of the accident as soon as possible, but not later than four
(4) hours, after the accident. If the accident involves loss of consciousness, a
fatality, broken bones, severed body member, or third degree burns, the safety
director will be notified by telephone immediately and will be given the name
of the injured, a description of the injury, and a brief description of how the
accident occurred. The supervisor will then make a thorough investigation of the
accident or illness (with the assistance of the safety director or compliance
inspector, if necessary) and will complete a written report on the accident or
illness and forward it to the safety director within seventy-two (72) hours after
the accident, injury, or first report of illness and will provide one (1) copy of the
written report to the record keeper.
Since Workers Compensation Form 6A or OSHA NO. 301 Form must be
completed; all reports submitted in writing to the person responsible for
recordkeeping shall include the following information as a minimum:
1. Accident location, if different from employer's mailing address and
state whether accident occurred on premises owned or operated by
employer.
2. Name, social security number, home address, age, sex, and
occupation (regular job title) of injured or ill employee.
3. Title of the department or division in which the injured or ill
employee is normally employed.
4. Specific description of what the employee was doing when injured.
5. Specific description of how the accident occurred.
6. A description of the injury or illness in detail and the part of the
body affected.
7. Name of the object or substance which directly injured the
employee.
8. Date and time of injury or diagnosis of illness.
9. Name and address of physician, if applicable.
10. If employee was hospitalized, name and address of hospital.
11. Date of report.
(1981 Code, § 2-133, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004, deleted by
Ord. #2010-28, July 2010, added by Ord. #2013-10, June 2013, and amended by
Ord. #2016-14, May 2014)
4-209. [Deleted]. (1981 Code, § 2-134, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34,
Sept. 2004, and deleted by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
Change 14, October 10, 2011 4-31
4-210. [Deleted]. (1981 Code, § 2-135, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34,
Sept. 2004, and deleted by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-211. [Deleted]. (1981 Code, § 2-136, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34,
Sept. 2004, and deleted by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-212. [Deleted]. (1981 Code, § 2-137, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34,
Sept. 2004, and deleted by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-213. [Deleted]. (1981 Code, § 2-138, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34,
Sept. 2004, and deleted by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-214. [Deleted]. (1981 Code, § 2-139, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34,
Sept. 2004, and deleted by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-215. [Deleted]. (1981 Code, § 2-140, as replaced by Ord. #2004-34,
Sept. 2004, and deleted by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-216. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004, and deleted
by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-217. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004, and deleted
by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-218. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004, and deleted
by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-219. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004, and deleted
by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-420. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004, amended by
Ord. #2005-03, March 2005, and Ord. #2008-51, Aug. 2008, and deleted by
Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-221. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004, and deleted
by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-222. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004, and deleted
by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
4-223. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2004-34, Sept. 2004, and deleted
by Ord. #2010-28, July 2010)
Change 17, July 23, 2018 5-1
TITLE 5
MUNICIPAL FINANCE AND TAXATION1
CHAPTER
1. PRIVILEGE TAXES.
2. REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES.
3. WHOLESALE BEER TAX.
4. PURCHASING DIVISION AND PROCEDURES.
5. SURETY BONDS.
6. HEALTH AND EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES BOARD.
CHAPTER 1
PRIVILEGE TAXES
SECTION
5-101. Tax levied.
5-102. License required.
5-101. Tax levied. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
code, there is hereby levied on all vocations, occupations, and businesses
declared by the general laws of the state to be privileges taxable by
municipalities, an annual privilege tax in the maximum amount allowed by
state laws. The taxes provided for in the state's "Business Tax Act" (Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 67-4-701, et seq.) are hereby expressly enacted, ordained, and
levied on the businesses, business activities, vocations, and occupations carried
on within the city at the rates and in the manner prescribed by the act. (1981
Code, § 12-1, modified)
5-102. License required. No person shall exercise any such privilege
within the city without a currently effective privilege license, which shall be
issued by the city clerk to each applicant therefor upon the applicant's payment
of the appropriate privilege tax. Violations of this section shall be punished
under the general penalty provisions of this code of ordinances.
1Charter references
Delinquent taxes; collection of: art. X, § 3.
Due and delinquent dates: art. X, § 2.
Levy of taxes: art. X, § 1.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 5-2
CHAPTER 2
REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
SECTION
5-201. When due and payable.
5-202. When delinquent; penalty and interest.
5-203. List of delinquents to be given to city attorney.
5-204. Partial payments of property taxes.
5-205. Tax relief.
5-201. When due and payable.1 Taxes levied by the city against real
and personal property shall become due and payable annually on the first day
of October of the year for which levied. (1981 Code, § 22-4, modified)
5-202. When delinquent; penalty and interest.2 All real property
taxes shall become delinquent on and after the first day of March next after they
become due and payable and shall be subject to a combined penalty and interest
of one and one-half (1½) percent per month on the first day of the month from
the first day of March that they become delinquent and each month thereafter
until they are paid. (1981 Code, § 22-4, modified)
5-203. List of delinquents to be given to city attorney. The clerk
shall collect all taxes which become delinquent on the first day of March by the
thirty-first day of the succeeding March if collectible. If not collectible, he shall
at that time make and certify a full and complete list of the delinquent real
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 67-1-701, 67-1-702 and 67-1-801, read
together, permit a municipality to collect its own property taxes if its
charter authorizes it to do so, or to turn over the collection of its
property taxes to the county trustee. Apparently, under those same
provisions, if a municipality collects its own property taxes, tax due
and delinquency dates are as prescribed by the charter; if the county
trustee collects them, the tax due date is the first Monday in October,
and the delinquency date is the following March 1.
2State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-5-2010(b) provides that if the county
trustee collects the municipality's property taxes, a penalty of 1/2 of
1% and interest of 1% shall be added on the first day of March
following the tax due date, and on the first day of each succeeding
month.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 5-3
estate taxes and deliver the same to the city attorney on the following April 1st
for violation of suit as provided in state law. (1981 Code, § 22-6, modified)
5-204. Partial payments of property taxes. (1) The city clerk may
accept partial payments of property taxes beginning on the first Monday of
October of the year for which the tax is levied. Notwithstanding the city's
acceptance of partial payments, the entire amount of taxes due must be paid in
full prior to the first day of March.
(2) Partial payments of property taxes may be paid in one (1) of two (2)
ways:
(a) Partial payments by electronic funds transfer. Taxpayers
who wish to sign up for partial payments by electronic funds transfer may
do so by completing a written twelve (12) month payment plan, along
with a written authorization agreement for direct (ACH) payments.
In order to enroll in this program, taxpayers must complete the
required forms by February 15 of a calendar year in order to be eligible
to participate in the program for that same calendar year or any
subsequent year.
Once a taxpayer signs up for partial payments by electronic funds
transfer, the authorization shall remain in effect until the taxpayer
notifies the city in writing that the taxpayer no longer desires to
participate in the program and cancels the written authorization for
direct (ACH) payments.
Monthly payments will be deducted beginning on March 15th, and
on the 15th day of each month thereafter.
For taxpayers who wish to participate in this program and pay
partial payments on more than one (1) parcel, a separate form must be
completed for each such parcel.
Partial payments by electronic funds transfer will not be accepted
for delinquent taxes.
(b) Partial payments by cash, check, money order or credit card.
Partial tax payments may also be paid by check, cash, money order or
credit card.
These partial payments may be paid for any tax that is payable at
the city clerk's office, even a delinquent tax. However, partial payments
may not be accepted for a delinquent tax that has been turned over to the
clerk and master's office.
A form must be completed by the taxpayer before a taxpayer may
participate in this program.
For taxpayers who wish to participate in this program and pay
partial payments on more than one parcel, a separate form must be
completed for each parcel.
(3) Prior to the final reading of the ordinance creating this section, the
city clerk shall transmit to the State Comptroller of the Treasury a copy of the
Change 17, July 23, 2018 5-4
ordinance, which shall serve as the plan required by Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 6-56-109(b). To fulfill the requirements of that section, the city hereby declares
that:
(a) The city has the appropriate accounting technology to
implement this program; and,
(b) The city can implement this program within existing
resources. (as added by Ord. #2014-51, Jan. 2015, and amended by Ord.
#2015-41, Dec. 2015)
5-205. Tax relief. Pursuant to the authority granted by Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 67-5-701(j)(1), the City of Cleveland hereby appropriates public
funds for the purpose of providing additional tax relief for those persons who
qualify to receive tax relief from the State of Tennessee under the State of
Tennessee's tax relief program.
Elderly low-income homeowners as described in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 67-5-702, disabled homeowners as described in Tennessee Code
Annotated,§ 67-5-703, and disabled veterans as described in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 67-5-704 will be eligible to receive additional tax relief from the
City of Cleveland in an amount equal to the amount of tax relief provided by the
State; provided, however, that in no event shall the total amount of tax relief
allowed by the state and the city exceed the total taxes actually paid.
Only those taxpayers who qualify under Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 67-5-702 through Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-5-704 are eligible for such
additional tax relief from the city, these eligible taxpayers must have previously
applied for and obtained the relief authorized by Tennessee Code Annotated,
§§ 67-5-702, or 67-5-703 or 67-5-704 in order to be eligible to receive this
additional tax relief from the city. (as added by Ord. #2017-57, Dec. 2017)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 5-5
CHAPTER 3
WHOLESALE BEER TAX
SECTION
5-301. To be collected.
5-301. To be collected. The city clerk is hereby directed to take
appropriate action to assure payment to the city of the wholesale beer tax levied
by the "Wholesale Beer Tax Act," as set out in Tennessee Code Annotated, title
57, chapter 6.1
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, chapter 6 provides for a tax of
17% on the sale of beer at wholesale. Every wholesaler is required to
remit to each municipality the amount of the net tax on beer wholesale
sales to retailers and other persons within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
Municipal code reference
Alcohol and beer regulations: title 8.
Beer privilege tax: § 8-208.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 5-6
CHAPTER 4
PURCHASING DIVISION AND PROCEDURES
SECTION
5-401. Powers and duties of purchasing agent.
5-402. Written requisitions required.
5-403. Council approval of purchase unnecessary, when.
5-404. Expenditures requiring approval of the city manager.
5-405. Competitive bidding; exemptions.
5-406. Submitting and awarding bids.
5-407. Rental or lease expenditures.
5-408. Contracts requiring bonds.
5-409. Emergency purchases.
5-410. Adherence to provisions; individual liability.
5-411. Petty cash fund.
5-412. Certification of unencumbered balance required.
5-413. Exemption of fuel, fuel products and perishable commodities from
public advertisement and competitive bidding requirements.
5-401. Powers and duties of purchasing agent. The purchasing
agent shall possess the following powers and perform the following duties under
the general supervision of the city manager:
(1) He shall contract for and purchase all supplies, materials,
equipment and services necessary for the conduct and operation of departments
and agencies of the city. Such purchases may include those for all jointly
financed agencies (such as Cleveland-Bradley Communications Center, and any
other joint operations with Bradley County, the State of Tennessee or the
federal government) when payment for such supplies and the accounting
function therefor is a responsibility of the City of Cleveland.
(2) At the direction of the city manager or his designee, he may
transfer from one department or agency to any other departments or agencies
such supplies, materials, and equipment or other personal property not needed
by one but necessary to the conduct and operation of the other; or may sell any
personal property belonging to the city which is declared surplus by the head of
a department or agency, or by the city council.
(3) He shall have charge of and supervision over all storerooms and be
responsible for distributing such supplies to the various departments.
(4) He may, subject to the approval of the city council, advertise for
and enter into contracts for goods and services as needed.
(5) He may establish standard specifications as to quantity and quality
for all supplies, materials and equipment generally needed by the departments.
(6) The purchasing agent may establish rules and regulations for the
operation procedures and functions of the purchasing division. When approved
Change 17, July 23, 2018 5-7
by the city council, such rules and regulations shall be spread upon the minutes
of the city council and filed in the office of the city clerk. The purchasing agent
shall then publish such rules and regulations in the form of a purchasing
manual for the benefit of those concerned. (1981 Code, § 2-237, modified, as
replaced by Ord. of 12/13/99 § 1, and amended by Ord. #2016-28, July 2016)
5-402. Written requisitions required. All purchases made under the
provisions of this chapter shall be made pursuant to a written requisition from
the head of the department, except for those purchases authorized by using a
procurement card, petty cash, or fixed price agreement. (1981 Code, § 2-238, as
replaced by Ord. of 12/13/99 § 1)
5-403. Council approval of purchase unnecessary, when. Where
the amount of the requisition or check request form does not exceed twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00), approval of the city council shall not be necessary
for the issuance of a purchase order or payment of a check request form or the
execution of a contract. In no event shall a requisition, check request form, or
contract be split or divided into two (2) or more with the intent of evading the
necessity of having competitive bids and/or the necessity of obtaining the
approval of the city council. At least three (3) written quotations shall be
required whenever possible for purchases costing less than twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) but more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). Purchases of like items shall be aggregated for purposes of the bid
threshold. (1981 Code, § 2-239; as amended by Ord. of Aug. 1995, and replaced
by Ord. of 12/13/99 § 1, and Ord. #2015-21, Aug. 2015)
5-404. Expenditures requiring approval of the city manager.
Whenever any requisition or check request form or contract calls for the
expenditure of less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and is more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00), the issuance of a purchase order or the
payment of a check request form or the award of a contract shall be subject to
the approval of the city manager or his designee, and shall not be binding on or
create any liability against the city until approved as such. Such designation
shall be contained in the purchasing manual. At least three (3) written
quotations shall be required whenever possible for purchases costing less than
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) but more than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Purchases of like items shall be aggregated for
purposes of the bid threshold. (1981 Code, § 2-240; as amended by Ord. of Aug.
1995; and replaced by Ord. of 12/13/99 § 1, and Ord. #2015-21, Aug. 2015)
5-405. Competitive bidding; exemptions. Whenever any requisition
or check request form or contract calls for a non-emergency, non-proprietary
expenditure exceeding twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), or a contract
for construction or remodeling of existing structures or sites calls for an
Change 16, December 14, 2015 5-8
expenditure exceeding twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), there shall be
competitive bids. At the direction of the purchasing agent and the city manager,
notice for bids shall be advertised at least once in a general circulation
newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to the time set for a public opening of
bids. The purchasing agent may also issue written invitations to bid to dealers
in the articles to be purchased in addition to, but not in lieu of, the
advertisement required hereunder. However, secondhand equipment or
equipment purchased from any federal, state or municipal agency, where it is
not practicable to take bids, may be purchased without taking bids, but such
purchases shall be subject to the requirements of §§ 5-403 and 5-404. Also, items
covered by the bidding process of federal, state government service contract
prices, and other governmental entities, are exempted from competitive bids.
(1981 Code, § 2-241; as amended by Ord. of Aug. 1995; and replaced by Ord. of
12/13/99 § 1, and Ord. #2015-21, Aug. 2015)
5-406. Submitting and awarding bids. All bids shall be sealed and
submitted to the purchasing agent on or before the specified time when such
bidding is to be closed. All bids will be awarded by the city council unless
otherwise designated by the city council. Recommendation of bids other than
the lowest bids must be justified in writing. (1981 Code, § 2-242, modified, as
replaced by Ord. of 12/13/99 § 1)
5-407. Rental or lease expenditures. The rental or lease of any
equipment, materials or vehicles, where the expenditure for the rental or lease
period does not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), may be made
by the purchasing agent with the approval of the city manager. At least three
(3) written quotations shall be required whenever possible for a rental or lease
costing less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) but more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). But where the expenditure is more
than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000), for rental or lease of equipment,
materials or vehicles, there shall be competitive bids. Also, rental or leasing of
items covered by the bidding process of federal, state government service
contract prices, and other governmental entities, are exempted from competitive
bids. (1981 Code, § 2-243, as replaced by Ord. of 12/13/99 § 1, and Ord.
#2015-21, Aug. 2015)
5-408. Contracts requiring bonds. No contract shall be let for any
public work until the contractor shall have first executed a good and solvent
bond or letter of credit to the effect that he will perform according to the contract
and pay for all the labor and materials used by said contractor, or any
immediate or remote subcontractor under him, in said contract in lawful money
of the United States. The bond or letter of credit to be so given shall be for one
hundred percent (100%) of the contract price. Where advertisement is made, the
condition of the bond or letter of credit shall be stated in the advertisement;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 5-9
provided, that this section shall not apply to contracts under twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00). (1981 Code, § 2-244, as replaced by Ord. of
12/13/99 § 1, and Ord. #2015-21, Aug. 2015)
5-409. Emergency purchases. Notwithstanding the provisions of
§ 5-406, whenever any emergency situation arises requiring equipment or
services for continued operations, the purchasing agent shall purchase said
equipment or services not to exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
where time does not permit the purchasing agent to obtain written quotes. Any
emergency purchases exceeding twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall
require the prior approval of the city council. In the event that four (4) council
members find that an emergency does exist, the purchasing agent will then
schedule this item of business for the next scheduled meeting of the city council,
and at said meeting the purchasing agent shall present a written description of
the emergency that has occurred, the item purchased, where the item was
purchased and the price paid for said item. Action shall then be taken by the
entire city council for approval.
The word "emergency" for the purpose of this section is defined as: Any
equipment or services shortage that would either severely impair or completely
shut down the operations of any department of city government. (1981 Code,
§ 2-245, as replaced by Ord. of 12/13/99 § 1, and Ord. #2015-21, Aug. 2015)
5-410. Adherence to provisions; individual liability. All contracts,
purchase orders, agreements and obligations issued or entered into contrary to
the provisions of the foregoing sections shall be void and no person shall have
any claim or demand whatever against the city thereunder, nor shall any official
or employee of the city waive or qualify the limitation fixed by the preceding
section or fasten upon the city any liability whatever contrary to such limitation.
(1981 Code, § 2-246, modified, as replaced by Ord. of 12/13/99 § 1)
5-411. Petty cash fund. The city clerk, with the approval of the city
manager shall authorize certain departments and/or officials to maintain a petty
cash fund not to exceed four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) from which
purchases or payments may be made not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) each,
and receipts shall be attached to the warrant voucher replenishing reimbursing
said petty cash fund. (1981 Code, § 2-247, modified, as replaced by Ord. of
12/13/99 § 1)
5-412. Certification of unencumbered balance required. No
contract, purchase order, agreement or other obligations involving the
expenditure of any money shall be issued or entered into or be valid unless the
city clerk or designee, first certifies thereon that there is in the city treasury to
the credit of the appropriation or loan authorization from which it is to be paid
an unencumbered balance in excess of all other unpaid obligations. If any
Change 16, December 14, 2015 5-10
official or employee of the city authorizes or incurs an obligation against the city
without first securing the city clerk's certification as required by this section,
such official or employee and his sureties shall be individually liable for the
amount of such obligation. (1981 Code, § 2-247.1, modified, as replaced by Ord.
of 12/13/99 § 1)
5-413. Exemption of fuel, fuel products and perishable
commodities from public advertisement and competitive bidding
requirements. Purchases of fuel and fuel products and perishable commodities
are exempted from the requirements of public advertisement and competitive
bidding when such items are purchased in the open market. A record of all such
purchases shall be made by the purchasing agent and shall specify the amount
paid, the items purchased and from whom the purchase was made. The
purchasing agent shall make a monthly report of such purchases to the city
manager and the city council and shall include all items of information as
required herein in his report. (1981 Code, § 2-248, modified, as replaced by Ord.
of 12/13/99 § 1)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 5-11
CHAPTER 5
SURETY BONDS
SECTION
5-501. Surety bonds for city officers and employees who handle money.
5-501. Surety bonds for city officers and employees who handle
money. (1) Pursuant to the authority and requirements of Article VIII, § 4 of
the city charter, the city manager, the assistant city manager, the mayor and
the vice-mayor shall execute a surety bond with some surety company
authorized to do business in the State of Tennessee, as surety, in the amount
of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
(2) Pursuant to the authority and requirements of Article VIII, § 4 of
the city charter, the city clerk shall execute a surety bond with some surety
company authorized to do business in the State of Tennessee, as surety, in the
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), unless a higher amount is
required by the comptroller of the treasury, in which case the bond shall be the
higher amount.
(3) Pursuant to the authority and requirements of Article VIII, § 4 of
the city charter, all other city employees who have job duties embracing the
receipt, disbursement, custody or handling of money shall execute a surety bond
with some surety company authorized to do business in the State of Tennessee,
as surety, in the amount of at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The city
manager is hereby authorized to secure a larger surety bond for any of these
other employees if the city manager determines that a bond of more than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) is necessary due to the specific job duties of the
employee.
(4) The city council specifically authorizes the purchase of a blanket
bond or bonds which will provide the city with the dollar amounts listed in this
section.
(5) The cost of these bonds shall be paid by the City of Cleveland. (as
added by Ord. #2014-21, June 2014)
Change 17, July 23, 2018 5-12
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES BOARD
SECTION
5-601. Payment in lieu of tax agreements for a tax-credit housing project--
city council approval required.
5-601. Payment in lieu of tax agreements for a tax-credit housing
project--city council approval required. Before any agreement pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 48-101-312 may be approved with respect to a
payment in lieu of tax for a tax-credit housing project as defined in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 48-101-312(b)(4)(B), the proposed agreement must be
considered and approved by the city council. The city council shall only review
and consider such an agreement after it has been considered by the Health and
Educational Facilities Board of the City of Cleveland, and the board has made
a recommendation to the city council pertaining to the proposed agreement. Any
applicant seeking an agreement hereunder shall initiate the request with the
Health and Educational Facilities Board of the City of Cleveland by submitting
such application and proposed payment in lieu of tax agreement as are required
by the board. (as added by Ord. #2016-08, March 2016)
6-1
1Municipal code reference
Issuance of citations in lieu of arrest in traffic cases: title 15,
chapter 7.
TITLE 6
LAW ENFORCEMENT1
CHAPTER
1. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
2. ARREST PROCEDURES.
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION
6-101. Policemen subject to chief's orders.
6-102. Policemen to preserve law and order, etc.
6-103. Police department records.
6-101. Policemen subject to chief's orders. All policemen shall obey
and comply with such orders and administrative rules and regulations as the
police chief may officially issue.
6-102. Policemen to preserve law and order, etc. Policemen shall
preserve law and order within the city. They shall patrol the city and shall
assist the city court during the trial of cases. Policemen shall also promptly
serve any legal process issued by the city court.
6-103. Police department records. The police department shall keep
a comprehensive and detailed daily record, in permanent form, showing at a
minimum:
(1) All known or reported offenses and/or crimes committed within the
corporate limits.
(2) All arrests made by policemen.
(3) All police investigations made, funerals convoyed, fire calls
answered, and other miscellaneous activities of the police department.
(4) Any other records required to be kept by the city council or by law.
The police chief shall be responsible for insuring that the police
department complies with the section.
6-2
1Municipal code reference
Issuance of citation in lieu of arrest in traffic cases: title 15, chapter 7.
CHAPTER 2
ARREST PROCEDURES
SECTION
6-201. When policemen to make arrests.
6-202. Disposition of persons arrested.
6-201. When policemen to make arrests.1 Unless otherwise
authorized or directed in this code or other applicable law, an arrest of the
person shall be made by a policeman in the following cases:
(1) Whenever he is in possession of a warrant for the arrest of the
person.
(2) Whenever an offense is committed or a breach of the peace is
threatened in the officer's presence by the person.
(3) Whenever a felony has in fact been committed and the officer has
reasonable cause to believe the person has committed it.
6-202. Disposition of persons arrested. (1) For code or ordinance
violations. Unless otherwise provided by law, a person arrested for a violation
of this code or other city ordinance, shall be brought before the city court.
However, if the city court is not in session, the arrested person shall be allowed
to post bond with the city court clerk, or, if the city court clerk is not available,
with her designee, or with the ranking police officer on duty. If the arrested
person is under the influence of alcohol or drugs when arrested, even if he is
arrested for an offense unrelated to the consumption of alcohol or drugs, the
person shall be confined until he does not pose a danger to himself or to any
other person.
(2) Felonies or misdemeanors. A person arrested for a felony or a
misdemeanor shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable federal and
state law and the rules of the court which has jurisdiction over the offender.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 7-1
TITLE 7
FIRE PROTECTION AND FIREWORKS1
CHAPTER
1. FIRE DISTRICT.
2. FIRE CODES.
3. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
4. FIREWORKS.
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DISTRICT
SECTION
7-101. Fire limits.
7-101. Fire limits. The fire limits of the city shall be as follows:
Beginning in the center of Worth Street, one hundred (100) feet north of
the intersection of the extension of the north line of Central Avenue with
the center line of Worth Street, and extending southwardly along the
center line of Worth Street, to a point located one hundred (100) feet
south of the extension of the south line of Thirty-sixth Street; and
extending eastwardly along a line located one hundred (100) feet south
of the south line of said Thirty-sixth Street, to the center of the main line
track of the Southern Railway Company; thence in a northeasterly
direction along the center line of said main line or track, to a point located
one hundred (100) feet north of the extension of the north line of Central
Avenue; thence westwardly along a line located one hundred (100) feet
north of the north line of said Central Avenue, to the point of beginning
in the center of Worth Street.2 (1981 Code, § 6-1)
1Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
2All fire limits referred to in titles 7 and 12 shall be these fire limits as set
out in this section (§ 7-101).
Change 17, July 23, 2018 7-2
CHAPTER 2
FIRE CODES1
SECTION
7-201. Definitions.
7-202. Authority having jurisdiction.
7-203. Enforcement of chapter.
7-204. Fire codes adopted.
7-205. Amendments.
7-206. Ordinances not covered by adopted codes.
7-207. Conflicts.
7-208. Violations and penalties.
7-209. Appeals.
7-210. Rules.
7-211. Fees.
7-201. Definitions. The following terms, when used in the adopted codes
referenced in §7-204 and in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated in
this section:
(1) "Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ)" shall be held to mean the
fire chief or whoever is assigned by the Cleveland City Council to be the "assist
to the commissioner."
(2) "Corporate limits" shall be held to mean the City of Cleveland city
limits.
(3) "Fire code official" shall be held to mean the fire marshal.
(4) "Deputy fire code official" shall be held to mean any state certified
fire inspector under the fire marshal's charge. (1981 Code § 8-56, as amended
by Ord. of Oct. 1995, Ord. of July 1998, Ord. of 8/27/2001, and Ord. #2009-71,
Oct. 2009, and replaced by Ord. #2014-27, June 2014, and Ord. #2017-07, March
2017)
7-202. Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ). Pursuant to the
authority granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-102-108, the fire chief of
the City of Cleveland Fire Department is hereby designated by the Cleveland
City Council as the "assistant to the commissioner" and thus is hereby
considered the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) over this entire chapter.
(1981 Code, § 8-57, as replaced by Ord. #2017-07, March 2017)
1Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 7-3
7-203. Enforcement of chapter. The fire chief and/or his state certified
fire inspector designees shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any fire inspector certified by the State of Tennessee and designated
by the fire chief shall be considered a "fire inspector" as referenced in § 7-202 of
this city code and have the authority to enforce this chapter and write citations
in lieu of arrest for violations of this chapter or anything referenced in this
chapter. (1981 Code, § 8-58, as amended by Ord. of 7/27/98, and Ord. of
8/27/2001, and replaced by Ord. #2017-07, March 2017)
7-204. Fire codes adopted. Pursuant to the authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, the following codes are adopted and
incorporated by reference as fully as if set out verbatim herein, and the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city:
(1) The International Fire Code,1 2012 edition, as prepared by the
International Code Council to including its referenced publications listed in
Chapter 80 as well as Appendices A, B, C, D, F, and I.
(2) The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code2, 2012 edition, as prepared by the
National Fire Protection Association, Chapters 15, 17 and their references.
Pursuant to the requirement of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1)
copy of the adopted codes have been filed with the city clerk and is available for
public use and inspection. Said codes are adopted and incorporated as fully as
if set out at length herein and shall be controlling within the corporate limits.
Any matters in said fire codes which are contrary to existing ordinances
of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee shall prevail and to that extent any existing
ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (1981 Code,
§ 8-59, modified, as replaced by Ord. #2017-07, March 2017)
7-205. Amendments. The following sections of the adopted codes are
amended as follows:
(1) IFC Section 101.1 Title, 2012 edition inserted in place of brackets
shall read "the City of Cleveland, Tennessee"
(2) IFC Section 109.4 Violation penalties, 2012 pursuant to §T.C.A.
6-54-504 IFC section 109.4 is hereby deleted.
(3) IFC Section 505 Premises Identification, 2012 edition shall have
the following sections added:
"505.1.1 New or existing multi-tenant buildings and/or multiple
buildings that have fire separation, but are still connected by fire
1Copies of this code are available from the International Code Council,
900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206.
2Copies of this code are available from the National Fire Protection
Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269-9101.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 7-4
walls provided with secondary exits to the exterior or exit corridor
shall provide tenant identification by business address and/or suite
number. This identification shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet
letters and shall be contrasting with their background. Letters or
numbers shall be a minimum of two inches high and be located 60
inches above the bottom of the door."
"505.1.2 When a single tenant assumes more than one lease space
in a new or existing multi-tenant building, and eliminates use of
a door, including spot welding the door in the closed position, a
sign stating 'FALSE DOOR, NO ENTRY' is required.". Letters or
numbers shall be a minimum of two inches high and be located 60
inches above the bottom of the door."
(4) IFC Section 912 Fire Department Connections, 2012 edition have
the following section added:
"912.1.1 New fire department connections for water-based fire
protection systems shall be provided with a 5 inch locking
connection and cap. Locking type caps shall be approved by the
AHJ."
(5) NFPA 13 Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 2010
edition referenced by the adopted codes, section 6.9.3.1 shall be
changed to read "The alarm apparatus for detecting water flow for
all new sprinkler systems and existing facilities with multiple
risers that in the opinion of the AHJ could be confusing to arriving
fire crews, shall be a combination horn/strobe device that is listed
for water flow detection and outside use. (1981 Code, § 8-60,
modified, as replaced by Ord. #2017-07, March 2017)
7-206. Ordinances not covered by adopted codes. (Reserved for
future use.) (1981 Code, § 8-61, modified, as replaced by Ord. #2017-07, March
2017)
7-207. Conflicts. In the event of a conflict or an inconsistency between
the codes adopted by reference and listed amendments:
(1) The provisions of the International Fire Code shall prevail if such
conflict or inconsistency relates to administration of the fire code(s).
(2) If the adopted codes reference the same code but different editions,
the latest edition will be the referenced code used. (1981 Code, § 8-63, modified,
as replaced by Ord. #2017-07, March 2017)
7-208. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of the codes as herein adopted by
reference and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter shall be
punishable by a penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00). Each day a violation is
Change 17, July 23, 2018 7-5
allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (1981 Code, § 8-64,
modified, as replaced by Ord. #2017-07, March 2017)
7-209. Appeals. Board of appeals shall be established in order to hear
and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code
official relative to the application and interpretation of the adopted code. (1981
Code, § 8-65, modified, as replaced by Ord. #2017-07, March 2017)
7-210. Rules. The AHJ shall have the authority to make rules for the
proper administration of the adopted codes that are not contrary to the adopted
codes. (Ord. of 7/27/98, as amended by Ord. of 8/27/2001, Ord. #2004-17, May
2004, Ord. #2009-71, Oct. 2009, and Ord. #2013-8, Feb. 2013, and replaced by
Ord. #2014-27, June 2014, and Ord. #2017-07, March 2017)
7-211. Fees. All fees permitted by the adopted codes or ordinances of this
chapter shall be approved by resolution of the Cleveland City Council. The
current fee schedule is set forth in Resolution 2003-39,1 and those fees are
incorporated herein by reference. That fee schedule shall constitute the fee
schedule until and unless those fees are modified by the city council. (as added
by Ord. #2017-07, March 2017)
1Resolution #2003-39, and any amendments thereto, may be found in the
recorder's office.
7-6
CHAPTER 3
FIRE DEPARTMENT1
SECTION
7-301. Establishment, equipment, and membership.
7-302. Objectives.
7-303. Organization, rules, and regulations.
7-304. Records and reports.
7-305. Chief responsible for training and maintenance.
7-306. Chief to be assistant to state officer.
7-307. Unlawful to interfere or tamper with fire plug or hydrant, or hose reel,
etc.
7-301. Establishment, equipment, and membership. There is
hereby established a fire department to be supported and equipped from
appropriations by the city council. All apparatus, equipment, and supplies shall
be purchased by or through the city and shall be and remain the property of the
city. The fire department shall be composed of a chief and such number of
subordinate officers and firemen as the city council shall authorize. (1981 Code,
§ 8-16, modified)
7-302. Objectives. The fire department shall have as its objectives:
(1) To prevent uncontrolled fires from starting.
(2) To prevent the loss of life and property because of fires.
(3) To confine fires to their places of origin.
(4) To extinguish uncontrolled fires.
(5) To prevent loss of life.
(6) To perform such rescue work as its equipment and/or the training
of its personnel makes practicable.
7-303. Organization, rules, and regulations. The chief of the fire
department shall set up the organization of the department, make definite
assignments to individuals, and shall formulate and enforce such rules and
regulations as shall be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of the
fire department, under the direction of the city manager. (1981 Code, §§ 8-19
and 8-22, modified)
7-304. Records and reports. The chief of the fire department shall
keep adequate records of all fires, inspections, apparatus, equipment, personnel,
1Municipal code reference
Special privileges with respect to traffic: title 15, chapter 2.
7-7
and work of the department. He shall submit such written reports on those
matters to the city manager as the city manager requires. The city manager
shall submit a report on those matters to the city council as they may require.
7-305. Chief responsible for training and maintenance. The chief
of the fire department, shall be fully responsible for the training of the firemen
and for maintenance of all property and equipment of the fire department,
under the direction and subject to the requirements of the city manager.
7-306. Chief to be assistant to state officer. Pursuant to
requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-102-108, the fire chief is
designated as an assistant to the state commissioner of insurance and is subject
to all the duties and obligations imposed by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 68,
chapter 102, and shall be subject to the directions of the commissioner in the
execution of the provisions thereof. (1981 Code, § 8-1, modified)
7-307. Unlawful to interfere or tamper with fire plug or hydrant,
or hose reel, etc. It shall be unlawful to interfere with any fire plug or
hydrant, or hose reel, or to ride or drive against a plug or hydrant, or over a
hose, or to turn on the water of a public hydrant or to throw stones or any other
missile against the same. (1981 Code, § 8-27)
Change 8, March 22, 2004 7-8
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION
7-401. Discharge of firecrackers, rockets, etc.; public displays regulated.
7-402. Fireworks: sales prohibited.
7-401. Discharge of firecrackers, rockets, etc.; public displays
regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firecrackers or
rockets of any description within the corporate limits of the city. However,
pyrotechnic displays may be allowed if they are in compliance with the rules and
regulations adopted by the city council. (1981 Code, § 15-65, modified)
7-402. Fireworks: sales prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
merchant or any one else to sell or keep for sale any firecrackers, sky rockets,
or other articles used for pyrotechnic display. However, the foregoing
prohibition against the sale of fireworks and the keeping of fireworks for sale
shall not be construed to apply to fireworks stores deemed to be lawful preexisting
non-conforming uses under the zoning ordinance. (1981 Code, § 15-66,
modified, as amended by Ord. #2003-37, Dec. 2003)
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-1
TITLE 8
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES1
CHAPTER
1. INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
2. BEER.
3. WINE SALES IN RETAIL FOOD STORES.
CHAPTER 1
INTOXICATING LIQUORS
SECTION
8-101. Prohibited generally.
8-102. Consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises.
8-103. Privilege tax on retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises.
8-104. Annual privilege tax to be paid to the city clerk.
8-105. Sign restriction.
8-106. Responsibilities of licensees.
8-101. Prohibited generally. Except as authorized by applicable laws2
and/or ordinances, it shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity, regardless
of its form of existence, i.e., sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, etc. to manufacture, receive, possess, store, transport,
sell, furnish, or solicit orders for any intoxicating liquor within this city.
"Intoxicating liquor" shall be defined to include whiskey, wine, "home brew,"
"moonshine," and all other intoxicating, spirituous, vinous, or malt liquors and
beers which contain more than five percent (5%) of alcohol by weight. (1981
Code, § 4-1, as amended by Ord. of 12/9/02)
8-102. Consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises.
Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 57, Chapter 4, inclusive, entitled
"Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages on Premises," and including any
1Municipal code references
Minors in beer places, etc.: title 11, chapter 1.
State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57.
2State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 39, chapter 17.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 8-2
amendments thereto, is hereby adopted so as to be applicable to all sales of
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption which are regulated by the said
code when such sales are conducted within the corporate limits of Cleveland,
Tennessee. It is the intent of the city council that the said Title 57, Chapter 4,
inclusive, of the Tennessee Code Annotated and any amendments thereto, shall
be effective in Cleveland, Tennessee, the same as if said code sections were
adopted herein verbatim. (as added by Ord. of 12/9/02)
8-103. Privilege tax on retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises. Pursuant to the authority contained in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-301, and any amendments thereto, there is
hereby levied a privilege tax (in the same amounts as levied by Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-4-301 for the City of Cleveland General Fund to be paid
annually as provided in this chapter) upon any person or legal entity regardless
of its form of existence, i.e., sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, etc. engaging in the business of selling at retail in the
City of Cleveland alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where
sold. It is the intent of the city council that the said Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 57-4-301, and any amendments thereto, shall be effective in Cleveland,
Tennessee, the same as if said Code section was adopted herein verbatim. (as
added by Ord. of 12/9/02)
8-104. Annual privilege tax to be paid to the city clerk. Any person
or legal entity regardless of its form of existence, i.e., sole proprietorship,
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, etc. exercising the privilege
of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in the City of
Cleveland shall remit annually to the city clerk the appropriate tax described
in § 8-103. Such payment shall be remitted not less than thirty (30) days
following the end of each twelve (12) month period from the original date of the
license. Upon the transfer of ownership of such business or the discontinuance
of such business, said tax shall be filed within thirty (30) days following such
event. Any person or legal entity regardless of its form of existence, i.e., sole
proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, etc, failing
to make payment of the appropriate tax when due shall be subject to any
penalty provided by law, including revocation of the privilege of selling alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises in the City of Cleveland. (as added
by Ord. of 12/9/02)
8-105. Sign restriction. Notwithstanding any provision in Tennessee
Code Annotated, Title 57, Chapter 4 of the Tennessee Code Annotated, no
outdoor sign, advertisement or display that advertises alcoholic beverages may
be erected or maintained on or about the property from which alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises is made other than one sign,
advertisement or display which makes reference to the fact that the
Change 9, March 28, 2005 8-3
establishment sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises but
does not use brand names, pictures, numbers, prices or diagrams relating to any
particular type or brand of alcoholic beverage. (as added by Ord. of 12/9/02)
8-106. Responsibilities of licensees. Licensees who obtain a
state-issued "liquor by the drink" permit shall be deemed responsible for the
actions of all employees or agents and insuring their compliance with all state
and local legislation or regulation related to alcoholic beverages. A violation by
an employee or agent of any state or local legislation or regulation related to
alcoholic beverages shall subject the licensee to the appropriate sanction,
including revocation or suspension of any license or state-issued "liquor by the
drink" permit. (as added by Ord. of 12/9/02)
Change 12, September 8, 2008 8-4
CHAPTER 2
BEER1
SECTION
8-201. Beer board.
8-202. Meetings of the beer board.
8-203. Record of beer board proceedings to be kept.
8-204. Requirements for beer board quorum and action.
8-205. Powers and duties of the beer board.
8-206. Definitions.
8-207. Permit required for engaging in beer business.
8-208. Privilege tax.
8-209. Beer permits shall be restrictive.
8-210. Classes of consumption permits.
8-211. Transfer of permits.
8-212. Proximity to schools, churches restricted.
8-213. Issuance of permits to persons convicted of certain crimes prohibited.
8-214. Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders.
8-215. Revocation and suspension of beer permits, investigation of permit
holders charged with violations; beer board action; loss of clerk's
certification for sale to minor.
8-216. Civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension; civil penalty for
responsible vendors.
8-217. Outdoor advertisement at retail beer establishments.
8-218. Oath of office.
8-219. Consumer identification requirements; required signs.
8-220. Violations.
8-201. Beer board. (1) The city council shall appoint a five (5) member
beer board.
(2) They shall serve two (2) year staggered terms with two (2)
members terms beginning on July 1, of odd numbered years and the terms of the
other three (3) members beginning on July 1, of even numbered years.
Thereafter the members will be appointed for a two-year term.
1Municipal code references
Minors in beer places, etc.: title 11, chapter 1.
Tax provisions: title 5.
State law reference
For a leading case on a municipality's authority to regulate beer, see
Watkins v. Naifeh, 635 S.W.2d 104 (Tenn. 1982).
Change 16, December 14, 2015 8-5
(3) Two alternate members shall be appointed to the beer board. The
term of the first alternate will expire on July 1, 1996, and the term of the second
alternate will expire on July 1, 1997. Thereafter the alternate members shall
be appointed for a two-year period.
(4) The city council shall decide when any alternate member is
appointed or reappointed which alternate shall be the first and which shall be
the second. In any meeting where both are present, but only one is necessary
to constitute a five member board, the alternate designated as the first alternate
shall exercise a vote, while the second alternate will not. (1981 Code, § 4-27, as
amended by Ord. of March 1995, modified)
8-202. Meetings of the beer board. All meetings of the beer board
shall be open to the public. The board shall hold regular meetings in such places
and at such times as it shall prescribe. When there is business to come before
the beer board, a special meeting may be called by the chairman provided he
gives at least a twelve (12) hour written notice thereof to each member and the
press. The board may adjourn a meeting at any time to another time and place.
8-203. Record of beer board proceedings to be kept. The city clerk
shall make a record of the proceedings of all meetings of the beer board. The
record shall be a public record and shall contain at least the following: The date
of each meeting; the names of the board members present and absent; the
names of the members introducing and seconding motions and resolutions, etc.,
before the board; a copy of each such motion or resolution presented; the vote of
each member thereon; and the provisions of each beer permit issued by the
board.
8-204. Requirements for beer board quorum and action. The
attendance of at least a majority of the members of the beer board shall be
required to constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business.
Matters before the board shall be decided by a majority of the members present
if a quorum is constituted. Any member present but not voting shall be deemed
to have cast a "nay" vote.
8-205. Powers and duties of the beer board. The beer board shall
have the power and it is hereby directed to regulate the selling, storing for sale,
distributing for sale, and manufacturing of beer within this municipality in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
8-206. Definitions. (1) "Beer." The term "beer" as used in this chapter
shall mean beer, ale, or other malt beverages, or any other beverages having an
alcoholic content of not more than five percent (5%) by weight, except wine as
defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3101(20); provided, however, that no
more than forty-nine percent (49%) of the overall alcoholic content of such
Change 16, December 14, 2015 8-6
beverage may be derived from the addition of flavors and other non-beverage
ingredients containing alcohol.
(2) "Certified clerk" means a clerk who has successfully satisfied the
training requirements contained within the Tennessee Responsible Vendor Act
of 2006 (Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-601, et seq.) and who has received
certification from a responsible vendor training program that meets all of the
statutory and regulatory requirements set forth in Tennessee Responsible
Vendor Act of 2006 (Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-601, et seq.) and the
rules and regulations of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
(3) "Clerk" means any person working in a capacity to sell beer directly
to consumers for off-premises consumption.
(4) "Responsible vendor." The term "responsible vendor" as used in this
chapter shall mean a person, corporation or other entity that has been issued a
permit to sell beer for off-premises consumption and has received certification
by the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission under the "Tennessee
Responsible Vendor Act of 2006" codified at Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 57-5-601, et seq.
(5) "Vendor" means a person, corporation or other entity that has been
issued a permit to sell beer for off-premises consumption. (1981 Code, § 4-26,
as replaced by Ord. #2006-10, April 2006, and Ord. #2007-19, July 2007)
8-207. Permit required for engaging in beer business. It shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, store for sale, distribute for sale, or manufacture
beer without first making application to and obtaining a permit from the beer
board. The application shall be made on such form as the board shall prescribe
and/or furnish, and pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-104(a), the
application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each application for a beer permit must be
received by the business tax inspector not later than fourteen (14) calendar days
prior to the scheduled meeting of the beer board. Each applicant must be a
person of good moral character and the applicant must certify that the applicant
has read and is familiar with the provisions of this chapter. No permit shall be
issued until such time as the permit applicant shall personally appear before the
beer board to obtain their initial permit. This section requires the owner (in the
case of a sole proprietorship) or a managing agent (in the case of a partnership,
corporation or limited liability company) to personally appear before the beer
board before a beer permit may be issued. (1981 Code, §§ 4-50, 4-51, and 4-52,
as replaced by Ord. of 2/14/2000, Ord. #2004-40, Nov. 2004, and Ord. #2007-19,
July 2007, and amended by Ord. #2015-22, Sept. 2015)
8-208. Privilege tax. There is hereby imposed on the business of selling,
distributing, storing or manufacturing beer a privilege tax of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate
or association engaged in the sale, distribution, storage or manufacture of beer
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-7
shall remit the tax each successive January 1 to the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee. At the time a new permit is issued to any business subject to this
tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the privilege tax on a prorated
basis for each month or portion thereof remaining until the next tax payment
date. (as replaced by Ord. #2007-19, July 2007)
8-209. Beer permits shall be restrictive. (1) All beer permits shall be
restrictive as the type of beer business authorized under them. Separate permits
shall be required for selling at retail, storing, distributing and manufacturing.
Beer permits for retail sale of beer may be further restricted by the beer board
so as to authorize sales only for off premises consumption. Beer permits for
Class 2 on-premises consumption shall be limited to fourteen (14) permits. As
Class 2 permits are revoked or expire, the limit on the number of Class 2
permits may fall below fourteen (14). If the number of Class 2 permits falls
below fourteen (14), applications shall then be accepted for new Class 2 permits.
Any new applications for Class 2 permits shall be processed in the order by
which the permit applications are received by the City of Cleveland. Unless a
new Class 2 permit is issued to a purchaser of a business holding an existing
Class 2 beer permit under the provisions of § 8-209(2), a new Class 2 permit may
not be issued by the City of Cleveland so long as the total number of Class 2
permits is fourteen (14). It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to
engage in any type or phase of the beer business not expressly authorized by
their permit. It shall likewise be unlawful for a beer permit holder to fail to
comply with any and all express restrictions or conditions which may be written
into a permit by the beer board.
(2) Sale of existing Class 2 establishments. Notwithstanding the
provisions of § 8-209(1) and the specific limitation on the number of Class 2
permits, a purchaser of an existing business holding an active Class 2 beer
permit may be issued a Class 2 permit if the purchaser acquires a business with
an existing Class 2 establishment, provided that the purchaser can satisfy the
following requirements:
(a) The Class 2 permit of the seller must still be active and not
have not been revoked or suspended at the time the purchaser acquires
the business.
(b) The new owner otherwise qualifies for a Class 2 beer permit
under 8-201 through 8-217 and complies with all of the terms and
conditions of §§ 8-201 through 8-217.
(c) The purchaser must apply for a new Class 2 permit within
30 days of the date of the purchase of the business holding an existing
Class 2 beer permit.
In the event a purchaser buys an existing Class 2 establishment
and is granted a Class 2 beer permit pursuant to the provisions of this
section, the permit of the previous holder shall be canceled at the same
time the purchaser receives the new Class 2 permit. (as amended by Ord.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-8
of 11/11/96, and Ord. of 6/9/03, and replaced by Ord. #2004-45, Jan. 2005,
and amended by Ord. #2007-19, July 2007, Ord. #2016-22, July 2016, and
Ord. #2018-02, Feb. 2018)
8-210. Classes of consumption permits. Permits issued by the beer
board shall consist of four (4) classes:
(1) Class 1 On Premises Permit. A Class 1 On Premises Permit shall
be issued for the consumption of beer only on the premises. To qualify for a
Class 1 On Premises permit, an establishment must, in addition to meeting the
other regulations and restrictions in this chapter:
(a) Be primarily a restaurant or an eating place; and
(b) Be able to seat a minimum of thirty people, including
children, in booths and at tables, in addition to any other seating it may
have; and
(c) All seating must be part of the premises. In case of any
outdoor seating, the outdoor seating area must be accessible from the
inside of the restaurant or eating place and the outdoor seating area must
have some type of enclosure around it, such as a wall or fencing; and
(d) In addition to the requirements of subsections 8-210(1)(a)
through (c), the monthly beer sales of any establishment which holds a
Class 1 On Premises Permit shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
monthly gross sales of the establishment. As used herein, the term "gross
sales" means all retail sales of the permit holder plus any applicable
taxes. As used herein, the term "beer sales" includes all retail beer sales
plus any taxes applicable to beer sales.
All Class 1 beer permit holders shall submit quarterly sales reports to the
City of Cleveland on forms provided by the city to assure that the Class 1 permit
holder is in compliance with the provisions of this section. The city will keep
these forms in the permit holder's individual business tax file so that the
confidentiality required by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-4-722 may be
maintained. The reports shall comply with the following schedule:
PERIOD REPORT DUE DATE
January-March April 20
April-June July 20
July-September October 20
October-December January 20
If the monthly beer sales for any Class 1 beer permit holder exceed 50% of the
monthly gross sales of the permit holder for either three consecutive months
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-9
during one calendar year or for any four months in any one calendar year, the
Class 1 permit of such permit holder may be suspended or revoked by the beer
board. In the alternative, and in lieu of suspension or revocation of the permit,
the beer board has the discretion to impose a civil penalty in lieu of suspension
in accordance with the terms of Cleveland Municipal Code § 8-216.
(2) Class 2 On Premises Permit. Other establishments making
application for a permit to sell beer for consumption on the premises, which do
not qualify, or do not wish to apply for, a Class 1 On Premises Permit, but which
otherwise meet all other regulations and restrictions in this chapter, shall apply
for a Class 2 On Premises Permit.
(3) Class 3 Off Premises Permit. An off premises permit shall be
issued for the consumption of beer only off the premises. To qualify for an off
premises permit, an establishment must, in addition to meeting the other
regulations in this chapter:
(a) be a grocery store or a convenience type market; and
(b) in either case, be primarily engaged in the sale of grocery
and personal and home care and cleaning articles, but may also sell
gasoline.
(4) Class 4 Growler Permit. A Class 4 Growler permit is a beer permit
issued for the retail sale of beer contained in "Growlers." To qualify for a
Growler permit, an establishment must meet all of the other applicable
regulations contained in this chapter, including, but not limited to, distance
requirements, and must comply with the additional requirements contained in
this subsection.
The term "Growler" means a glass bottle not to exceed sixty-four ounces
(64 oz.) that is filled by a licensee or employee of the licensed establishment with
beer from a keg. Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee
from a duly licensed wholesaler. Only professionally sanitized and sealed
Growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each Growler must
be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed
condition. Consumption of beer on the premises of any Class 4 permit is strictly
prohibited, except samples of tap beers offered for sale may be made available,
but individual samples shall not exceed one ounce (1 oz.) per sample, nor shall
any one (1) individual be offered or consume more than five (5) one ounce
samples (5 oz.) per business day.
(5) Special occasion beer permits. In addition to the other types of beer
permits provided for in this chapter, the beer board shall have the authority to
issue a special occasion beer permit to a bona fide charitable, nonprofit or
political organization for the sale, storage, dispensing, serving, distribution or
manufacture of beer in the City of Cleveland for a temporary period of time.
Such special occasion beer permit shall be issued for no longer than one
(1) forty-eight (48) hour period, and each permit shall be subject to the hours of
sale which may otherwise be imposed by law or regulation, and each such
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-10
permit must be issued in advance of its effective date. A special occasion beer
permit shall only be valid for one (1) specific location.
No such charitable, nonprofit or political organization shall be eligible to
receive more than three (3) special occasion beer permits in any one (1) calendar
year, measured from January 1 to December 31.
For the purposes of this section "bona fide charitable or nonprofit
organization" means any corporation which has been recognized as exempt from
federal taxes under § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, or any organization
having been in existence for at least three (3) consecutive years which expends
at least sixty percent (60%) of its gross revenue exclusively for religious,
educational or charitable purposes.
For purposes of this section "bona fide political organization" means any
political campaign committee as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 2-10-102, or any political party as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 2-13-101.
A special occasion beer permit shall not be issued unless and until the
applicant has submitted an application to the beer board for a special occasion
beer permit. A special occasion beer permit holder shall not be subject to the
annual privilege tax or application fee set forth in title 8 of the Cleveland
Municipal Code, but there is hereby imposed an application fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) for applying for a special occasion beer permit, and all of the other
provisions of this chapter governing the issuance of a beer permit shall apply.
The application for a special occasion beer permit shall set forth the
following information:
(a) The name of the organization seeking a special occasion beer
permit;
(b) The name, address, and telephone number, including cell
number, of the chairperson of the organization seeking a special occasion
beer permit;
(c) The name, address, cell number and e-mail address of any
person who will be selling beer on behalf of the organization seeking the
permit.
(d) The date(s) and time(s) when the special event or occasion
will be held;
(e) The hours which beer sales will be conducted during the
event;
(f) The specific location where the special occasion or event will
be held, along with the survey required by § 8-212 of the Cleveland
Municipal Code;
(g) A statement that the applicant is a charitable, nonprofit or
political organization, including documentation showing evidence of the
type of organization; and
(h) If the special event or occasion covered by a special occasion
beer permit will be held on land not owned by the applicant, a written
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-11
statement of approval from the landowner must also accompany the
application.
A special occasion beer permit shall not be issued to allow the sale,
storage, dispensing, serving, distribution or manufacture of beer on publicly
owned property, except that the beer board may issue a special occasion beer
permit to a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization authorizing the sale
of beer on public property after the city council approves of the request and the
applicant has applied for and received all other permits which may be necessary
or required under the Cleveland Municipal Code, including by way of example,
but not limited to, a street closure permit, an event permit, or a tent permit.
Failure of the special occasion beer permit holder to abide by all of the
conditions of the permit, and all of the laws of the State of Tennessee and
ordinances of the City of Cleveland, shall preclude the permit holder from
obtaining another special occasion beer permit for a period of one (1) year, in
addition to any other penalties that may be otherwise provided for by law.
(6) Craft beer restaurant permit. (a) Definitions. As used in this
subsection, the following definitions shall apply:
(i) "Craft beer restaurant" shall mean a restaurant
whose business includes the retail sale of craft beer manufactured
on the premises.
(ii) "Craft beer" shall mean beer manufactured by on the
premises by a craft beer restaurant permit holder for consumption
on the premises of the craft beer restaurant.
(b) Class 6 craft beer restaurant permit. A Class 6 craft beer
restaurant permit shall be issued for the manufacture of craft beer on the
premises. A Class 6 craft beer restaurant permit allows consumption of
beer only on the premises.
(c) Requirements. To qualify for a Class 6 craft beer restaurant
permit, a craft beer restaurant must, in addition to meeting the other
regulations and restrictions of title 8, Chapter 2 of the Cleveland
Municipal Code:
(i) Be primarily a restaurant or an eating place; and
(ii) Be able to seat a minimum of thirty (30) people, in
booths and at tables, in addition to any other seating it may have;
and
(iii) All seating must be part of the premises. In case of
any outdoor seating, the outdoor seating area must be accessible
from the inside of the restaurant or eating place and the outdoor
seating area must have some type of enclosure around it, such as
a wall or fencing. Seats in an open air or patio area shall not count
toward meeting the requirement of thirty (30) interior seats
required for this category of permit; and
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-12
(iv) In addition to the requirements of §§ 8-210(6)(c)(1)
through (6)(c)(3), the monthly beer sales of any establishment
which holds a Class 6 craft beer restaurant permit shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the monthly gross sales of the establishment.
As used herein, the term "gross sales" means all retail sales of the
permit holder plus any applicable taxes. As used herein, the term
"beer sales" includes all retail beer sales plus any taxes applicable
to beer sales.
All Class 6 craft beer restaurant permit holders shall submit quarterly
sales reports to the City of Cleveland on forms provided by the city to assure
that the Class 6 permit holder is in compliance with the provisions of this
section. The city will keep these forms in the permit holder's individual business
tax file so that the confidentiality required by Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 67-4-722 may be maintained. The reports shall comply with the following
schedule:
PERIOD REPORT DUE DATE
January-March April 20
April-June July 20
July-September October 20
October-December January 20
If the monthly beer sales for any Class 6 beer permit holder exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the monthly gross sales of the permit holder for either three consecutive
months during one (1) calendar year or for any four months in any one (1)
calendar year, the Class 6 permit of such permit holder may be suspended or
revoked by the beer board. In the alternative, and in lieu of suspension or
revocation of the permit, the beer board has the discretion to impose a civil
penalty in lieu of suspension in accordance with the terms of Cleveland
Municipal Code § 8-216.
(7) Non-consumption wholesaler permit. A Class 7 permit is a beer
permit issued for the non-consumption, wholesale and distribution of beer. A
non-consumption wholesaler permit ("wholesaler permit") shall be issued to each
distributor, manufacturer, brewer or brewery or manufacturer's branch
authorizing it to sell beer directly to retailers. To qualify for a non-consumption
wholesaler permit, an establishment must meet the distance requirements
contained in this chapter, as well as the other general requirements imposed in
this chapter, with the exception of those requirements explicitly imposed upon
another particular class of permit only. No wholesaler or distributor shall
maintain more than one (1) place of business unless such wholesaler or
distributor has received a separate permit from the beer permit board for each
place of business. If a wholesaler or distributor maintains a place of business
Change 12, September 8, 2008 8-13
that is contiguous to another permitted location, the requirement in the
preceding sentence for separate permits from the beer permit board for each
location shall not apply.
A Class 7 permit is limited strictly to warehouse wholesale and
distribution, and does not allow or permit consumption of beer on the premises
of the wholesaler. The products must come in to the warehouse already
packaged and sealed, and the products must leave packaged and sealed without
ever being opened or otherwise consumed. (as amended by Ord. of 6/9/03,
Ord. #2005-36, Sept. 2005, Ord. #2013-49, Nov. 2013, Ord. #2016-06, Feb. 2016,
Ord. #2016-27, Aug. 2016, and Ord. #2016-31, Aug. 2016 )
8-211. Transfer of permits. There shall be no transfer of a beer permit
from one licensee to another.
8-212. Proximity to schools, churches restricted. (1) It shall be
unlawful to store or sell at wholesale or retail, beer in the corporate limits of the
city, within one hundred eighty-five (185) feet from the front door of any school
or churchhouse building.
(2) This section shall not apply to locations holding a valid license from
the city on August 1, 1995, nor to any annual renewal of any such license or
licenses.
(3) No official of the city or board appointed by the city council shall
issue a permit or license for such storage or sale of beer except as provided
herein.
(4) The distances provided for herein shall be measured in a straight
line by beginning at the front door of the business location and going from that
point to the front door of any churchhouse or school building.
(5) The measurements herein provided for shall be made by an
engineer or registered surveyor at the expense of the applicant. A drawing
prepared by the engineer or registered surveyor shall be furnished the beer
board prior to the consideration of the application for a license by the beer
board. (1981 Code, § 4-58, modified, and amended by Ord. #2005-36, Sept. 2005)
8-213. Issuance of permits to persons convicted of certain crimes
prohibited. No beer permit shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted for the possession, sale, manufacture, or transportation of intoxicating
liquor, or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten (10) years.
No person, firm, corporation, joint-stock company, syndicate, or association
having at least a five percent (5%) ownership interest in the applicant shall have
been convicted of any violation of the laws against possession, sale,
manufacture, or transportation of beer or other alcoholic beverages or any crime
Change 12, September 8, 2008 8-14
involving illegal drug sales, drug manufacture, drug possession, drug
transportation or moral turpitude within the past ten (10) years. (1981 Code,
§ 4-54, modified, as amended by Ord. of 5/14/2001)
8-214. Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders. It
shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to:
(1) Employ any person convicted for the possession, sale, manufacture,
or transportation of intoxicating liquor, or any crime involving illegal drug sales,
drug manufacture, drug possession, drug transportation or moral turpitude
within the past ten (10) years.
(2) Employ any minor under 18 years of age in the sale, storage,
distribution or manufacture of beer.
(3) Make or allow any sale of beer between the hours of 3:00 A.M. and
5:30 A.M. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 3:00 A.M. and
10:00 A.M. on Sunday. No beer shall be consumed, or opened for consumption,
on or about any premises licensed pursuant to these ordinances in either bottle,
glass, or other container, between 3:00 A.M. and 5:30 A.M. Monday through
Saturday, and between 3:00 A.M. and 10:00 A.M. on Sunday.
(4) Make or allow any sale of beer to a person under twenty-one (21)
years of age.
(5) Allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to loiter in or
about his place of business.
(6) Make or allow any sale of beer to any intoxicated person.
(7) Allow drunk persons to loiter about his premises.
(8) Serve, sell, or allow the consumption on his premises of any
alcoholic beverage with an alcoholic content of more than 5% by weight, unless
a permit holder also has a state-issued "liquor by the drink" license or permit.
(9) Fail to provide and maintain separate sanitary toilet facilities for
men and women.
(10) Sale of beer at places where dancing allowed.
(a) No beer shall be sold on premises upon any part of which
dancing is allowed, unless the cleared area provided for dancing shall
contain at least one hundred forty-four (144) square feet of floor space. In
computing the cleared area of floor space, only the compact floor area
used primarily for dancing shall be counted. No area upon which
counters, tables, chairs or obstructions are located, and no aisles used
primarily for providing access to tables, shall be included for computing
such cleared floor space.
(b) No beer shall be sold or consumed on premises upon any
part of which dancing is allowed unless the part of such premises where
such beverage is sold and consumed is separated from the other part of
Change 12, September 8, 2008 8-15
the building or premises where dancing is allowed by a partition or wall,
railing, rope or other definite means of separation approved by the beer
board, and such beverage shall not be sold or consumed upon the space
set apart for dancing.
(11) Not operate beer sales for ninety (90) consecutive days.
(12) Fail to commence beer sales within one year from the date a beer
permit is issued. If a permit holder fails to commence beer sales within one year
from the date a permit is issued, the beer permit shall be revoked.
(13) Serve, sell, or allow the consumption on his premises of any
alcoholic beverage of any kind, whether designated as beer, liquor, wine, or
otherwise, to or by any person under the age of twenty-one (21).
(14) In the case of a Class 1 on-premises permit holder, it is a violation
of this section for a permit holder to fail to provide complete and accurate
quarterly reports to the City of Cleveland in accordance with and by the due
date(s) shown in § 8-210.
(15) In the case of a Class 4 Growler permit, it is a violation of this
section to allow consumption of beer on the premises of a Class 4 permit holder
in excess of the sample amounts that are allowed under § 8-210(4). (1981 Code,
§§ 4-28, 4-31, 4-32, 4-38, and 4-39, modified, as amended by Ord. of March 1999,
Ord. of 5/14/2001, Ord. of 5/13/02, Ord. of 12/9/02, Ord. of 6/9/03, Ord. #2004-47,
Jan. 2005, Ord. #2005-36, Sept. 2005, and Ord. #2013-49, Nov. 2013)
8-215. Revocation and suspension of beer permits, investigation
of permit holders charged with violations; beer board action; loss of
clerk's certification for sale to minor.
(1) (a) In general. The beer board shall have the power to revoke or
suspend any beer permit issued under the provisions of title 8, chapter 2,
when the holder of the permit is guilty of making a false statement or
misrepresentation in the permit application or if the permit holder
violates any provisions of this chapter. However, no beer permit shall be
revoked until a public hearing is held by the board after reasonable notice
to the permit holder. Revocation proceedings may be initiated, in writing,
by the police chief or by the chairperson of the beer board or his or her
designee.
(b) Responsible vendors. Pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-5-608(a), the beer board shall not revoke or suspend the
permit of a "responsible vendor" qualified under the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-606 for a clerk's illegal sale of beer to
a minor if the clerk is properly certified and has attended annual
meetings since the clerk's original certification, or is within sixty-one (61)
days of the date of hire at the time of the violation.
Change 12, September 8, 2008 8-16
Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraph, the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission shall revoke the certification of a vendor certified as a
responsible vendor, if the vendor had actual knowledge of the violation or
should have known about the violation, or participated in or committed
the violation. If the Alcoholic Beverage Commission revokes a vendor's
certification under these circumstances, then the vendor shall be
penalized for the violation by the beer board as if the vendor were not
certified as a responsible vendor.
If, at the time of the violation, the vendor's status as a certified
responsible vendor has been revoked by the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission, the vendor shall be punished by the beer board as if the
vendor were not certified as a responsible vendor.
Under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-608(c), the Alcoholic
Beverage Commission shall revoke a vendor's status as a responsible
vendor upon notification by the beer board that the board has made a
final determination that the vendor has sold beer to a minor for a second
time within a twelve-month period. The revocation shall be for three (3)
years.
(2) Investigation, subpoenas, oaths. When any beer permit holder is
charged with a violation of any state law, the Cleveland Municipal Code, any
ordinance of the city, or if a beer permit holder is alleged to have violated
§ 8-214 of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the beer board to make an
investigation. In order that the beer board may make the necessary
investigation, the beer board is hereby given authority to issue subpoenas for
witnesses to appear before it for the purpose of giving testimony. The chairman
of the beer board is authorized to administer an oath to witnesses. The beer
board, after its investigation, due notice and a public hearing, may either revoke
or suspend the beer permit of any beer permit holder.
(3) Proposed revocation or suspension of beer permit holders who also
hold a license to sell alcoholic beverages. (a) If the beer board determines that
a beer permit holder who also holds a license for the sale of alcoholic
beverages under the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, section 57,
chapter 4, part 2, has violated any provision contained in Tennessee Code
Annotated, section 57, chapter 4, then the beer board may, in its
discretion, suspend not only the holder's beer permit for a specified period
of time, but the beer board may also include a proposed suspension of the
permit holder's authority to sell alcoholic beverages for the same period
of time, provided that the Alcoholic Beverage Commission shall review
the beer board's action with regard to the proposed suspension or
revocation relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages other than beer and
approve such suspension.
Change 12, September 8, 2008 8-17
(b) Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-202(b), the
beer board shall direct the city clerk to serve written notice upon the
Alcoholic Beverage Commission of its proposed action and provide the
Alcoholic Beverage Commission with a tape recording and/or a transcript
of the beer board's proceedings. A copy of this notice shall also be sent to
the beer permit holder.
(c) Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-202(b), the
proposed action by the beer board shall become final upon a review and
affirmance of that decision by Alcoholic Beverage Commission. If the
Alcoholic Beverage Commission shall fail to act within thirty (30) days
after receiving the written notice from the beer board, the failure to act
shall be construed as an affirmation of the proposed action.
(d) The suspension or revocation of the beer permit shall be
effective at the same time as the receipt of the notice of the affirmation
of the suspension from the Alcoholic Beverage Commission or the
thirty-first (31st) day following notice to the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission if the Alcoholic Beverage Commission fails to render a
decision. If the Alcoholic Beverage Commission reverses the proposed
decision of the beer board, then the decision of the beer board with regard
to alcoholic beverages shall be vacated subject to any administrative
appeal by the city of the Alcoholic Beverage Commission's decision. Even
if the beer board's decision is reversed by the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission, the beer board's proposed action as to the suspension or
revocation of the holder's beer permit shall remain in full force and effect.
(4) If the beer board determines that a clerk of an off-premises beer
permit holder certified under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-606, sold beer
to a minor, the beer board shall report the name of the clerk to the Alcoholic
Beverage Commission within fifteen (15) days of determination of the sale. The
certification of the clerk shall be invalid, and the clerk may not reapply for a
new certificate for a period of one (1) year from the date of the beer board's
determination. (1981 Code, § 4-56, as replaced by Ord. #2004-44, Jan. 2005, and
amended by Ord. #2007-19, July 2007)
8-216. Civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension; civil
penalty for responsible vendors. (1) Permit holders that are not responsible
vendors. The beer board may, at the time it imposes a revocation or suspension,
offer a permit holder that is not a responsible vendor the alternative of paying
a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for
each offense of making or permitting to be made any sales to minors, or a civil
penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any other offense.
Change 12, September 8, 2008 8-18
If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative to revocation or suspension,
a permit holder shall have seven (7) days within which to pay the civil penalty
before the revocation or suspension shall be imposed. If a civil penalty is paid
within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be deemed withdrawn.
Payment of the civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension by a
permit holder shall be an admission by the permit holder of the violation so
charged and shall be paid to the exclusion of any other penalty that the city may
impose.
(2) Responsible vendors. Notwithstanding the language of § 8-215(b),
the beer board may impose on a responsible vendor a civil penalty not to exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense of making or permitting to be
made any sales to minors or for any other offense. (as repealed by Ord. of
12/10/2001, and replaced by Ord. #2005-01, Feb. 2005, and Ord. #2007-19, July
2007)
8-217. Outdoor advertisement at retail beer establishments. No
outdoor sign, advertisement or display that advertises beer may be erected or
maintained on the property on which a retail beer establishment is located other
than one (1) sign, advertisement or display which makes reference to the fact
that the establishment sells beer but does not use brand names, pictures,
numbers, prices or diagrams relating to beer. (1981 Code, § 4-59, as amended
by Ord. of 10/28/96, and replaced by Ord. of 6/9/03)
8-218. Oath of office. Before beginning a term of service on the beer
board, a member shall take the following oath of office:
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the
United States, the Constitution of the State of Tennessee, and that I will
perform with fidelity the duties of the office to which I have been
appointed and which I am about to assume."
(as added by Ord. #2004-21, June 2004)
8-219. Consumer identification requirements; required signs.
(1) Consumer identification requirements. Prior to making a sale of
beer for off-premises consumption, the adult consumer must present to the
permit holder or any employee of the permit holder a valid, government issued
document, such as a driver's license, or other form of identification deemed
acceptable to the permit holder, that includes the photograph and birth date of
the adult consumer attempting to make a beer purchase. Persons exempt under
state law from the requirement of having a photo identification shall present
identification that is acceptable to the permit holder. The permit holder or
employee shall make a determination from the information presented whether
Change 12, September 8, 2008 8-19
the purchaser is an adult. In addition to the prohibition of making a sale to a
minor, no sale of beer for off-premises consumption shall be made to a person
who does not present such a document or other form of identification to the
permit holder or any employee of the permit holder.
(2) Required signs. Responsible vendors shall post signs on the
vendor's premises informing customers of the vendor's policy against selling beer
to underage persons. The signs shall be not less than eight and one-half inches
by eleven inches (8-1/2" x 11 "), and contain the following language:
STATE LAW REQUIRES IDENTIFICATION FOR THE SALE OF BEER.
(as added by Ord. #2007-19, July 2007)
8-220. Violations. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a civil offense. Each day a violation shall be allowed to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (as added by Ord. #2007-19, July 2007)
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-20
CHAPTER 3
WINE SALES IN RETAIL FOOD STORES
SECTION
8-301. Definitions.
8-302. Adoption of state law.
8-303. Issuance of retail food store wine license.
8-304. Certificate of compliance.
8-305. Issuance of certificate of compliance; appeal.
8-306. Issuance, renewal, suspension, and termination of retail food store
wine license.
8-307. Inspection fee.
8-301. Definitions. Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the following meanings unless the context necessarily requires
otherwise:
(1) "City" means the City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
(2) "Inspection fee" means a fee equal to five percent (5%) of the
wholesale price of wine supplied by a wholesaler to a retail food store wine
licensee located within the City of Cleveland.
(3) "Retail food store" means an establishment that is open to the
public that derives at least twenty percent (20%) of its sales taxable sales from
the retail sale of food and food ingredients for human consumption taxed at the
rate provided for in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-6-228(a) and has retail
floor space of at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
(3) "Retail food store wine licensee" means a retail food store that sells
wine at retail within the City of Cleveland.
(4) "Retail sale" or "sale at retail" means the sale to a consumer or to
any person or entity for a purpose other than for resale.
(5) "Wholesaler" means any person or entity who sells wine at
wholesale to a retail food store wine licensee located within the City of
Cleveland.
(6) "Wine" means the product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of
the juice of fresh, sound, ripe grapes, with the usual cellar treatment and
necessary additions to correct defects due to climatic, saccharine and seasonal
conditions, including champagne, sparkling and fortified wine of an alcoholic
content not to exceed eighteen percent (18%) by volume. No other product shall
be called "wine" unless designated by appropriate prefixes descriptive of the
fruit or other product from which the same was predominately produced, or an
artificial or imitation wine. "Wine" does not mean alcohol derived from wine that
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-21
has substantial changes to the wine due to the addition of flavorings or
additives. (as added by Ord. #2016-23, July 2016)
8-302. Adoption of state law. There is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference the applicable state statutes on retail food store
wine sales, codified in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-801 et seq. (as added
by Ord. #2016-23, July 2016)
8-303. Issuance of retail food store wine license. Any person,
partnership, limited liability company or corporation desiring to sell wine to
patrons or customers within the premises of a retail food store, in sealed
packages only, and not for consumption on the premises of a retail food store,
shall make application to the alcoholic beverage commission for a retail food
store wine license. This application shall comply with the terms and conditions
set forth in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-801 et seq. The city shall not be
permitted to limit the number of retail food store wine licensees issued within
the city's jurisdiction. (as added by Ord. #2016-23, July 2016)
8-304 Certificate of compliance. As a condition precedent to the
issuance of a retail food store license under Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 57-3-803, the mayor or a majority of the city council may issue a certificate of
compliance by the city according to the terms contained herein. The certificate
shall state the following information:
(1) The name and address of each person who will be in actual charge
of the business, along with statement that the applicant or applicants who will
be in actual charge of the business have not been convicted of a felony within a
ten (10) year period immediately preceding the date of the application with the
alcoholic beverage commission and, if a corporation, that the executive officers
or those in control have not been convicted of a felony within a ten (10) year
period immediately preceding the date of the application with the alcoholic
beverage commission; and
(2) The name and address of the proposed retail food store applying for
a retail food store wine license, and a statement that the applicant or applicants
have secured a location for the business which complies with all zoning laws of
the City of Cleveland; and
(3) That the applicant or applicants have complied with this chapter
and the applicable state laws on retail food store wine sales. (as added by Ord.
#2016-23, July 2016)
8-305. Issuance of certificate of compliance; appeal. A failure on the
part of the City to grant or deny the applicant's request for a certificate of
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-22
compliance within sixty (60) days of the written application shall be deemed a
granting of the certificate. If an applicant is denied a certificate of compliance,
the applicant may seek a review of the denial of the certificate of compliance by
instituting an action in chancery court within sixty (60) days of the denial. (as
added by Ord. #2016-23, July 2016)
8-306. Issuance, renewal, suspension, and termination of retail
food store wine license. The issuance, renewal, suspension, and termination
of retail food store wine licenses and the regulation of and operation by such
license holders shall be governed by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-201
et seq., except where Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-801 et seq. expressly
states otherwise. (as added by Ord. #2016-23, July 2016)
8-307. Inspection fee. (1) Inspection fee levied. Pursuant to the
authority granted under Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 57-3-501 through
57-3-504, there is hereby levied on each retail food store wine licensee an
inspection fee of five percent (5%) of the wholesale price of any wine supplied to
the retail food store wine licensee by any wholesaler. In the event of any
subsequent amendment of Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 57-3-501 through
57-3-504, the inspection fee shall be the maximum allowed by state law.
(2) Collection. Collection of such inspection fee shall be made by the
wholesaler from the retail food store wine licensee. The inspection fee shall be
collected by the wholesaler at the time of the sale or at the time that the retail
food store wine licensee makes payment for the delivery of the wine. A retail
food store wine licensee shall create and maintain all records specified by any
state statute, rule or regulation relating to the purchase and sale of wine at
retail for a period of at least fifteen (15) months following such sale.
(3) Reports. The city clerk shall prepare and make available to each
wholesaler selling wine to retail food store licensees sufficient forms for the
monthly report of inspection fees payable by such retail food store wine licensees
making a purchase of wine from such wholesaler. Pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-3-503, each wholesaler making sales of wine to retail food store
wine licensees located within the City of Cleveland shall furnish the City a
report monthly, which report shall contain a list of the wine sold to each retail
food store licensee within the City of Cleveland, the wholesale price of the wine
sold to each retail food store licensee, the amount of any tax due, and such other
information as may be required by the city. The monthly report shall be
furnished to the city by the wholesaler no later than the twentieth (20th) day of
the month following which the sales were made. The inspection fees collected by
the wholesaler from the retail food store licensees located within the city of
Cleveland shall be paid to the city at the same time the monthly report is made.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 8-23
Wholesalers collecting and remitting the inspection fee to the city shall be
entitled to reimbursement for this collection service, a sum equal to five percent
(5%) of the total amount of inspection fees collected and remitted, such
reimbursement to be deducted and shown on the monthly report to the
municipality. Failure to collect or timely report and/or pay the inspection fee
collected shall result in a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the fee due the city
which shall be payable to the city. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 57-3-503, the city shall have the authority to audit the records of wholesalers
reporting to the city in order to determine the accuracy of the reports. The city
shall also have the authority to audit the records of the retail food store wine
licensees in order to determine the accuracy of such reports related to the
inspection fees. Nothing herein shall relieve a retail food store wine licensee
from the obligation to pay the municipal inspection fee, and it shall be the duty
of the retail food store wine licensee to see that payment of the inspection fee is
made to the city on or before the twentieth (20th) day of each month for the
preceding month.
(4) Failure to pay fees. The failure of the wholesaler to pay the
inspection fee to make the required reports accurately and within the time
required by this chapter may result in the suspension or revocation of retail food
store wine licensee's privilege license if it is determined by the city that the
conduct of the retail food store wine licensee has resulted in the failure of the
wholesaler to pay the inspection fees and to make the required reports.
(5) Use of fees. All funds derived from the inspection fees imposed
herein shall be used to defray expenses in connection with the enforcement of
this chapter, including particularly the payment and compensation of officers,
employees and other representatives of the city in investigating and inspecting
retail food store wine licensees and in seeing that all provisions of this chapter
are observed. The city council finds and declares that the amount of these
inspection fees is reasonable, and that the funds expected to be derived from
these inspection fees will be reasonably required for such purposes. (as added
by Ord. #2016-23, July 2016)
9-1
TITLE 9
BUSINESS, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.
CHAPTER
1. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.
2. ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATIONAL BUSINESS.
3. JEWELRY SALES.
4. GARAGE SALES.
5. ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS.
6. CABLE TELEVISION.
7. TAXICABS.
CHAPTER 1
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.1
SECTION
9-101. Definitions.
9-102. Exemptions.
9-103. Permit required.
9-104. Permit procedure.
9-105. Restrictions on peddlers, street barkers and solicitors.
9-106. Restrictions on transient vendors.
9-107. Display of permit.
9-108. Suspension or revocation of permit.
9-109. Expiration and renewal of permit.
9-101. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used
in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning given to them in this
section:
(1) "Peddler" means any person, firm or corporation, either a resident
or a nonresident of the city, who has no permanent regular place of business and
who goes from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to place, or from
street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise and
offering or exposing the same for sale.
(2) "Solicitor" means any person, firm or corporation who goes from
dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to place, or from street to
1Municipal code references
Privilege taxes: title 5.
Trespass by peddlers, etc.: § 11-501(5).
9-2
street, taking or attempting to take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise,
or personal property of any nature whatever for future delivery,
except that the term shall not include solicitors for charitable and religious
purposes and solicitors for subscriptions as those terms are defined below.
(3) "Solicitor for charitable or religious purposes" means any person,
firm, corporation or organization who or which solicits contributions from the
public, either on the streets of the city or from door to door, business to business,
place to place, or from street to street, for any charitable or religious
organization, and who does not sell or offer to sell any single item at a cost to the
purchaser in excess of ten dollars ($10.00). No organization shall qualify as a
"charitable" or "religious" organization unless the organization meets one of the
following conditions:
(a) Has a current exemption certificate from the Internal
Revenue Service issued under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Service Code of 1954, as amended.
(b) Is a member of United Way, Community Chest or similar
"umbrella" organizations for charitable or religious organizations.
(c) Has been in continued existence as a charitable or religious
organization in Bradley County for a period of two (2) years prior to the
date of its application for registration under this chapter.
(4) "Solicitor for subscriptions" means any person who solicits
subscriptions from the public, either on the streets of the city, or from door to
door, business to business, place to place, or from street to street, and who offers
for sale subscriptions to magazines or other materials protected by provisions
of the Constitution of the United States.
(5) "Transient vendor1" means any person who brings into temporary
premises and exhibits stocks of merchandise to the public for the purpose of
selling or offering to sell the merchandise to the public. Transient vendor does
not include any person selling goods by sample, brochure, or sales catalog for
future delivery; or to sales resulting from the prior invitation to the seller by the
owner or occupant of a residence. For purposes of this definition, "merchandise"
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 62-30-101 et seq. contains permit
requirements for "transitory vendors."
The definition of "transient vendors" is taken from Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 62-30-101(3). Note also that Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 67-4-709(a) prescribes that transient vendors shall pay a tax of
$50.00 for each 14 day period in each county and/or municipality in
which such vendors sell or offer to sell merchandise for which they are
issued a business license, but that they are not liable for the gross
receipts portion of the tax provided for in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 67-4-709(b).
9-3
means any consumer item that is or is represented to be new or not previously
owned by a consumer, and "temporary premises" means any public or
quasi-public place including a hotel, rooming house, storeroom, building or part
of a building, tent, vacant lot, railroad car, or motor vehicle which is temporarily
occupied for the purpose of exhibiting stocks of merchandise to the public.
Premises are not temporary if the same person has conducted business at those
premises for more than six (6) consecutive months or has occupied the premises
as his or her permanent residence for more than six (6) consecutive months.
(6) "Street barker" means any peddler who does business during
recognized festival or parade days in the city and who limits his business to
selling or offering to sell novelty items and similar goods in the area of the
festival or parade.
9-102. Exemptions. The terms of this chapter shall neither apply to
persons selling at wholesale to dealers, nor to newsboys, nor to bona fide
merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business, nor to
persons selling agricultural products, who, in fact, themselves produced the
products being sold.
9-103. Permit required. No person, firm, association, community or
school group or corporation shall operate a business as a peddler, transient
vendor, solicitor or street barker, and no solicitor for charitable or religious
purposes or solicitor for subscriptions shall solicit within the city unless the
same has obtained a permit from the city in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. Community groups and school groups may obtain a single permit
for the group. (1981 Code, § 12-21, modified)
9-104. Permit procedure. (1) Application form. A sworn application
containing the following information shall be completed and filed with the city
clerk by each applicant for a permit as a peddler, transient vendor, solicitor, or
street barker and by each applicant for a permit as a solicitor for charitable or
religious purposes or as a solicitor for subscriptions:
(a) The complete name and permanent address of the business
or organization the applicant represents.
(b) A brief description of the type of business and the goods to
be sold.
(c) The dates for which the applicant intends to do business or
make solicitations.
(d) The names and permanent addresses of each person who
will make sales or solicitations within the city.
(e) The make, model, complete description, and license tag
number and state of issue, of each vehicle to be used to make sales or
solicitations, whether or not such vehicle is owned individually by the
9-4
person making sales or solicitations, by the business or organization
itself, or rented or borrowed from another business or person.
(f) Tennessee State sales tax number, if applicable.
(2) Permit fee. Each applicant for a permit as a peddler, transient
vendor, solicitor or street barker shall submit with his application a
nonrefundable fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). There shall be no fee for an
application for a permit as a solicitor for charitable or religious purposes or as
a solicitor for subscriptions.
(3) Permit issued. Upon the completion of the application form and
the payment of the permit fee, where required, the clerk shall issue a permit
and provide a copy of the same to the applicant.
(4) Submission of application form to chief of police. Immediately
after the applicant obtains a permit from the city clerk, the city clerk shall
submit to the chief of police a copy of the application form and the permit. (1981
Code, § 12-23, modified)
9-105. Restrictions on peddlers, street barkers and solicitors. No
peddler, street barker, solicitor, solicitor for charitable purposes, or solicitor for
subscriptions shall:
(1) Be permitted to set up and operate a booth or stand on any street
or sidewalk, or in any other public area within the city.
(2) Stand or sit in or near the entrance to any dwelling or place of
business, or in any other place which may disrupt or impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
(3) Offer to sell goods or services or solicit in vehicular traffic lanes, or
operate a "road block" of any kind.
(4) Unless approved by the adjacent business owner, call attention to
his business or merchandise or to his solicitation efforts by crying out, by
blowing a horn, by ringing a bell, or creating other noise, except that the street
barker shall be allowed to cry out to call attention to his business or
merchandise during recognized parade or festival days of the city.
(5) Enter in or upon any premises or attempt to enter in or upon any
premises wherein a sign or placard bearing the notice "Peddlers or Solicitors
Prohibited," or similar language carrying the same meaning, is located. (1981
Code, § 12-21, modified)
9-106. Restrictions on transient vendors. A transient vendor shall
not advertise, represent, or hold forth a sale of goods, wares or merchandise as
an insurance, bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate, executor,
administrator, receiver's manufacturer's wholesale, cancelled order, or misfit
sale, or closing-out sale, or a sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire, water or
otherwise, unless such advertisement, representation or holding forth is actually
of the character it is advertised, represented or held forth.
9-5
9-107. Display of permit. Each peddler, street barker, solicitor,
solicitor for charitable purposes or solicitor for subscriptions is required to have
in his possession a valid permit or copy if he/she represents a community group,
school group soliciting for charitable or religious purpose while making sales or
solicitations, and shall be required to display the same upon demand. (1981
Code, § 12-29, modified)
9-108. Suspension or revocation of permit. (1) Suspension by the
clerk. The permit issued to any person or organization under this chapter may
be suspended by the city clerk for any of the following causes:
(a) Any false statement, material omission, or untrue or
misleading information which is contained in or left out of the
application; or
(b) Any violation of this chapter.
(2) Suspension or revocation by the city manager. The permit issued
to any person or organization under this chapter may be immediately suspended
by the city manager and may be revoked by the city manager, after notice and
hearing, for the same causes set out in paragraph (1) above. Notice of the
hearing for suspension or revocation of a permit shall be given by the city clerk
in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the permit holder at his last
known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing, or it shall
be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at least three
(3) days prior to the date set for hearing. (1981 Code, § 12-33, modified)
9-109. Expiration and renewal of permit. The permit of peddlers,
solicitors and transient vendors shall expire on the same date that the permit
holder's privilege license expires. The permit of any peddler, solicitor, or
transient vendor who for any reason is not subject to the privilege tax shall be
issued for six (6) months. The permit of street barkers shall be for a period
corresponding to the dates of the recognized parade or festival days of the city.
The permit of solicitors for religious or charitable purposes and solicitors for
subscriptions shall expire on the date provided in the permit, not to exceed
thirty (30) days. (1981 Code, § 12-35, modified)
Change 7, March 24, 2003 9-6
CHAPTER 2
ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATIONAL BUSINESS
SECTION
9-201. Circuses, carnivals, etc., not to exhibit within city; exceptions,
requirements.
9-202. [Deleted.]
9-203. [Deleted.]
9-201. Circuses, carnivals, etc., not to exhibit within city;
exceptions, requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or
offer to exhibit in the city limits any aggregation of entertainment known as
shows, carnivals, or circuses except that a circus or carnival sponsored by local
civic or charitable organization may be permitted provided that:
(1) The site for the circus or carnival shall first be approved by a
committee composed of the city attorney, building inspector, city clerk, fire
inspector, traffic engineer and chief of police.
(2) A corporate bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
shall be posted with the city clerk to insure a cleanup of the public premises and
for any damages to public property.
(3) The location shall not be in an area zoned for residential area.
(4) A proper business license must be obtained.
(5) Proof of liability insurance be provided to the city clerk in the
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
(6) The length of stay shall be limited to ten (10) days.
(7) Any approved site must have adequate off-street parking.
(8) The sponsor or the organization conducting the carnival or circus
must employ a sufficient number of qualified people to handle traffic before,
during and after the show. (1981 Code, § 12-41, modified)
9-202. [Deleted.] (1981 Code, § 12-42, as deleted by Ord. of 12/9/02)
9-203. [Deleted.] (1981 Code, § 12-43, as deleted by Ord of 12/9/02)
9-7
CHAPTER 3
JEWELRY SALES
SECTION
9-301. Register required.
9-302. Holding period for articles.
9-303. Daily reports required; notification of location.
9-301. Register required. It shall be the duty of all persons dealing in
the purchase, sale or exchange of secondhand or antique jewelry, watches,
diamonds or other precious stones, cutlery, old gold, silver, platinum or other
precious metals, or any other secondhand manufactured articles, composed
wholly or in part of gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals, to keep a
book in which every article received by them in the course of their business shall
be registered, and in which shall be given as minute a description of every
article as is possible, including the maker's name and number of every article
so received by them. The name, age, sex, color, residence, driver's license
number, and general description of each and every individual selling or
exchanging such articles, shall be taken and entered in the register. The
register shall at all times be kept at the place of business of every person
engaging in the business aforesaid. Members of the police department shall be
allowed free access to the register and the person shall give to such officers all
information in his possession concerning such articles and all persons selling or
exchanging the same. (1981 Code, § 12-141)
9-302. Holding period for articles. All persons engaging in business
as described herein shall retain any article received in the same state or
condition in which it was received, and shall not co-mingle it with other articles
separately received, and shall make it available for examination by members of
the police department, for a period of three (3) days before a resale or exchange,
unless written permission is obtained from the chief of police. (1981 Code,
§ 12-142)
9-303. Daily reports required; notification of location. All persons
engaging in business as described herein shall furnish to the chief of police daily
reports at his office, showing fully the name, age, sex, color, residence, driver's
license number, and general description of each person who shall have sold or
exchanged any article during the preceding day, together with a full description
of the articles sold or exchanged by such person, including the number of each
article bearing a number, and the day and hour of the transaction. Every person
engaging in such business shall keep duplicates of such reports in a well-bound
book or register, which book or register shall at all times be subject to the
inspection of members of the police department. Any person intending to engage
9-8
in business as described herein who will not operate that business at an
established and permanent location shall give the chief of police at least
seventy-two (72) hours' prior notice of the location and date and hours of the
operation of such business. (1981 Code, § 12-143)
Change 10, July 10, 2006 9-9
CHAPTER 4
GARAGE SALES
SECTION
9-401. Definitions.
9-402. Dates of sales.
9-403. Hours of operation.
9-404. Display of sale property.
9-405. Advertising.
9-406. Enforcement; violations.
9-407. Persons exempted from chapter.
9-408. [Deleted.]
9-409. [Deleted.]
9-410. [Deleted.]
9-411. [Deleted.]
9-401. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms,
are defined and shall be construed as follows:
(1) "Garage sales" shall be the offering for sale or exchange, or the sale
or exchange, to the public of any personal property of any kind or description at
a sale held on privately-owned residential property. For the purposes of this
chapter, garage sales include all sales of personal property, whether entitled
"garage sales," "lawn sales," "yard sales," "attic sales," "porch sales," "room
sales," "backyard sales," "patio sales," "flea market" or "rummage sales." This
definition does not include the operation of business carried on in a nonresidential
zone where the person conducting the sale does so on a regular dayto-
day business and has a business license to do so.
(2) "Residential property" is any real estate, lot or tract in the City of
Cleveland which is used primarily for residential purposes.
(3) "Personal property" shall mean property which is owned, utilized
and maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and
acquired in a normal course of living or in maintaining a residence. (as replaced
by Ord. #2005-16, April 2005)
9-402. Date of sales. Garage sales are only allowed on Fridays,
Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays. As used in this section, city holidays
include the following holidays:
New Year's Day; Martin Luther King, Jr's birthday; President's Day;
Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Columbus Day; Veterans' Day;
Thanksgiving Day; and Christmas Day. (as replaced by Ord. #2005-16,
April 2005)
Change 10, July 10, 2006 9-10
9-403. Hours of operation. Garage sales shall be conducted between
the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. (as replaced by Ord. #2005-16, April 2005)
9-404. Display of sale property. Personal property offered for sale
may be displayed outdoors after 5:00 P.M. on the day before any garage sale will
be lawfully held. All personal property shall be removed from outdoor display
by no later than 8:00 P.M. on the date that a garage sale is held. Personal
property offered for sale may only be displayed within a residence, in a garage,
a carport, a driveway, or in a front, side or rear yard. No personal property
offered for sale at a garage sale shall be displayed in or on any public right-ofway.
A vehicle offered for sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed
driveway within such front or side yard. However, an unlicensed and inoperable
vehicle as defined in title 13 of this Cleveland Municipal Code may not be
displayed for more than 30 calendar days in a twelve-month period. (as replaced
by Ord. #2005-16, April 2005)
9-405. Advertising. (1) Signs permitted. Only the following specified
signs may be displayed in relation to a garage sale:
(a) Two signs permitted. Two (2) signs of not more than four (4)
square feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the
residence or residential site where the garage sale is being conducted.
(b) Directional signs. Two (2) signs of not more than two (2)
square feet each are permitted, provided that the premises on which the
garage sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare, and written
permission to erect such signs is received from the property owner(s) on
whose property such signs are to be placed.
(2) Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be
exhibited for more than two (2) days prior to the date a garage sale is to
commence.
(3) Removal of signs. Signs must be removed each day at the close of
the garage sale activities. (as replaced by Ord. #2005-16, April 2005)
9-406. Enforcement; violations. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, partnership, corporation or association to advertise, promote, conduct or
hold any garage sale within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland except
as provided in this chapter. If any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
association violates any of the provisions of this chapter, they will be subject to
having the garage sale terminated immediately by any officer of the Cleveland
Police Department or any Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Cleveland.
In addition, a person, firm, partnership, corporation or association who violates
any provision of this chapter is subject to a citation punishable by civil penalty
of up to $50 per day for each day that a violation occurs, plus applicable court
costs and litigation taxes. In addition, the Cleveland Police Department is
hereby given the power to immediately terminate any garage sale if the garage
Change 10, July 10, 2006 9-11
sale is impeding traffic flow or causing a traffic hazard on any road or street
within the City of Cleveland. (as replaced by Ord. #2005-16, April 2005)
9-407. Persons exempted from chapter. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to or affect the following:
(1) A person selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Court-ordered sales by executors or administrators in the
settlement of estates.
(3) Sales of personal property which are:
(a) Advertized by newspaper or radio for private appointment
only; and
(b) Not advertized by a sign or signs either on or off the
premises; and
(c) Such that the property is not exhibited on the premises in
such a manner as to indicate a public sale.
(4) All businesses and all business establishments which are properly
licensed to conduct retail or wholesale sales.
(5) Any sale conducted by any merchant or any other business
establishment on a regular, day-to-day basis from or at a place of business
wherein such sale is permitted by zoning regulations of the City of Cleveland,
or under the protection of any non-conforming use section thereof.
(6) Any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor
when such sale is conducted from a properly zoned premises, and when such
sale is not otherwise prohibited by other ordinances of the city or any other
provision of the Cleveland Municipal Code. (as replaced by Ord. #2005-16,
April 2005)
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-12
CHAPTER 5
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION
9-501. Findings and purpose.
9-502. Definitions.
9-503. License required.
9-504. Application for license.
9-505. Standards for issuance of license.
9-506. Permit required.
9-507. Application for permit.
9-508. Standards for issuance of permit.
9-509. Fees.
9-510. Display of license or permit.
9-511. Renewal of license or permit.
9-512. Revocation of license or permit.
9-513. Hours of operation.
9-514. Responsibilities of the operator.
9-515. Prohibitions and unlawful sexual acts.
9-516. Penalties and prosecution.
9-517. Invalidity of part.
9-518. Denial of applications or renewals.
9-519. Compliance with zoning laws.
9-501. Findings and purpose. (1) The City Council of the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee finds:
(a) That homogeneous and heterogeneous masturbatory acts
and other sexual acts, including oral sex acts, may be occurring in
Cleveland in adult-oriented establishments in the City of Cleveland.
(b) That offering and providing such space, areas, and rooms
where such activities may take place creates conditions that generate
prostitution and other crimes.
(c) That the continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented
establishments would be detrimental to the general welfare, health, and
safety of the citizens of the City of Cleveland.
(2) It is the purpose if this chapter to promote and secure the general
welfare, health, and safety of the citizens of the City of Cleveland. (Ord. of Feb.
1996)
9-502. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the words and
phrases used herein shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly
indicated by the context:
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-13
(1) "Adult-oriented establishment" shall include, but not be limited to,
"adult bookstores," "adult motion picture theaters," "adult mini motion picture
establishments," or "adult cabaret" and further means any premises to which
the public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so
physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or
stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of
viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides
adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when
such adult entertainments are held, conducted, operated or maintained for a
profit, direct or indirect. An "adult-oriented establishment" further includes,
without being limited to, any "adult entertainment studio" or any premises that
is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as
an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio,
sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like import.
(2) "Adult bookstore" means an establishment having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes,
magazines, or other periodicals, or any print or electronic media which are
distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to 'specified sexual activities' or 'specified anatomical areas,' as
defined below, and in conjunction therewith have facilities for the presentation
of adult entertainment, as defined below, and including adult-oriented films,
movies, or live entertainment for observation by patrons therein.
(3) "Adult motion picture theater" means an enclosed building with a
capacity of fifty (50) or more persons regularly used for presenting material
having as a dominant theme or presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"specified anatomical areas," as defined below for observation by patrons
therein.
(4) "Adult mini motion picture theater" means an enclosed building
with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons regularly used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphases on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas," as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
(5) "Adult cabaret" is defined to mean an establishment which features
as a principle use of its business, entertainers and/or waiters and/or bartenders
who expose to public view of the patrons within said establishment, at any time,
the bare female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola,
human genitals, pubic region, or buttocks, even if partially covered by opaque
material or completely covered by translucent material; including swim suits,
lingerie or latex covering. Adult cabarets shall include commercial
establishments which feature entertainment of an erotic nature including exotic
dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers.
(6) "City council" means the City Council of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee.
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-14
(7) "Employee" means any and all person, including independent
contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the
operation of an adult-oriented establishment.
(8) "Entertainer" means any person who provides entertainment
within an adult-oriented establishment as defined in this section, whether or not
a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment
is provided as an employee or an independent contractor.
(9) "Adult entertainment" means any exhibition of any adult oriented
motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has a
significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual or simulated
performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of specified
anatomical area removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed,
pantomime, modeling, or any other personal service offered customers.
(10) "Operator" means any person, partnership, or corporation
operating, conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
(11) "Specified sexual activities" means:
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(b) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
(c) Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breasts.
(12) "Specified anatomical areas" means:
(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(i) Human genitals, pubic region;
(ii) Buttocks;
(iii) Female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
(b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely opaquely covered. (Ord. of Feb. 1996, as amended by Ord.
#2003-28, Oct. 2003)
9-503. License required. (1) Except as provided in subsection (5)
below, from and after the effective date of this chapter, no adult-oriented
establishment shall be operated or maintained in the City of Cleveland without
first obtaining a license to operate issued by the City of Cleveland.
(2) A license may be issued only for one (1) adult-oriented
establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership, or
corporation which desires to operate more than one (1) adult oriented
establishment must have a license for each.
(3) No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person,
partnership or corporation.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, employee or operator to
knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service directly related
to the operation of any unlicensed adult oriented establishment.
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-15
(5) All existing adult oriented establishments at the time of the
passage of this chapter must submit an application for a license within one
hundred twenty (120) days of the passage of this chapter on third and final
reading. If a license is not issued within said one-hundred-twenty-day period
then such existing adult oriented establishment shall cease operations. (Ord.
of Feb. 1996)
9-504. Application for license. (1) Any person, partnership or
corporation desiring to secure a license shall make application to the city clerk.
The application shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the city clerk. A
copy of the application shall be distributed promptly by the city clerk to the
Cleveland Police Department and to the applicant.
(2) The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the
city clerk. An applicant for a license shall furnish the following information
under oath:
(a) Name and address, including all aliases.
(b) Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18)
years of age.
(c) All residential addresses of the applicant for the past three
(3) years.
(d) The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
(e) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(f) Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any
other county, city or state under an adult oriented establishment license
or similar business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a
license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity
or trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the
suspension or revocation.
(g) All criminal statutes, whether federal or state, or city
ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of bond and pleadings no nolo
contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations.
(h) Fingerprints and two (2) portrait photographs at least two
(2) inches by two (2) inches of the applicant.
(i) The address of the adult-oriented establishment to be
operated by the applicant.
(j) The names and addresses of all persons, partnerships, or
corporations holding any beneficial interest in the real estate upon which
such adult-oriented establishment is to be operated, including, but not
limited to, contract purchasers or sellers, beneficiaries of land trust or
lessees subletting to applicant.
(k) If the premises are leased or being purchased under
contract, a copy of such lease or contract shall accompany the application.
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-16
(l) The length of time the applicant has been a resident of the
City of Cleveland, or its environs, immediately preceding the date of the
application.
(m) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify
the name, address and telephone number of the corporation, the date and
state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent for
service of process of the corporation, the names and addresses of the
officers and directors of the corporation, and the names and addresses of
any persons holding fifty percent (50%) or more of the stock of the
corporation; if the applicant is a partnership, the application shall specify
the name and address of the partnership, the name and address of all
general partners of the partnership; if the partnership is a limited
partnership, the application shall specify the name and address of all
general partners who have a controlling interest in the partnership.
(n) A statement by the applicant that he or she is familiar with
the provisions of this chapter and is in compliance with them.
(o) All inventory, equipment, or supplies which are to be leased,
purchased, held in consignment or in any other fashion kept on the
premises or any part or portion thereof for storage, display, any other use
therein, or in connection with the operation of said establishment, or for
resale, shall be identified in writing accompanying the application
specifically designating the distributor business name, address, phone
number, and representative's name.
(3) Within ten (10) days of receiving the results of the investigation
conducted by the Cleveland Police Department, the city clerk shall notify the
applicant that his application is granted, denied or held for further
investigation. Such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional
thirty (30) days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon conclusion
of such additional investigation, the city clerk shall advise the applicant in
writing whether the application is granted or denied.
(4) Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant
to the investigation of the application, or his or her refusal or failure to appear
at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said
application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation
required by this chapter, shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he
or she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the
city clerk. (Ord. of Feb. 1996, as replaced by Ord. #2003-28, Oct. 2003)
9-505. Standards for issuance of license. (1) To receive a license to
operate an adult oriented establishment, an applicant must meet the following
standards:
(a) If the applicant is an individual:
9-17
(i) The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of
age.
(ii) The applicant shall not have been convicted of or
pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral
turpitude, prostitution, obscenity, or other crime of a sexual nature
in any jurisdiction within five (5) years immediately preceding the
date of the application.
(iii) The applicant shall not have been found to have
previously violated this chapter withing five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
(b) If the applicant is a corporation:
(i) All officers, directors and stockholders required to be
named under § 9-504(2) shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(ii) No officer, director or stockholder required to be
named under § 9-504(2) shall have been convicted of or pleaded
nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude,
prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any
jurisdiction with five (5) years immediately preceding the date of
the application.
(iii) No officer, director or stockholder required to be
named under § 9-504(2) shall have been found to have previously
violated this chapter within five (5) years immediately preceding
the date of the application.
(c) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, or any other
type of organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial
interest:
(i) All persons having a financial interest in the
partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall be at
least eighteen (18) years of age.
(ii) No persons having a financial interest in the
partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have
been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any
crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
(iii) No persons having a financial interest in the
partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have
been found to have previously violated this chapter within five (5)
years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(2) No license shall be issued unless the Cleveland Police Department
has investigated the applicant's qualification to be licensed. The results of that
investigation shall be filed in writing with the city clerk no later that twenty
(20) days after the date of the application. (Ord. of Feb. 1996)
9-18
9-506. Permit required. In addition to the license requirement
previously set forth for owners and operators of "adult oriented establishments,"
no person shall be an employee or entertainer in an adult oriented
establishment without first obtaining a valid permit issued by the city clerk.
(Ord. of Feb. 1996)
9-507. Application for permit. (1) Any person desiring to secure a
permit shall make application to the city clerk. The application shall be filed in
triplicate with and dated by the city clerk. A copy of the application shall be
distributed promptly by the city clerk to the Cleveland Police Department and
to the applicant.
(2) The application for a permit shall be upon a form provided by the
city clerk. An applicant for a permit shall furnish the following information
under oath:
BUSINESSES, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS
(a) Name and address, including all aliases.
(b) Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18)
years of age.
(c) All residential addresses of the applicant for the past three
(3) years.
(d) The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
(e) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(f) Whether the applicant, while previously operating in this or
any other city or state under an adult oriented establishment permit or
similar business for whom applicant was employed or associated at the
time, has ever had such a permit revoked or suspended, the reason
therefore, and the business entity or trade name or where the applicant
was employed or associated at the time of such suspension or revocation.
(g) All criminal statutes, whether federal, state or city
ordinance violation, convictions, forfeiture of bond and pleadings of nolo
contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations.
(h) Fingerprints and two (2) portrait photographs at least two
(2) inches by two (2) inches of the applicant.
(i) The length of time the applicant has been a resident of the
City of Cleveland, or its environs immediately preceding the date of the
application.
(j) A statement by the applicant that he or she is familiar with
the provisions of this chapter and is in compliance with them.
(3) Within ten (10) days of receiving the results of the investigation
conducted by the Cleveland Police Department, the city clerk shall notify the
applicant that his application is granted, denied, or held for further
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-19
investigation. Such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional
thirty (30) days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon conclusion
of such additional investigations, the city clerk shall advise the applicant in
writing within ten (10) days whether the application is granted or denied.
(4) [Deleted.]
(5) Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant
to the investigation of the application, or his or her refusal or failure to appear
at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said
application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation
required by this chapter, shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he
or she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the
city clerk. (Ord. of Feb. 1996, as amended by Ord. #2003-28, Oct. 2003)
9-508. Standards for issuance of permit. (1) To receive a permit as
an employee, an applicant must meet the following standards:
(a) The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(b) The applicant shall not have been convicted of or pleaded no
contest to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude or prostitution,
obscenity, or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(c) The applicant shall not have been found to violate any
provision of this chapter within five (5) years immediately preceding the
date of the application.
(2) No permit shall be issued until the Cleveland Police Department
has investigated the applicant's qualifications to receive a permit. The result
of that investigation shall be filed in writing with the city clerk not later than
twenty (20) days after the date of the application.
(3) Whenever an application for a permit as an employee is denied, the
applicant may within ten (10) days of receipt of notification of denial request a
hearing before the city council, at which the applicant may present evidence
bearing upon the question. This hearing shall be held by the city council at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council which occurs more than five
(5) days after the request for a hearing has been filed. If the city council denies
the applicant a permit as an employee, the city attorney shall within ten (10)
days after the denial institute suit for declaratory judgment in state court for
review of the denial. (Ord. of Feb. 1996)
9-20
9-509. Fees. (1) A license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be
submitted with the application for a license. If the application is denied, onehalf
(1/2) of the fee shall be returned.
(2) A permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be submitted
with the application for a permit. If the application is denied, one-half (1/2) of
the fee shall be returned. (Ord. of Feb. 1996)
9-510. Display of license or permit. (1) The license shall be displayed
in a conspicuous public place in the adult oriented establishment.
(2) The permit shall be carried by an employee upon his or her person
and shall be displayed upon request of a customer, any member of the Cleveland
Police Department, or any person designated by the city council. (Ord. of Feb.
1996)
9-511. Renewal of license or permit. (1) Every license issued
pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the expiration of one (1) year from the
date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before operation
is allowed in the following year. Any operator desiring to renew a license shall
make application to the city clerk. The application for renewal must be filed not
later than sixty (60) days before the license expires. The application for renewal
shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the city clerk. A copy of the
application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the city clerk to the
Cleveland Police Department and to the operator. The application for renewal
shall be upon a form provided by the city clerk and shall contain such
information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as may be required by
the city council.
(2) A license renewal fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be
submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a
late penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed against the
applicant who files for a renewal less than sixty (60) days before the license
expires. If the applicant is denied, one-half (1/2) of the total fees collected shall
be returned.
(3) If the Cleveland Police Department is aware of any information
bearing on the operator's qualifications, the information shall be filed in writing
with the city clerk.
(4) Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the
expiration of one (1) year from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked, and
must be renewed before an employee is allowed to continue employment in an
adult-oriented establishment in the following calendar year. Any employee
desiring to renew a permit shall make application to the city clerk. The
application for renewal must be filed not later than sixty (60) days before the
permit expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with and
dated by the city clerk. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed
promptly by the city clerk to the Cleveland Police Department and to the
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-21
employee. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the city
clerk and shall contain such information and data, given under oath or
affirmation, as may be required by the city clerk.
(5) A permit renewal fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be
submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to said renewal fee, a
late penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed against the applicant who
files for renewal less than sixty (60) days before the license expires. If the
application is denied, one-half (1/2) of the fee shall be returned.
(6) If the Cleveland Police Department is aware of any information
bearing on the employee's qualification, that information shall be filed in writing
with the city clerk.
(7) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any application
for renewal of a license or for renewal for a permit shall be handled, investigated
and approved or denied within the same time periods as those established in
this chapter for original license applications and permit applications. In the
event a license renewal application or permit renewal application is denied, the
applicant shall have all rights of appeal to the city council as set forth in § 9-518.
(Ord. of Feb. 1996, as amended by Ord. #2003-28, Oct. 2003)
9-512. Revocation of license or permit. (1) The city manager shall
revoke a license or permit for any of the following reasons:
(a) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was
given on any application or material facts were omitted from any
application.
(b) The operator, entertainer, or any employee of the operator,
violates any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by
the city council pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that in the
case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of
an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of thirty (30) days
if the city council shall find that the operator had no actual or
constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of
due diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge.
(c) The operator or employee becomes ineligible to obtain a
license or permit.
(d) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not
paid.
(e) An operator employs an employee who does not have a
permit or provides space on the premises, whether by lease or otherwise,
to an independent contract who performs or works as an entertainer
without a permit.
(f) Any intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverage, narcotic or
controlled substance is allowed to be sold or consumed on the licensed
premises.
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-22
(g) Any operator, employee or entertainer sells, furnishes, gives
or displays, or causes to be sold, furnished, given or displayed to any
minor any adult-oriented entertainment or adult-oriented material.
(h) Any operator, employee or entertainer denies access of law
enforcement personnel to any portion of the licensed premises wherein
adult-oriented entertainment is permitted or to any portion of the
licensed premises wherein adult-oriented material is displayed or sold.
(i) Any operator allows continuing violations of the rules and
regulations of the Bradley County Health Department.
(j) Any operator fails to maintain the licensed premises in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition.
(2) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, before revoking
or suspending any license or permit, the city manager shall give the license
holder or permit holder not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days'
written notice of the charges against such license holder or permit holder and
of the revocation of such license or permit, or of the period of time such license
or permit is to be suspended; such notice shall also advise the license holder or
permit holder of the license holder's or permit holder's right to request a hearing
before the city council. In the event the license holder or permit holder does not
request in writing a hearing before the city council within the time set forth in
such notice, the suspension or revocation shall be effective beginning the date
set forth in such notice.
If the license holder or permit holder desires to request a hearing before
the city council to contest the suspension or revocation, such request shall be
made in writing to the city manager within ten (10) days of the license holder's
or permit holder's receipt of the notification from the city manager. If the
license holder or permit holder timely requests such a hearing, the effective date
of a suspension or hearing shall be stayed pending the final outcome of judicial
proceedings to determine whether such license or permit has been properly
revoked or suspended under the law.
If the license holder or permit holder timely requests such a hearing, a
public hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the city manager's receipt
of such request before the city council, at which time the license holder or permit
holder may present evidence as to why the suspension or revocation is improper
or contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The city council shall hear evidence
concerning the basis for such suspension or revocation and shall affirm or
reverse the suspension or revocation at the conclusion of said hearing; any such
hearing shall be concluded no later than twenty-two (22) days after the license
holder's or permit holder's receipt of notification of the suspension or revocation,
unless an extension beyond such time period is requested by the license holder
or permit holder and granted by the city council.
If the city council affirms the suspension or revocation, the office of the
city attorney shall institute suit for declaratory judgment in a court of record in
Bradley County, Tennessee, within five (5) days of the date of any such
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-22.1
affirmation seeking an immediate judicial determination of whether such license
or permit has been properly revoked or suspended under the law.
(3) The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall
automatically and immediately revoke the license. The transfer of any interest
in a non-individual operator's license shall automatically and immediately
revoke the license held by the operator.
(4) Any operator or employee who's license or permit is revoked shall
not be eligible to receive a license or permit for five (5) years from the date of
revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be
used as an adult-oriented establishment for two (2) years from the date of
revocation of the license. (Ord. of Feb. 1996, as amended by Ord. #2003-28, Oct.
2003)
9-513. Hours of operation. (1) No adult-oriented establishment shall
be open between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M. on weekdays or between
the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays.
(2) All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the Cleveland Police Department or such other persons as
the city council may designate. (Ord. of Feb. 1996)
9-514. Responsibilities of the operator. (1) The operator shall
maintain a register of all employees, showing the name, and aliases used by the
employee, home address, age, birth date, sex, height, weight, color of hair and
eyes, phone numbers, social security number, date of employment and
termination, and duties of each employee and such other information as may be
required by the city council. The above information of each employee shall be
maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three (3) years
following termination.
9-23
(2) The operator shall make the register of employees available
immediately for inspection by police upon demand of a member of the Cleveland
Police Department at all reasonable times.
(3) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if
such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or
approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to
supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator, shall be punishable for such
act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or
caused the omission.
(4) An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees
while on the licensed premises and any act or omission of any employee
constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act
or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's
license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
(5) There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in the common
areas of each adult-oriented establishment a list of any and all entertainment
provided on the premises. Such list shall further indicate the specific fee or
charge in dollar amounts for each entertainment listed. Viewing adult-oriented
motion pictures shall be considered as entertainment. The operator shall make
the list available immediately upon demand of the Cleveland Police Department
at all reasonable times.
(6) No employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow any
minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult-oriented establishment or to
allow any minor to view adult entertainment as defined herein.
(7) Every adult-oriented establishment shall be physically arranged
in such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms
or stalls, wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall be visible from the
common area of the premises. Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by
doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. It shall
be unlawful to install booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls within adult-oriented
establishments for whatever purpose, but especially for the purpose of secluded
viewing of adult-oriented motion pictures or other types of adult entertainment.
(8) The operator shall be responsible for and shall provide that any
room or area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or
other types of live adult entertainment shall be readily accessible at all times
and shall be continuously opened to view in its entirety.
(9) No operator, entertainer, or employee of an adult-oriented
establishment shall demand or collect all or any portion of a fee for
entertainment before its completion.
(10) A sign shall be conspicuously displayed in the common area of the
premises, and shall read as follows:
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-24
This Adult-Oriented Establishment is Regulated by Cleveland City Code,
Title 9, Chapter 5, Sections 9-501 through 9-516. Entertainers Are:
1. Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct;
2. Not permitted to expose their sex organs;
3. Not permitted to demand or collect all or any portion of a fee for
entertainment before its completion.
(Ord. of Feb. 1996)
9-515. Prohibitions and unlawful sexual acts. (1) No operator,
entertainer, or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall permit to be
performed, offer to perform, perform or allow customers, employees or
entertainers to perform sexual intercourse of oral or anal copulation or other
contact stimulation of the genitalia.
(2) No operator, entertainer, or employee shall encourage or permit
any person upon the premises to touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, buttocks,
anus or genitals of any other person.
(3) No operator, entertainer, employee, or customer shall be unclothed
or in such attire, costume, or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the
sex organs, breasts or buttocks of said operator, entertainer, or employee with
the intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desires of the operator, entertainer,
employee, or customer.
(4) No entertainer, employee or customer shall be permitted to have
any physical contact with any other on the premises during any performance
and all performances shall only occur upon a stage at least eighteen inches (18")
above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet (6') from the
nearest entertainer, employee and/or customer. (Ord. of Feb. 1996)
9-516. Penalties and prosecution. (1) Any person, partnership, or
corporation who is found to have violated this chapter shall be fined a definite
sum not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall result in the suspension or
revocation of any permit or license.
(2) Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate
offense, and any violation continuing more than one (1) hour of time shall be
considered a separate offense for each hour of violation. (Ord. of Feb. 1996)
9-517. Invalidity of part. Should any court of competent jurisdiction
declare any section, clause, or provision of this chapter to be unconstitutional,
such decision shall affect only such section, clause or provision so declared
unconstitutional, and shall not affect any other section, clause, or provision of
this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2003-28, Oct. 2003)
9-518. Denial of applications or renewals. (1) As used in this section,
"application" shall mean:
Change 8, March 22, 2004 9-24.1
(a) An application for a license;
(b) An application for a permit;
(c) An application for a license renewal; and
(d) An application for a permit renewal.
(2) Whenever an application is denied, the city clerk shall notify the
applicant in writing of the reasons for such action; such notice shall also advise
the applicant of the applicant's right to request a hearing before the city council.
If the applicant desires to request a hearing before the city council to contest the
denial of an application, such request shall be made in writing to the city
manager within ten (10) days of the applicant's receipt of the notification of the
denial of the application. If the applicant timely requests such a hearing, a
public hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the city manager's receipt
of such request before the city council at which time the applicant may present
evidence as to why the application should not be denied. The city council shall
hear evidence concerning the basis for denial of the application and shall affirm
or reverse the denial of an application at the conclusion of said hearing; any
such hearing shall be concluded no later than twenty-two (22) days after the
applicant's receipt of notification of denial of an application, unless an extension
beyond such time period is requested by the applicant and granted by the city
council.
(3) If the city council affirms the denial of an application, the office of
the city attorney shall institute suit for declaratory judgment in a court of record
in Bradley County, Tennessee, within five (5) days of the date of any such denial
seeking an immediate judicial determination of whether such application has
been properly denied under the law. (as added by Ord. #2003-28, Oct. 2003)
9-519. Compliance with zoning laws. (1) As used in this section,
"applicant" or "applicants" shall mean:
(a) An applicant for a license;
(b) An applicant for a permit;
(c) An applicant for a license renewal;
(d) An applicant for a permit renewal.
(2) All applicants must comply with all zoning laws and regulations of
the City of Cleveland. (as added by Ord. #2003-28, Oct. 2003)
9-25
CHAPTER 6
CABLE TELEVISION
SECTION
9-601. To be furnished under franchise.
9-601. To be furnished under franchise. Cable television shall be
furnished to the City of Cleveland and its inhabitants under franchise granted
to Telecable of Cleveland, Inc., by the city council of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee. The rights, powers, duties and obligations of the City of Cleveland
and its inhabitants are clearly stated in the franchise agreement executed by,
and which shall be binding upon the parties concerned.1
1For complete details relating to the cable television franchise agreement
see the Ordinance dated January 19, 1990 in Appendix A at the end of this
municipal code.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 9-26
CHAPTER 7
TAXICABS
SECTION
9-701. Scope of chapter.
9-702. Definitions.
9-703. Character of service to be furnished.
9-704. Certificate of public convenience and necessity.
9-705. Application for certificate.
9-706. Hearing on certificate.
9-707. Issuance of certificate.
9-708. Transfer of certificate.
9-709. Suspension or revocation of certificate.
9-710. Indemnity bond or liability insurance required.
9-711. Privilege taxes to be paid.
9-712. Records and reports required.
9-713. Permit requirements for taxicab drivers.
9-714. Form and content of application for permit; accompanying documents.
9-715. Fee for permit.
9-716. Investigation of application for permit.
9-717. Persons ineligible for permits.
9-718. Issuance of permit.
9-719. Term of permit; design.
9-720. Display and illumination of permit.
9-721. Suspension or revocation of permit.
9-722. Photograph of applicant for permit to be filed.
9-723. Inspection, fees, certificate.
9-724. Condition of taxicabs.
9-725. Signs, insignia, color scheme for taxicabs.
9-726. Rates prescribed; rate card to be posted.
9-727. Receipt for fare to be given if requested.
9-728. Refusal to pay legal fare.
9-729. Manifests to be maintained.
9-730. Drivers prohibited from soliciting patronage.
9-731. Aiding or engaging in unlawful or immoral acts prohibited.
9-732. Places for accepting and discharging passengers.
9-733. Group rides regulated.
9-734. Use of streets for parking regulated; private facilities required.
9-701. Scope of chapter. The provisions of this chapter relate to the
operation and control of taxicabs in the City of Cleveland and to the drivers of
taxicabs operating taxicabs within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland.
(Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 9-27
9-702. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this
chapter shall have the meaning as set out herein:
(1) "Certificate" means a certificate of public convenience and necessity
issued by the city council authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab
business in the city.
(2) "Cruising" means the driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys, or
public places of the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire.
(3) "Holder" means a person to whom a certificate of public
convenience and necessity has been issued.
(4) "Manifest" means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all
trips made by the driver showing time and place of origin, destination, number
of passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip.
(5) "Person" includes an individual, a corporation or other legal entity,
a partnership, and any unincorporated association.
(6) "Rate card" means a card issued by the City of Cleveland for
display in each taxicab which contains the rates of fare then in force.
(7) "Senior citizen" means any passenger who is sixty-two (62) years
old or older.
(8) "Taxicab" means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business
of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than eight (8)
persons, and not operated on a fixed route. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-703. Character of service to be furnished. All persons engaged in
the taxicab business in the City of Cleveland operating under the provisions of
this chapter shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs.
Holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity shall maintain a
central place of business and keep it open twenty-four (24) hours a day for the
purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs, unless a lesser time is
established by a resolution passed by the city council. They shall answer all
calls received by them for services inside the City of Cleveland as soon as they
can do so, and if the services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they
shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call
can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any holder who refuses to accept
a call anywhere in the City of Cleveland at any time when the holder has
available cabs, or who fails or refuses to give overall service, shall be deemed a
violator of this chapter and the certificate granted to the holder shall be revoked
at the discretion of the city council. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord.
#2013-9, March 2013)
9-704. Certificate of public convenience and necessity. It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by
said person to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city
without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity
Change 15, August 11, 2014 9-28
from the city council. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March
2013)
9-705. Application for certificate. An application for a certificate of
public convenience and necessity shall be filed with the city council upon forms
provided by the city clerk's office, shall be verified under oath, and shall furnish
the following information:
(1) Name, address. The name and address of the applicant.
(2) Financial status. The financial status of the applicant, including
the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transaction or acts giving rise to the judgments.
(3) Experience. The experience of the applicant in the transportation
of passengers.
(4) Necessity. Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove
that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate.
(5) Vehicles, facilities. The number of vehicles to be operated or
controlled by the applicant and the location of proposed depots and terminals.
(6) Color scheme insignia. The color scheme or insignia to be used to
designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant.
(7) Additional information. Such further information as the city
council may require. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March
2013)
9-706. Hearing on certificate. Upon the filing of an application for a
certificate of public convenience and necessity, the city clerk shall fix a time and
place for a public hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the
applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience and
necessity have been heretofore issued. Due notice shall also be given the
general public by posting a notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation. Any interested person may file with the city council a memorandum
in support of or in opposition to the issuance of a certificate. (Ord. of Jan. 1999,
as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-707. Issuance of certificate. (1) Findings. If the city council finds
that further taxicab service in the City of Cleveland is required by the public
convenience and necessity, and that the applicant is fit, willing, and able to
perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this
chapter and other rules promulgated by the city council, then the city council
shall issue a certificate stating the name and address of the applicant, the
number of vehicles authorized under the certificate, and the date of issuance;
otherwise, the application shall be denied.
(2) Matters to be considered. In making the above findings, the city
council shall take into consideration the number of taxicabs already in
operation; whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need;
Change 15, August 11, 2014 9-29
the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions; and the
character, experience, and responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as
replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-708. Transfer of certificate. No certificate of public convenience and
necessity may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, or otherwise transferred without
the prior consent of the city council. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord.
#2013-9, March 2013)
9-709. Suspension or revocation of certificate. (1) Grounds. A
certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the city council if the holder thereof has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter, has discontinued operations for more than sixty (60)
days, or has violated any ordinances or municipal code provisions of the City of
Cleveland, law of the United States, or a law of the State of Tennessee, the
violation of which unfavorably reflects on the fitness of the holder to offer public
transportation.
(2) Notice, hearing. Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall
be given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity
to be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. (Ord. of
Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-710. Indemnity bond or liability insurance required.
(1) Indemnity bond or liability insurance policy. No certificate of
public convenience and necessity shall be issued or continued in operation
unless there is in full force and effect an indemnity bond or liability insurance
for each vehicle authorized in an amount established by resolution of the city
council. The bonds or insurance policies shall inure to the benefit of any person
who is injured or who sustains damage to property proximately caused by the
negligence of a holder, his servants, or agents. The bonds or insurance policies
shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Indemnity bonds or insurance
policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business in the State of
Tennessee. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-711. Privilege taxes to be paid. No certificate of public convenience
and necessity shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof
has paid the applicable privilege taxes levied by the city council. (Ord. of Jan.
1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-712. Records and reports required. (1) Operating information.
Every holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations, operating
and other expenses, capital expenditures, and such other operating information
as may be required by the city council. Every holder shall maintain the records
Change 15, August 11, 2014 9-30
containing such information and other data required by this chapter at a place
readily accessible for examination by the city clerk's office.
(2) Annual reports to city business tax office. Every holder shall
submit reports of receipts, expenses, and statistics of operation to the City of
Cleveland business tax office for each calendar year, in accordance with a
uniform system prescribed by the city clerk. The reports shall reach the
business tax office on or before the last day of August of the year following the
calendar year for which the reports are prepared.
(3) Accident reports. All accidents arising from or in connection with
the operation of taxicabs shall be reported within twenty-four (24) hours from
the time of occurrence to the Cleveland Police Department in a form of report
to be furnished by the police department.
(4) Other records. It shall be mandatory for all holders to file with the
city clerk's office copies of all contracts, agreements, arrangements, memoranda,
or other writing relating to the furnishing of taxicab service to any hotel,
theater, hall, public resort, railway station, or other place of public gathering,
whether such arrangements are made with the holder or any corporation, firm,
or association with which the holder may be interested or connected. (Ord. of
Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-713. Permit requirements for taxicab drivers. No person shall act
as a driver of a taxicab unless the person has first obtained a taxicab driver
permit from the Cleveland Police Department. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced
by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-714. Form and content of application for permit; accompanying
documents. (1) Application. Taxicab drivers' permits shall be applied for in
writing on such form as the chief of police, or the chief's designee, may prescribe.
The application shall show proof of the applicant's current Tennessee
class D license with an F endorsement; what experience the applicant has had
in driving motor vehicles; whether the applicant has been convicted of violating
any motor vehicle, traffic, or criminal law of the City of Cleveland, the State of
Tennessee, the United States of America, or of any other city or state, together
with the particulars of all such convictions; and such other information as the
chief of police, or the chief's designee, may reasonably require.
(2) Accompanying documents. Each applicant shall be accompanied
by at least two (2) recent photographs of the applicant of such size and design
as designated by the chief of police or the chief's designee; a certificate from a
physician licensed to practice medicine in Tennessee showing that the applicant
is not disabled by reason of defects in his sight, hearing, body, or limbs from
safely operating a motor vehicle; and certificates from at least three (3)
reputable persons personally acquainted with the applicant showing the
applicant to be a person of good moral character. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced
by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 9-31
9-715. Fee for permit. No permit or renewal of a permit to drive a
taxicab shall be issued until the applicant therefor has first paid to the
Cleveland Police Department a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. of Jan. 1999,
as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-716. Investigation of application for permit. Except on an
application for renewal, before a taxicab driver permit is issued, the chief of
police, or the chief's designee, shall investigate the statements made in the
application and shall determine whether the applicant complies with this
chapter and is entitled to a permit. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord.
#2013-9, March 2013)
9-717. Persons ineligible for permits. No taxicab driver permit shall
be issued to anyone who has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving
moral turpitude.
No taxicab driver permit shall be issued to anyone less than eighteen (18)
years old. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-718. Issuance of permit. The chief of police shall issue a taxicab
driver permit to any applicant therefor who complies with this chapter and who
under its provisions is entitled to the permit. Any applicant refused a permit
or permit renewal may request an appeal to the city manager, who upon review
of the matter, shall decide whether said permit should be issued. (Ord. of Jan.
1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-719. Term of permit; design. (1) A taxicab driver permit shall be
issued for a period of not more than one (1) year and shall continue in effect only
through December 31st of the year within which it is issued, except that during
December of any year, permits may be issued to be effective through December
31st of the next year. No pro-ration of the fee is allowed.
(2) Taxicab drivers' permits shall be of such size and design as the
chief of police, or the chief's designee, may prescribe. However, each permit
shall bear on its face a photograph of the applicant, the number of his permit,
its expiration date, and such other information as the chief of police, or the
chief's designee, may direct. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9,
March 2013)
9-720. Display and illumination of permit. The permit of each
taxicab driver shall be kept prominently displayed and visible to the passengers
of the taxicab. After sundown, it shall be illuminated by a suitable light so as
to remain plainly visible to the passengers. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 9-32
9-721. Suspension or revocation of permit. (1) Grounds. Any
permit granted to any taxicab driver under the terms of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the chief of police for the driver's failure or refusal to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. The permit may also be
revoked if the taxicab driver's Tennessee class D license with an F endorsement
is revoked or expires; if the taxicab driver willfully or persistently violates any
city ordinance or state or federal law; or if the permit holder is convicted of
either a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude.
(2) Conditions precedent to revocation. A permit may not be revoked
unless the taxicab driver has received notice of the proposed revocation and
reasons therefor at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the proposed revocation,
and has had an opportunity to show cause why his permit should not be
revoked.
(3) Appeal of revocation. Any taxicab driver whose permit is revoked
by the chief of police under this section may request an appeal to the city
manager, who upon review of the matter shall decide whether said permit
should be revoked or reinstated. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord.
#2013-9, March 2013)
9-722. Photograph of applicant for permit to be filed. One (1)
photograph of each applicant for a taxicab driver permit shall be retained in the
files of the Cleveland Police Department with the application. (Ord. of Jan.
1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-723. Inspections, fees, certificates. (1) Time, place, fee. To insure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter all taxicabs shall be inspected by
the city's fleet manager before they can be placed in service as a taxicab.
Thereafter, they shall be regularly inspected annually in January by the city's
fleet manager. An inspection fee of forty dollars ($40.00) per vehicle shall be
charged for each annual inspection. The times and places for such inspections
shall be prescribed by the fleet manager who shall also see that notice thereof
is given individually to each holder of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity.
(2) Certification of inspection. A certificate of inspection shall be
issued and prominently displayed on the windshield of each taxicab found to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. No holder of a certificate of public
convenience and necessity shall allow a taxicab to be operated without a
certificate of inspection.
(3) Additional inspections. In addition to the initial inspection and
regular annual inspections for which the fees are to be charged, taxicabs shall
be inspected without cost to the holders at such other times and places as the
chief of police or fleet manager may reasonably direct.
(4) Noncompliance with inspection requirements. When any taxicab
is found not to conform to the requirements of this chapter, its certificate of
Change 15, August 11, 2014 9-33
inspection shall be revoked. Such taxicab shall not thereafter be operated in the
City of Cleveland until it has been put in proper condition, an extra twenty
dollar ($20.00) inspection fee paid, and a new certificate of inspection obtained
following re-inspection by the fleet manager. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-724. Condition of taxicabs. All taxicabs operated in the City of
Cleveland shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition inside and out. They
shall also be kept in such mechanical condition as is reasonably necessary to
provide for their satisfactory operation and the safety of the public. They shall
be equipped with such lights, brakes and other mechanical equipment and
devices as are required by state law and the Cleveland Municipal Code for motor
vehicles generally. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-725. Signs, insignia, color scheme for taxicabs. (1) Each taxicab
shall bear on the outside of each rear door, in painted letters not less than two
inches (2") in height, the name of the owner and/or company name, and in
addition may bear an identifying design approved by the city council.
(2) No vehicle covered by the terms of this chapter shall be licensed
whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia to be used
thereon in the opinion of the city council conflicts with or imitates any color
scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles
already operating under this chapter in such a manner as to be misleading or
tend to deceive or defraud the public. If after a license has been issued for a
taxicab hereunder, the color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia
thereof is changed so as to be in the opinion of the city council in conflict with
or in imitation of any color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia
used by any other person, owner or operator, in such a manner as to be
misleading or tend to deceive the public, the license of or certificate covering the
taxicab or taxicabs shall be suspended or revoked. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as
replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-726. Rates prescribed; rate card to be posted. (1) No owner or
driver of a taxicab shall charge a greater sum for the use of a taxicab than is
prescribed by resolution of the city council. Taxicabs must use the most direct
route possible from the point of passenger entry to the passenger's destination
point. When more than one (1) passenger employs the same taxicab, charges
shall be made for the additional passengers consistent with the rules prescribed
by a resolution passed by the city council. In establishing the rates, the city
council may authorize a discount of up to twenty percent (20%) from the regular
rates, fees, and charges for senior citizens.
(2) Every taxicab operated under this chapter shall have a rate card
issued by the business tax office setting forth the authorized maximum rates of
fare which can be charged. Said card shall be displayed in such manner as to
Change 15, August 11, 2014 9-34
be in full view of all passengers and shall clearly denote if any senior citizen
discount rates are in effect. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9,
March 2013)
9-727. Receipt for fare to be given if requested. The driver of any
taxicab shall upon demand by any passenger tender to the passenger a receipt
for the amount charged. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March
2013)
9-728. Refusal to pay legal fare. It shall be unlawful for any person
to refuse to pay the legal fare for any taxicab after having hired it, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab with intent to defraud the person
from whom it is hired of the value of such service. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as
replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-729. Manifests to be maintained. (1) Form, contents. Every driver
shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each
day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount
of fare. All completed manifests shall be returned to the owner by the driver at
the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be
furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a character approved by the
city clerk's office.
(2) Preservation. Every holder of a certificate of public convenience
and necessity shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for
at least the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year, and the
manifests shall be available to the Cleveland Police Department and the city
clerk's office. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-730. Drivers prohibited from soliciting patronage. No driver
shall solicit passengers for a taxicab nor cruise in search of passengers. Neither
shall any driver annoy any person, obstruct the movement of any person, or
follow any person for the purpose of soliciting his patronage. (Ord. of Jan. 1999,
as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
9-731. Aiding or engaging in unlawful or immoral acts prohibited.
No driver shall help, aid, assist, use, otherwise engage, or knowingly allow his
taxicab to be used in the commission of or in furtherance of any unlawful or
immoral act, purpose, or design. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord.
#2013-9, March 2013)
9-732. Places for accepting and discharging passengers. Drivers
of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall
pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible, or in the absence of a
sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or
Change 15, August 11, 2014 9-35
discharge passengers. Upon one-way streets, passengers may be discharged on
either side of the road. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2013-9, March
2013)
9-733. Group riding regulated. Whenever one (1) passenger has
lawfully and properly entered or engaged a taxicab, no additional passenger
shall be accepted without the consent of the first passenger. The first passenger
has the right to require the additional passengers to pay one-half (1/2) of the
cost for the trip. In any event, sufficient room must be left for the driver at all
times to have free, comfortable, and easy control of the operation of the taxicab.
Not more than two (2) passengers shall be permitted to sit upon the same seat
occupied by the driver of any taxicab. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord.
#2013-9, March 2013)
9-734. Use of streets for parking regulated; private facilities
required. All holders of a certificate of public convenience and necessity are
required to provide private facilities for the parking of their taxicabs when the
taxicabs are not engaged or lawfully parked. (Ord. of Jan. 1999, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-9, March 2013)
10-1
TITLE 10
ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. IN GENERAL.
2. DOGS AND CATS--ADDITIONAL SECTIONS.
3. WILD BIRDS.
CHAPTER 1
IN GENERAL
SECTION
10-101. Running at large prohibited.
10-102. Swine prohibited.
10-103. Pen or enclosure to be kept clean.
10-104. Adequate food, water, and shelter, etc., to be provided.
10-105. Keeping in such manner as to become a nuisance prohibited.
10-106. Seizure and disposition of animals.
10-101. Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
owning or being in charge of any cows, sheep, horses, mules, goats, dogs, cats,
chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, or other domestic fowl, cattle, or livestock,
knowingly or negligently to permit any of them to run at large in any street,
alley, or unenclosed lot within the corporate limits.
Any person, including its owner, knowingly or negligently permitting an
animal to run at large may be prosecuted under this section even if the animal
is picked up and disposed of under other provisions of this chapter, whether or
not the disposition includes returning the animal to its owner. (1981 Code,
§ 5-51, modified, as amended by Ord. of 7/23/2001)
10-102. Swine prohibited. Swine are prohibited within the corporate
limits.
10-103. Pen or enclosure to be kept clean. When animals or fowls are
kept within the corporate limits, the building, structure, corral, pen, or
enclosure in which they are kept shall at all times be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition. (1981 Code, § 5-92, modified)
10-104. Adequate food, water, and shelter, etc., to be provided. No
animal or fowl shall be kept or confined in any place where the food, water,
shelter, and ventilation are not adequate and sufficient for the preservation of
its health and safety.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 10-2
All feed shall be stored and kept in a rat-proof and fly-tight building, box,
or receptacle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to beat or otherwise abuse or injure
any dumb animal or fowl. (1981 Code, §§ 5-91 and 5-93, modified)
10-105. Keeping in such manner as to become a nuisance prohibited.
No animal or fowl shall be kept in such a place or condition as to become a
nuisance because of either noise, odor, contagious disease, or other reason.
10-106. Seizure and disposition of animals. Any animal or fowl found
running at large or otherwise being kept in violation of this chapter may be
seized by any police officer or other properly designated officer or official and
confined in a shelter provided or designated by the city council. If the owner is
known, the owner shall be given notice of the seizure in person, by telephone,
or by a postcard addressed to the owner's last known mailing address. If the
owner is not known or cannot be located, then no notice is required to be sent to
the owner. If the owner is known, an impounded animal or fowl will be held for
a period of five (5) days from its seizure before it is disposed of in accordance
with this section. If the owner is not known, an impounded animal or fowl will
be held for a period of three (3) days from its seizure before it is disposed of in
accordance with this section. If the animal or fowl is not claimed within the
applicable time period after its seizure, then the animal will be sold, adopted or
humanely destroyed, or it may otherwise be disposed of as authorized by the city
council. If an animal is claimed by its owner, then the owner must pay the
shelter its costs. The shelter shall collect from each person claiming an
impounded animal or fowl reasonable fees, in accordance with a schedule
approved by the city council, to cover the costs of impoundment and
maintenance. (1981 Code, § 5-52, as replaced by Ord. #2005-05, March 2005)
10-3
The title of this chapter was changed by Ord. of 7/23/2001. 1
CHAPTER 2
DOGS AND CATS--ADDITIONAL SECTIONS1
SECTION
10-201. Rabies vaccination and registration required.
10-202. Dogs to wear tags.
10-203. Restraint of dogs.
10-204. Vicious dogs to be securely restrained.
10-205. Noisy dogs prohibited.
10-206. Confinement of dogs suspected of being rabid.
10-207. Seizure, impoundment and redemption of dogs running at large.
10-208. Destruction of vicious or infected dogs running at large.
10-201. Rabies vaccination and registration required. It shall be
unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog without having the
same duly vaccinated against rabies and registered in accordance with the
provisions of the "Tennessee Anti-Rabies Law" (Tennessee Code Annotated,
§§ 68-8-101 through 68-8-114) or other applicable law. Any references to dogs
within this chapter shall also be presumed to include cats. (1981 Code, § 5-27,
modified)
10-202. Dogs to wear tags. It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
keep, or harbor any dog which does not wear a tag evidencing the vaccination
and registration required by the preceding section.
10-203. Restraint of dogs. Every person owning or having possession,
charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall keep such dog exclusively upon
his own premises; provided, however, that such dog may be off such premises if
it is under the control of a competent person and restrained by a chain, leash or
other means of visible control.
10-204. Vicious dogs to be securely restrained. It shall be unlawful for
any person to own or keep any dog known to be vicious or dangerous unless such
dog is so confined and/or otherwise securely restrained as to provide reasonably
for the protection of other animals and persons. (1981 Code, § 5-31, modified)
10-205. Noisy dogs prohibited. No person shall own, keep, or harbor any
dog which, by loud and frequent barking, whining, or howling, disturbs the
peace and quiet of any neighborhood. (1981 Code, § 5-32, modified)
Change 9, March 28, 2005 10-4
10-206. Confinement of dogs suspected of being rabid. If any dog has
bitten any person or is suspected of having bitten any person or is for any reason
suspected of being infected with rabies, the chief of police or any other properly
designated officer or official may cause such dog to be confined or isolated for
such time as he deems reasonably necessary to determine if such dog is rabid.
(1981 Code, § 5-35, modified)
10-207. Seizure, impoundment and redemption of dogs running at large.
(1) Seizure. Any dog found running at large may be seized by the animal
control officer or any police officer and placed in the animal shelter.
(2) Impoundment. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer
of the City of Cleveland to immediately impound any and all dogs running at
large in violation of the provisions of this chapter. All costs of said
impoundment and all costs of any subsequent boarding of any dog shall be borne
by the owner and shall be paid by the owner prior to the time any dog shall be
released to the owner.
(3) Redemption. (a) Dogs wearing rabies vaccination tag or other
identification. If said dog is wearing a rabies vaccination tag, or other
identification, all reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner of
the animal. Reasonable effort is defined to include a postcard addressed
to the owner's last known mailing address or a telephone call to the
owner if the owner's telephone number is known. The notice shall advise
the owner that they are required to appear within five (5) days and
redeem the animal by paying the animal shelter a fee for each day the
animal has been impounded, plus an impoundment or pickup fee in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council. If, after five
(5) days, the dog has not been claimed, the animal control officer may
destroy the same in a human manner and dispose of the remains in a
sanitary manner. Alternatively, the animal shelter may offer the dog for
adoption, consistent with the city's animal adoption program.
(b) Dogs not wearing a rabies vaccination tag or other
identification. If a dog is not wearing a rabies vaccination tag or other
identification, the animal may be adopted or destroyed, unless legally
claimed by the owner within three (3) days. No dog shall be released
from the shelter without having proof of current vaccination or until it
has been vaccinated and, where applicable, a tag issued. The owner must
also pay the animal shelter a fee for each day the animal has been
impounded, plus an impoundment or pickup fee in accordance with the
fee schedule adopted by the city council. (1981 Code, § 5-34, modified, as
amended by Ord. #2005-06, March 2005)
10-208. Destruction of vicious or infected dogs running at large. When,
because of its viciousness or apparent infection with rabies, a dog found running
Change 9, March 28, 2005 10-5
State law reference 1
For a Tennessee Supreme Court case upholding the summary
destruction of dogs pursuant to appropriate legislation, see Darnell v.
Shapard, 156 Tenn. 544, 3 S.W.2d 661 (1928).
at large cannot be safely impounded it may be summarily destroyed by any
policeman or other properly designated officer.1
Change 9, March 28, 2005 10-6
CHAPTER 3
WILD BIRDS
SECTION
10-301. City to supervise abatement of any nuisance created by wild birds.
10-301. City to supervise abatement of any nuisance created by wild
birds. When any flock or group of wild birds are found to be congregating in
such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a
menace to health or property, and if such are found and declared by the city
manager to be creating a public nuisance, appropriate action may be authorized
by the city manager after a thorough investigation. However, trapping or killing
of such birds shall not be resorted to unless the city manager is unable to find
a satisfactory alternative. Remedial measures shall be taken only by authority
of, and under supervision of the city. (1981 Code, § 5-96, modified)
11-1
TITLE 11
MUNICIPAL OFFENSES1
CHAPTER
1. ALCOHOL.
2. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET.
3. FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES.
4. TRESPASSING AND INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC.
5. MISCELLANEOUS.
6. HANDBILLS.
7. LITTERING.
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOL2
SECTION
11-101. Drinking alcoholic beverages in public, etc.
11-102. Minors in beer places.
11-101. Drinking alcoholic beverages in public, etc. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drink, consume or have open any container of beer
or intoxicating liquor in or on any public street, alley, avenue, highway,
sidewalk, public park, public school ground or other public place, while riding
in or operating a vehicle in or on any of the aforementioned public places, or
while on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control.
11-102. Minors in beer places. No person under the age of twenty-one
(21) shall loiter in or around or otherwise frequent any place where beer is sold
at retail for Class 2 on premises consumption.
1Municipal code references
Animal control: title 10.
Housing and utilities: title 12.
Fireworks and explosives: title 7.
Traffic offenses: title 15.
Streets and sidewalks (non-traffic): title 16.
2Municipal code reference
Sale of alcoholic beverages, including beer: title 8.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 11-2
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET
SECTION
11-201. Disturbing the peace.
11-202. Anti-noise regulations.
11-203. Excessive noise from motor vehicles.
11-201. Disturbing the peace. No person shall disturb, tend to disturb,
or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive, or
obstreperous conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon
any premises owned or possessed by him or under his control. (1981 Code,
§§ 11-16, 15-21 and 15-23, modified)
11-202. Anti-noise regulations. Subject to the provisions of this
section, the creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary
noise is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be
detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public
peace and welfare, is prohibited.
(1) Miscellaneous prohibited noises enumerated. The following acts,
among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in
violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
(a) Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or other device on
any automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck, or vehicle while not in motion
except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently
out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes
are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation
by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh
sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time.
(b) Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio,
phonograph, or any musical instrument or sound device, including but
not limited to loudspeakers or other devices for reproduction or
amplification of sound, either independently of or in connection with
motion pictures, radio, or television, in such a manner or with such
volume, particularly during the hours between 9:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.,
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office
or hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any
person in the vicinity.
(c) Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling, or
singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 P.M.
and 7:00 A.M., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
Change 17, July 23, 2018 11-3
comfort, or repose of any person in any hospital, dwelling, hotel, or other
type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.
(d) Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which by
causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any person in the vicinity.
(e) Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, truck,
or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to cause loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
(f) Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin
or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper
city authorities.
(g) Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
motor vehicle, or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device
which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(h) Building operations. Building operations. The erection
(including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in
any residential area or section or the construction or repair of streets and
highways in any residential area or section, other than between sunrise
and 10:00 P.M. on week days during daylight savings time, and between
sunrise and 9:00 P.M. on week days when daylight savings time is not in
effect, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a permit from the building inspector
granted for a period while the emergency continues, not to exceed thirty
(30) days.
If the building inspector should determine that the public health
and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration, or
repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways between
the hours of 10:00 P.M. and sunrise on week days during daylight savings
time, or between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and sunrise on week days when
daylight savings time is not in effect, and if he shall further determine
that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest through
delay, he may grant permission for such work to be done between 10:00
P.M. and sunrise on week days during daylight savings time or on week
days between 9:00 P.M. and sunrise when daylight savings time is not in
effect, upon application being made at the time the permit for the work
is awarded or during the process of the work.
(i) Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation
of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital or adjacent
to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same is
in session.
(j) Loading and unloading operations. The creation of any loud
and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
Change 9, March 28, 2005 11-4
vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and other
containers.
(k) Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum,
loudspeaker, or other instrument or device emitting noise for the purpose
of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale or display of
merchandise.
(l) Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of
mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or
standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes.
(2) Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply
to or be enforced against:
(a) City vehicles. Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon
necessary public business.
(b) Repair of streets, etc. Excavations or repairs of bridges,
streets, or highways at night, by or on behalf of the city, the county, or
the state, when the public welfare and convenience renders it
impracticable to perform such work during the day.
(c) Noncommercial and nonprofit use of loudspeakers or
amplifiers. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the
course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character and in
the course of advertising functions sponsored by nonprofit organizations.
However, no such use shall be made until a permit therefor is secured
from the police department. Hours for the use of an amplified or public
address system will be designated in the permit so issued and the use of
such systems shall be restricted to the hours so designated in the permit.
(1981 Code, § 11-17, 15-21, and 15-23, modified, as amended by Ord.
#2017-52, Nov. 2017)
11-203. Excessive noise from motor vehicles. (1) No person
operating or occupying a motor vehicle on any public street, highway, alley,
parking lot, or driveway within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee, shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification
system, including, but not limited to, any radio, tape player, compact disc
player, loudspeaker, or any other electrical device used for the amplification of
sound from within the motor vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a
distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the vehicle. For the purpose of this
section "plainly audible" means any sound which clearly can be heard, by
unimpaired auditory senses based on a direct line of sight of fifty (50) or more
feet, however, words or phrases need not be discernible and such sound shall
include base reverberation.
(2) This section shall not be applicable to emergency or public safety
vehicles, vehicles owned or operated by a municipal or county government or
any utility company, for sound emitted unavoidably during a job-related
operation, school or community sponsored activities, auctioneers or auctioning
Change 9, March 28, 2005 11-5
activities, boats or other water crafts operated on waters or any motor vehicle
used in an authorized public activity for which a permit has been granted by the
appropriate agency of a municipal or county government.
(3) A violation of this section will subject the offender to a fine in an
amount not to exceed $50.00. (as added by Ord. #2004-30, Aug. 2004)
11-6
CHAPTER 3
FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES
SECTION
11-301. Unlawful to discharge firearms, etc.
11-302. Throwing missiles.
11-303. Carrying weapons.
11-301. Unlawful to discharge firearms, etc. It shall be unlawful to
shoot or discharge any firearm, gun, pistol, toy pistol, torpedo, dynamite
cartridge or flipper within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland. It shall
also be unlawful to discharge any explosive, except when done in excavating or
for other proper and lawful purposes.
It shall also be unlawful to discharge within the corporate limits of the
City of Cleveland any air gun, air pistol, air rifle, BB gun, or slingshot capable
of discharging or propelling a bullet or pellet, whether made of metal, plastic,
or any other kind of material, and whether propelled by spring, compressed air,
expanding gas, explosive, or any other force producing means or method. (1981
Code, § 15-63, modified, as replaced by Ord. of 4/14/97, 31)
11-302. Throwing missiles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
maliciously throw any stone, snowball, bottle, or any other missile upon or at
any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property or upon or at any
person.
11-303. Carrying weapons. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to
carry in any manner whatever, with intent to go armed, any razor, dirk, bowie
knife or other knife or like form, shape or size, or a pocket knife with blade
exceeding four (4) inches in length, or a switchblade knife of any size, sword
cane, ice pick, slingshot, black jack, knucks, Spanish stiletto, or a fountain pen
pistol or gun, or like instrument containing a firing pin capable of shooting tear
gas, or pistol cartridges; or any pistol or revolver of any kind whatsoever.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed on or about
his person, any razor, dirk, bowie knife, or other knife of like form, shape, or
size, or pocket knife with blade exceeding four (4) inches in length, or a
switchblade knife of any size, sword cane, ice pick, slingshot, black jack, brass
knucks, Spanish stiletto, or a fountain pen pistol or gun, or like instrument
containing a firing pin capable of shooting tear gas or pistol cartridges; or any
pistol or revolver of any kind whatsoever, or any other dangerous weapon.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person
authorized by state law to carry weapons, any person employed in the army, air
force, navy or marine service of the United States, or to any officer or policeman
while bona fide engaged in his official duties, in the execution of process, or
11-7
while searching for or engaged in arresting criminals, or to persons who may
have been summoned by such officer or policeman in the discharge of his said
duties, and in arresting criminal and transporting and turning them over to the
proper authorities; nor shall said provisions apply to any conductor of any
passenger or freight train of any railroad while he is on duty. Persons who may
be employed in the army, air force, navy or marine service, as aforesaid, shall
only carry such pistols as are prescribed by the army, air force and navy
regulations. (1981 Code, § 15-61, modified)
11-8
CHAPTER 4
TRESPASSING AND INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC
SECTION
11-401. Trespassing.
11-402. Interference with traffic.
11-401. Trespassing.1 (1) On premises open to the public.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to defy a lawful order,
personally communicated to him by the owner or other authorized person,
not to enter or remain upon the premises of another, including premises
which are at the time open to the public.
(b) The owner of the premises, or his authorized agent, may
lawfully order another not to enter or remain upon the premises if such
person is committing, or commits, any act which interferes with, or tends
to interfere with, the normal, orderly, peaceful or efficient conduct of the
activities of such premises.
(2) On premises closed or partially closed to public. It shall be
unlawful for any person to knowingly enter or remain upon the premises of
another which is not open to the public, notwithstanding that another part of
the premises is at the time open to the public.
(3) Vacant buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or
remain upon the premises of a vacated building after notice against trespass is
personally communicated to him by the owner or other authorized person or is
posted in a conspicuous manner.
(4) Lots and buildings in general. It shall be unlawful for any person
to enter or remain on or in any lot or parcel of land or any building or other
structure after notice against trespass is personally communicated to him by the
owner or other authorized person or is posted in a conspicuous manner.
(5) Peddlers, etc. It shall also be unlawful and deemed to be a trespass
for any peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, or other person to fail
to promptly leave the private premises of any person who requests or directs
him to leave.2 (1981 Code, §§ 15-128, 15-129, and 15-130, modified)
1State law reference
Subsections (1) through (4) of this section were taken substantially
from Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-14-405.
2Municipal code reference
Provisions governing peddlers: title 9, chapter 1.
11-9
11-402. Interference with traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person
to stand, sit, or engage in any activity whatever on any public street, sidewalk,
bridge, or public ground in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere
with the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon.
11-10
CHAPTER 5
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
11-501. Abandoned refrigerators, etc.
11-502. Caves, wells, cisterns, etc.
11-503. Posting notices, etc.
11-504. Curfew authorized.
11-505. Indecent exposure prohibited.
11-506. Commercial sexual activity prohibited.
11-507. Prohibited sexual activity in establishments offering food or beer.
11-501. Abandoned refrigerators, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person to leave in any place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended,
unused, or discarded refrigerator, icebox, or other container with any type
latching or locking door without first removing therefrom the latch, lock, or door
or otherwise sealing the door in such a manner that it cannot be opened by any
child.
11-502. Caves, wells, cisterns, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to permit to be maintained on property owned or occupied by him any cave, well,
cistern, or other such opening in the ground which is dangerous to life and limb
without an adequate cover or safeguard.
11-503. Posting notices, etc. No person shall paint, make, or fasten,
in any way, any show-card, poster, or other advertising device or sign upon any
public or private property unless legally authorized to do so.
11-504. Curfew authorized. After proclamation of a civil emergency
by the mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical
areas of the municipality or to the municipality as a whole, as he deems
advisable, and applicable during which hours of the day or night as he deems
necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. The proclamation and
general curfew shall have the force and effect of law and shall continue in effect
until rescinded in writing by the mayor but not to exceed 15 days. (1981 Code,
§ 15-107, modified)
11-505. Indecent exposure prohibited. (1) Definitions. The
following definitions apply to this section unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Intimate parts" includes the primary genital area, groin,
inner thigh, buttock or breast of a human being below the top of the
areola of any person;
11-11
(b) "Sexual contact" includes the intentional touching of the
victim's, the defendant's, or any other person's intimate parts, or the
intentional touching of the clothing covering the immediate area of the
victim's, the defendants, or any other person's intimate parts, if that
intentional touching can be reasonably construed as being for the purpose
of sexual arousal or gratification; and
(c) "Sexual penetration" means sexual intercourse, cunnilingus,
fellatio, anal intercourse, or any other intrusion, however slight, of any
part of a person's body or of any object into the genital or anal openings
of the victim's, the defendant's, or any other person's body, but emission
of semen is not required.
(2) Indecent exposure. A person commits an offense who, in a public
place or on the private premises of another, or so near thereto as to be seen from
such private premises:
(a) Intentionally:
(i) Exposes such person's intimate parts as defined in
subsection (1)(a) to one (1) or more persons; or
(ii) Engages in sexual contact or sexual penetration as
defined in subsection (1)(b) and (1)(c).
(b) Reasonably expects the acts will be viewed by another and
such acts:
(i) Will offend an ordinary viewing person; or
(ii) Are for the purpose of sexual arousal and gratification
of the defendant. (1981 Code, § 15-38)
11-506. Commercial sexual activity prohibited. (1) Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to procure, to offer or to engage in any act of
adamitism, anilingus, bestiality, cunnilingus, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation,
frottage, masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or urolagnia for any financial
consider or reward.
(2) Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have
the meanings ascribed in this subsection:
(a) "Adamitism" means the practice of going naked or the state
of being unclothed.
(b) "Anilingus" means erotic stimulation achieved by contact
between mouth or tongue and the anus.
(c) "Bestiality" means sexual relations between a human being
and a lower animal.
(d) "Coprophilia" means use of feces for sexual excitement.
(e) "Cunnilingus" means stimulation of the vulva or clitoris with
the lips or tongue.
(f) "Fellation" means the practice of obtaining sexual
gratification by oral stimulation of the penis.
11-12
(g) "Flagellation" means an act or instance of obtaining sexual
gratification by beating, flogging or scourging another, or being the
recipient of such action.
(h) "Frottage" means masturbation by rubbing another person.
(i) "Masturbation" means erotic stimulation involving the
genital organs, commonly resulting in orgasm and achieved by manual or
other bodily manipulation.
(j) "Sexual intercourse" means carnal copulation of male and
female implying actual intercourse of the organs of the latter.
(k) "Sodomy" means penetration of the male organ into the anus
of another person.
(l) "Urolagnia" means sexual excitement associated with the
urine or urination. (1981 Code, § 15-43)
11-507. Prohibited sexual activity in establishments offering food
or beer. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any place or
establishment or the premises thereof wherein food or beer are offered for sale,
and to:
(a) Publicly perform acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any
other sexual acts prohibited by law.
(b) Publicly engage in actual or simulated acts involving the
anus or genitals.
(c) Publicly engage in the actual or simulated displaying of the
pubic hair, anus, buttocks, vulva, genitals or breasts below the top of the
areola of any person.
(d) Publicly wear or use any device or covering exposed to public
view which simulates the human breasts, genitals, anus, buttocks, pubic
hair or any portion thereof.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow another to
commit any of the acts specified or defined in this section on or about the
premises which are owned, managed or operated by such person, or in which
such person is employed. (1981 Code, § 15-44)
Change 7, March 24, 2003 11-13
CHAPTER 6
HANDBILLS
SECTION
11-601. Throwing, distributing handbills in public places.
11-602. [Deleted.]
11-603. Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
11-604. Distribution of handbills prohibited where property posted.
11-605. Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises.
11-606. Dropping litter from aircraft.
11-607. Posting notices prohibited.
11-601. Throwing, distributing handbills in public places. No
person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or
other public place within the city, nor shall any person hand out or distribute
or sell any handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place with the city for any
person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
handbill to any person willing to accept it. (1981 Code, § 10-55, modified)
11-602. [Deleted.] (1981 Code, § 10-56, as amended by Ord. of
12/10/2001, and deleted by Ord. of 1/27/03)
11-603. Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises
which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (1981 Code,
§ 10-57, modified)
11-604. Distribution of handbills prohibited where property
posted. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any
private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is
placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a
sign bearing the words: "NO TRESPASSING," "NO PEDDLERS OR AGENTS,"
"NO ADVERTISEMENT" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that
the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or have their right
11-14
of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon such premises.
(1981 Code, § 10-58, modified)
11-605. Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises.
(1) No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon
private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any
such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person in or upon such
private premises; provided, however, that, in case of inhabited private premises
which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such person, unless requested
by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such
handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed
or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted
about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places and except that
mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or
regulations.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of
mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, periodicals and magazines of a
general circulation, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property
in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (1981
Code, § 10-59, modified)
11-606. Dropping litter from aircraft. No person in an aircraft shall
throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object.
(1981 Code, § 10-60)
11-607. Posting notices prohibited. No person shall post or affix any
notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the
public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree or upon any public
structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. (1981
Code, § 10-61)
Change 12, September 8, 2008 11-15
CHAPTER 7
LITTERING
SECTION
11-701. Definitions.
11-702. Littering.
11-703. Littering unlawful, violations.
11-701. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context
otherwise requires, the following words shall have the following definitions:
(1) "Commercial purpose" means litter discarded by a business,
corporation, association, partnership, sole proprietorship, or any other entity
conducting business for economic gain, or by an employee or agent of the entity;
(2) "Garbage" includes putrescible animal and vegetable waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food;
(3) "Litter" includes garbage, refuse, rubbish and all other waste
material, including a tobacco product as defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 39-17-1503 and any other item primarily designed to hold or filter
a tobacco product while the tobacco is being smoked;
(4) "Refuse" includes all putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste;
and
(5) "Rubbish" includes non-putrescible solid waste consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible waste. (as replaced by Ord. #2008-24, June
2008)
11-702. Littering. (1) A person commits littering who:
(a) Knowingly places, drops or throws litter on any public
property within the City of Cleveland and does not immediately remove
it.
(b) Knowingly places, drops or throws litter on any private
property without permission and does not immediately remove it.
(c) Negligently places or throws glass or other dangerous
substances on or adjacent to water to which the public has access for
swimming or wading, or on or within fifty (50) feet of a public street or
highway.
(d) Negligently discharges sewage, minerals, oil products or
litter into any public waters or lakes within the city.
(2) Whenever litter is placed, dropped, or thrown from any motor
vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this section, the trier
of fact may, in its discretion and in consideration of the totality of the
circumstances, infer that the operator of the conveyance has committed
littering.
Change 12, September 8, 2008 11-16
(3) Whenever litter discovered on public or private property is found
to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills,
publications, or other writings that display the name of a person in such a
manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to that person, the
trier of fact may, in its discretion and in consideration of the totality of the
circumstances, infer that the person has committed littering. (as added by
Ord. #2008-24, June 2008)
11-703. Littering unlawful, violations. (1) It shall be unlawful and
is a civil offense for anyone to discard any type of litter within the corporate
limits of the City of Cleveland except in appropriate containers.
(2) It shall be unlawful and is a civil offense for any person or entity
to violate the provisions of Cleveland Municipal Code, § 11-702.
(3) Violations of this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. In addition to a civil
penalty, the offender shall be responsible for the payment of court costs and any
applicable litigation tax. (as added by Ord. #2008-24, June 2008)
Change 17, July 23, 2018 12-1
TITLE 12
BUILDING, UTILITY, ETC. CODES1
CHAPTER
1. BUILDING CODE.
2. ELECTRICAL CODE.
3. [DELETED.]
4. [DELETED.]
5. [DELETED.]
6. PLUMBING CODE.
7. [DELETED].
8. GAS CODE.
9. BUILDING MAINTENANCE CODE.
10. MECHANICAL CODE.
11. [DELETED.]
12. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
13. MOBILE FOOD UNITS.
14. EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE2
SECTION
12-101. Adopted.
12-102. Modifications.
12-103. Available in clerk's office.
12-104. Permit fee schedule.
12-105. Sprinkling of certain building required.
12-106. Temporary, mobile, factory-built or factory-assembled structures.
12-107. [Deleted.]
1Any fire limits adopted by reference in this title shall mean those fire
limits as described in § 7-101.
2Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 12-2
12-101. Adopted. (1) Pursuant to authority granted by Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 6-54-502, the International Building Code,1 2012 edition and
Appendices A, B, D, F, G, and H, as prepared and adopted by the International
Code Council, Inc., and as amended as follows:
(a) Section 101.1 Insert "City of Cleveland Tennessee" in (Name
of Jurisdiction)
(b) Section 1612.3 Insert "City of Cleveland Tennessee" in
(Name of Jurisdiction)
(c) Section 1612.3 Insert "February 2, 2007" in (Date of
Issuance)
(d) Section 3412 Insert "1981 Code" (Date in One Location)
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out verbatim
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate
limits of the city.
(2) Pursuant to authority granted by Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 6-54-502, the International Residential Code, 2012 edition, as prepared and
adopted by the International Code Council, Inc., and as amended as follows:
(a) Section 101.1 Insert "City of Cleveland Tennessee" in (Name
of Jurisdiction)
(b) Table R301.2(1) adding the following: Ground Snow
Load "10", Wind Design Speed "90 mph", Wind Design Topographic
Effects "No", Seismic Design Category "C", Weathering "Moderate",
Frost Line Depth "12 inches", Termite Protection "Yes", Winter
Design Temperature "18 degrees Fahrenheit", Ice Barrier
Underlayment Required "No", Flood Hazards "See FIRM current
panel #", Air Freezing Index "1500 or less", Mean Annual
Temperature "59.4". (APPROPRIATE DESIGN CRITERIA).
(c) Under R302.2 Townhouses, replace the current
exception with the following language:
A common 1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly
tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 is
permitted for townhouses that are equipped
throughout with an automatic residential fire
sprinkler system, or a common 2-hour
fire-resistance-rated wall assembly tested in
accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 is also
permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain
plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in
the cavity of the common wall. The wall shall be
rated for the fire exposure from both sides and shall
extend to and be tight against the exterior wall and
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 12-3
the underside of the roof sheathing. Electrical
installations shall be installed in accordance with
Chapters 34 through 43. Penetrations of the electrical
outlet boxes shall be in accordance with Section
R302.4.
(d) Section R313 add words to R313.1 Townhouse
automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire
sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses with five (5) or
more units connected together in accordance with section 903.2.8
of the International Building Code, 2012 edition.
(e) Section R313 delete R313.2 One and two family
dwellings automatic fire systems in its entirety.
(f) Section P2603.5.1 Insert "six (6) inches" (Number of
inches in two locations).
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out verbatim
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate
limits of the city.
(3) Pursuant to the requirement of Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 6-54-502, one (1) copy of these codes, with the referenced appendices, have
been filed with the city clerk and are available for public use and inspection.
Any matters in said codes which are contrary to the existing ordinances
of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee shall prevail, any existing ordinances to the
contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (1981 Code, § 6-38, as
amended by Ord. of Oct. 1995, Ord. of July 1998, Ord. of 8/27/2001, and
Ord. #2009-71, Oct. 2009, replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014, and amended
by Ord. #2015-23, Sept. 2015)
12-102. Modifications. When reference is made to the duties of certain
official named therein, that designated official of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee who has the duties corresponding to those of the named official in
said code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the
provisions of said code are concerned. (1981 Code, § 6-39, as amended by Ord.
of Jan. 1994, Ord. of Feb. 1995, Ord. of July 1998, Dec. 1998, and Ord. of
8/27/2001, repealed by Ord. #2009-71, Oct. 2009, and added by Ord. #2014-28,
June 2014)
12-103. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502 one (1) copy of the building code has
been placed on file in the clerk's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (1981 Code, § 6-4, modified)
12-104. Permit fee schedule. The following building permit fee
schedule, as contemplated by the 2012 International Building Code, § 109.2, is
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-4
hereby adopted by the city council of the city as the building permit fee schedule
for the city.
Building Permit Fees
One and two-family dwelling permit fees for new construction are calculated
based on heated square footage. A multiplier of eighty-five dollars ($85.00) per
square foot will be used to assess building valuation. The permit fee will be
calculated with this valuation using the table below.
All other building permit fees are based on estimated cost of construction and
calculated using the table below.
Total Valuation Fee
$1,000.00 or less $20.00
$1,001.00 to $50,000.00 $20.00 for the first $1,000.00
plus $5.00 for each additional
thousand or fraction thereof, to
and including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $300.00 for the first $50,000.00
plus $4.00 for each additional
thousand or fraction thereof, to
and including $100,000.00
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $500.00 for the first $100,000.00
plus $3.00 for each additional
thousand or fraction thereof, to
and including $500,000.00
$500,001.00 and up $ 1 , 8 0 0 . 0 0 f o r t h e f i r s t
$500,000.00 plus $2.00 for each
additional thousand or fraction
thereof.
Moving of any building or structure $100.00
Demolition of One and Two-family homes $50.00
Demolition of Multi-family, Commercial
& Accessory structures $100.00
Change 17, July 23, 2018 12-5
Starting work before permit issued B104 Penalties, where work for
which a permit required is
started prior to obtaining proper
permit, the fees are herein
specified shall be doubled.
Payment of said fee shall not
relieve any persons from fully
complying with the requirements
of the Codes.
Plans Review Fee 15% of the building permit fee
and 15% of the grading permit if
issued independently of the
building permit
Re-inspection Fee $25.00
Certificate of Occupancy $25.00
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy $50.00 (and $50.00 for each
subsequent renewal)
Land Disturbance $20.00 for each residential lot
(1981 Code, § 6-40, as replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-105. Sprinkling of certain building required. In addition to the
requirements of the building code adopted by § 12-101, this additional
requirement shall be in effect. Any building forty (40) feet from ground level or
over four (4) stories in height shall have an approved sprinkler system exclusive
of chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers and other projections not
used for human habitation. In measuring the height of a building a habitated
basement or attic shall be counted as one story. (1981 Code, § 6-41)
12-106. Temporary, mobile, factory-built or factory-assembled
structures. (1) It shall be unlawful to place any temporary structure, trailer,
mobile structure (including, but not limited to, cars, vans, trucks, or buses),
tents, factory-built structures or factory-assembled structures designed for
conveyance after fabrication, either on its own wheels, flatbed truck, or other
trailers; on any lot either residential, commercial, or industrial, within the
corporate limits of the city; used for assembly, business, educational, hazardous,
factory, industrial, institutional, mercantile, residential or storage occupancies,
except as noted herein.
(2) Exceptions. Structures exempted from provisions of this section
shall include:
Change 17, July 23, 2018 12-6
(a) Mobile homes located in approved mobile home parks.
(b) Prefabricated dwelling kits or structures specifically
approved in the International Building Code1 compliance listing.
(c) Temporary office and storage buildings located on approved
construction sites provided they are removed upon completion of
construction.
(d) Customary accessory storage buildings in approved
residential locations.
(e) A tent used by a person, firm, corporation, or group as an
assembly occupance for the purpose of a meeting, festival, fair, circus, or
carnival, or a tent used by a transient vendor for a limited time not to
exceed ten (10) days with a permit and in conformity with adopted codes
and further provided that the tent is located on commercial, office, or
industrial property not otherwise occupied by the same person, firm,
corporation, group, ortransient vendor on a more-or-less continuous basis.
The ten (10) day limit on this type of tent permit may be extended to a
longer period if the temporary use of the tent for such longer period is
determined to be a lawful pre-existing non-conforming use under the
zoning ordinance. Tents installed under this section require a permit and
that permit is valid for up to ten (10) days. A ten (10) day tent permit
issued under this section shall not be issued for the same property until
six (6) months have elapsed after the expiration of the previous such
permit.
(f) Replacement of existing mobile homes on single family
residential lots, with another mobile home, in accordance with the city's
zoning laws.
(g) A tent or temporary building used by a properly licensed
person or business solely for the otherwise lawful selling of edible fresh
produce such as fruits or vegetables, inedible or ornamental plants,
agricultural and lawn care products and accessories, Christmas trees or
other holiday plants in season either as an accessory activity to an
existing business or as a licensed transient vendor.
(h) A person who sells his own property which was not acquired
specifically for resale, barter, or exchange and who does not conduct such
sales or act as a participant by furnishing goods in such a sale on a
regular basis.
(i) "Vendor facilities" are defined for the purposes of this section
as carts, trucks, booths, stands, and the like from which goods, services,
or information are delivered over a counter or through a window to
customers or recipients where no such customers or recipients enter the
vendor facility. Vendor facilities do not include mobile food units which
1The"Southern Building Code" was replaced with "International Building
Code" to comply with the adopted building code.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 12-7
are regulated under other chapters of the Cleveland Municipal Code.
Vendor facilities shall not be located indoors or outdoors except on a site
containing a commercial development or shopping center or office
development or industrial development with at least twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet of finished floor area under roof, or on the campus of
a school, college, church, or other institution. Vendor facilities must
comply with all other applicable laws, policies, and procedures for the
protection of public health, safety, and welfare, including any orders of
the building official or fire inspector. Vendor facilities that are located
outdoors shall not be located in any public right-of-way, or within twenty
feet (20') of any roadway pavement edge. Vendor facilities shall not be
located within one hundred feet (100') of any roadway edge of pavement
on any urban interstate, freeway, expressway, urban principal arterial,
or within fifty feet (50') of the roadway edge of pavement on any urban
minor arterial, as classified in the subdivision regulations. Vendor
facilities must have all applicable permits and licenses. Vendor facilities
shall not be located except on an improved site that includes other
principal structures and uses including paved parking and driveways.
The number of vendor facilities operating outdoors on a given site at the
same time shall not exceed two (2) unless part of an otherwise lawful
outdoor festival, fair, athletic event, or the like with a duration of not
more than ten (10) days. For purposes of this section, "site" shall mean
one (1) or more lots or parcels that are developed in a connected fashion
with common features such as buildings, parking, driveways, sidewalks,
open spaces, etc.
(j) A tent used by a person, firm, corporation, or group for the
otherwise lawful purpose of display, storage, sales, or provision of goods
or services on property where the same person, firm, corporation, or
group also occupies a permanent structure used for these same purposes,
provided that the size of the tent does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of
the size of the permanent structure; and further provided that the tent
shall not be located within one hundred feet (100') of any roadway edge
of pavement on any urban interstate, freeway, or expressway, or within
fifty feet (50') of the roadway edge of pavement of any other public
roadway; and further provided that the use, location, and installation of
the tent must comply with all other applicable laws, policies, and
procedures for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare,
including any orders of the building official or fire inspector. Tents
installed under this section require a permit and that permit is valid for
up to ninety (90) days and the permit is renewable.
(k) A tent used by a properly license insurance business solely
for the otherwise lawful inspection of motor vehicles with potential hail
damage and the resolution of claims relating to the same; and further
provided that the size of the tent does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of
Change 17, July 23, 2018 12-8
the size of any permanent structure located on the same property; and
further provided that the tent shall not be located within one hundred
feet (100') of any roadway edge of pavement on any urban interstate,
freeway, or expressway, or within fifty feet (50') of the roadway edge of
pavement of any other public roadway; and further provided that the use,
location, and installation of the tent must comply with all other
applicable laws, policies, and procedures for the protection of public
health, safety, and welfare, including any orders of the building official
or fire inspector. Tents installed under this paragraph require a permit
and that permit is valid for up to thirty (30) days.
(l) A tent or temporary structure used by a person, firm,
corporation, or group that is located on the campus of a college, school,
church, or other institution (not including storefront, office park, house
locations, or other locations where the institutional campus is not the
primary use) with property owner permission, and not within fifty feet
(50') of a public roadway or within one hundred feet (100') of any roadway
edge of pavement on any urban interstate, freeway, or expressway. The
tent or temporary structure shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
size of the primary permanent structure. The use, location, and
installation of the tent or temporary structure must comply with all other
applicable laws, policies, and procedures for the protection of public
health, safety, and welfare, including any orders of the building official
or fire inspector. Tents or temporary structures installed subject to this
paragraph require a permit and that permit is valid for up to ninety (90)
days and the permit is renewable. (1981 Code, § 6-42, as amended by
Ord. of 7/14/97, Ord. of 5/12/03, Ord. #2004-08, April 2004, replaced by
Ord. #2010-40, Dec. 2010, and amended by Ord. #2014-43, Nov. 2014, and
Ord. #2017-11, April 2017)
12-107. [Deleted.] (as added by Ord. #2008-13, April 2008, and deleted
by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-9
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRICAL CODE1
SECTION
12-201. Code adopted.
12-202. Electrical permit fees.
12-203. Available in clerk's office.
12-204. License required; exceptions.
12-205. Application for license.
12-206. Classes of licenses.
12-207. License fees.
12-208. License form and content; requirements as to supervisor.
12-209. Expiration and renewal of license.
12-210. License not transferable; may be suspended or revoked.
12-211. State license required.
12-212. Modifications.
12-201. Code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, and for the purpose of providing a practical
minimum standard for the safeguarding of persons and of buildings and their
contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, power,
radio, signaling, and for other purposes, the National Electrical Code,2 2008
edition is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out
verbatim herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the city. (1981 Code, § 6-61, as amended by Ord. of Oct. 1995,
and replaced by Ord. #2003-39, Jan. 2004, and Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-202. Electrical permit fees. Electrical permit fees are hereby
established as follows:
Size of Service
State
Inspection
Permit
Fee Total
0 through 30 amperes $27.00 $7.00 $34.00
31 through 60 amperes 27.00 7.00 34.00
61 through 200 amperes 27.00 7.00 34.00
1Municipal code reference
Fire protection, fireworks and explosives: title 7.
2Copies of this code may be purchased from the National Fire Protection
Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269-9101.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-10
Size of Service
State
Inspection
Permit
Fee Total
201 through 400 amperes 40.00 7.00 47.00
401 through 600 amperes 50.00 7.00 57.00
601 through 1,000 amperes 90.00 7.00 97.00
1001 and above are non-standard permits State inspection fees will be
determined by State inspector.
City permit fee will be $7.00 per
permit for nonstandard permits.
Rough-in Inspection 27.00 7.00 34.00
Dwelling Unit's HVAC Inspection 27.00 7.00 34.00
Re-inspection 0 through 1,000 amperes 27.00 7.00 34.00
Temporary Pole Based on svc size 7.00
Service Release Based on svc size 7.00
(1981 Code, § 6-63, as amended by Ord. of 11/13/2000, Ord. #2004-38, Oct. 2004,
and Ord. #2005-22, June 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-203. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the electrical code has
been placed on file in the clerk's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (1981 Code, § 6-4, modified)
12-204. License required; exceptions. No person shall engage in the
business of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing any electrical devices,
appliances or equipment served or to be served by the Cleveland Utilities
System unless such person has received an electrical license and a certificate
therefor, nor shall any person except a person employed by and working under
the direction of a holder of an electrical license in any manner undertake to
execute any work of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing any electrical
devices, appliances or equipment; provided, however, that, no license shall be
required in order to execute any of the following classes of work:
(1) Any work involved in the manufacture, test or repair of electrical
materials, devices, appliances or apparatus.
(2) The assembly, erection and connection of electrical apparatus and
equipment by the manufacturer of such apparatus and equipment, but not
including any electrical apparatus and equipment other than that involved in
making electrical connections on the apparatus or equipment itself or between
two (2) or more parts of such apparatus or equipment.
12-11
(3) The maintenance and repair of its own electrical equipment by
concerns through regular employees.
(4) After an electrician has reached sixty-two (62) years of age he may
be issued a license at no cost upon proper application and approval by the
electrical inspector. This license is to be limited to light repair work.
12-205. Application for license. Before any license or certificate is
granted and before any expiring license is renewed the applicant shall fill out
an application for such license, certificate or renewal of license. The fee required
for the class of license to be granted or renewed shall accompany the application.
Such application shall state the class of license applied for, the name and place
of business of the applicant and the name of the representative of the applicant
who will act as supervisor of the work to be done under the license. Additional
information regarding training, apprenticeship and experience will be required
with the initial application.
12-206. Classes of licenses. Two (2) classes of licenses and certificates
therefor shall be issued, respectively "master electrician's license," and "limited
license electrician license."
(1) A master electrician's license shall entitle the holder thereof to
engage in the business of and to secure permits for the installation, alteration
and repair of any electrical devices, appliances or equipment. Such a license
must be prominently displayed at the holder's place of business.
(2) A limited license electrician's license shall entitle the holder to
engage in the business of and to secure permits for the installation and repair
of any electrical devices, appliances or equipment; provided that, the work to be
performed can lawfully be performed by a limited licensed electrician under the
Tennessee Contractors Licensing Act of 1994, as amended, Title 62, Chapter 6,
Tennessee Code Annotated. Such a license must be prominently displayed at
the holder's place of business. (as amended by Ord. of 1/8/2001)
12-207. License fees. Fees for licenses granted or renewed under this
division shall be one hundred one dollars and no cents ($101.00) for a master
electrician and fifty dollars and no cents ($50.00) for a limited licensed
electrician. Such fees shall be collected by the city clerk. (as amended by Ord.
of 1/8/2001, and Ord. #2005-26, June 2005)
12-208. License form and content; requirements as to supervisor.
Each certificate for an electrical license issued in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter shall specify the name of the person or firm licensed, who shall
be known as the holder of the license, and shall specify the name of the person
who has passed the examination, who shall be designated in the certificate as
the supervisor of all work to be done under the license. The person designated
in the certificate as the supervisor may be a person in the employ of the holder
12-12
of the license; or, if the holder is an individual, may be the holder himself; or, if
the holder is a firm, may be a member of the firm, or if the holder is a
corporation, may be an official of the corporation. The same shall not be
designated as the supervisor in two (2) or more such licenses issued to different
persons or firms. If the business associates with, or employment of the
supervisor by, the holder of a license terminates, such license shall become null
and void sixty (60) days after such termination.
12-209. Expiration and renewal of license. Each license required by
this chapter shall expire on the thirty-first day of December following the date
of its issuance, and shall be renewed upon application of the holder and payment
of the required fee at any time within thirty (30) days after the expiration date.
If not renewed within this time, the city will require the applicant to show good
and sufficient cause for his failure to make such application within thirty (30)
days after the expiration date; provided that, if any licensee enters active service
in the armed forces of the United States, he shall be granted a renewal license
upon his application after discharge from such service if such application is
presented within six (6) months following the date of his discharge and provided
further, that, if any licensee discontinues business and allows his license to
expire, but works continuously thereafter for a licensed electrical contractor or
is continuously engaged thereafter in the installation of electrical equipment
and appliances, such licensee shall be issued a renewal license or certificate
upon his application therefor and payment of the required fee if such application
is filed and such fee is paid within six (6) months from the date the licensee
discontinued business.
12-210. License not transferable; may be suspended or revoked.
No license and certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be assignable or transferable. Any such license shall, after a
hearing, be suspended or revoked by the city if the person holding such license
willfully, or by reason of incompetence, repeatedly violates any provision of the
National Electrical Code, state laws applying to electricity, this chapter or any
ordinance relating to the installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of
electrical devices, appliances and equipment.
12-211. State license required. All persons now or hereafter desiring
to engage in the business of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing any
electrical devices, appliances or equipment served or to be served by the
Cleveland Utilities System, except for those specifically excluded in § 12-204 of
this chapter, shall provide evidence of their State of Tennessee Electrical
License to the city clerk along with payment of the license fee. Persons
receiving a master electrician's license from the City of Cleveland must have a
Class E or CE electrical contractor's license from the State of Tennessee.
Persons receiving a limited license electrician's license from the City of
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-13
Cleveland must have a Limited License Electrician's (LLE) license from the
State of Tennessee. Before issuing a city license to a person who has no
previous city license and whose previous experience in electrical work is
unknown by the building official, the city will require proof of having passed a
competency exam or proof of two years experience in electrical work. (as
amended by Ord. of 1/8/2001)
12-212. Modifications. When reference is made to the duties of certain
official named therein, that designated official of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee who has the duties corresponding to those of the named official in
said code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the
provisions of said code are concerned. (as added by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-14
CHAPTER 3
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-15
CHAPTER 4
[DELETED.]
(as deleted by Ord. #2009-71, Oct. 2009)
12-16
CHAPTER 5
[DELETED.]
(as deleted by Ord. #2009-71, Oct. 2009)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-17
CHAPTER 6
PLUMBING CODE1
SECTION
12-601. Plumbing code adopted.
12-602. Modifications.
12-603. Available in clerk's office.
12-604. Owner, installer, etc., not relieved of any liability.
12-605. License required; exceptions.
12-606. Application for license.
12-607. Classes of licenses.
12-608. Fees for licenses, examinations, permits, and inspections.
12-609. License form and content; requirements as to supervisor.
12-610. Expiration and renewal of license.
12-611. License not transferable; may be suspended or revoked.
12-612. [Deleted.]
12-613. [Deleted.]
12-614. [Deleted.]
12-615. Passing grade; issuance of license.
12-616. Deleted.
12-601. Plumbing code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, the International
Plumbing Code,2 2012 edition as prepared and adopted by the International
Code Council, Inc., and as amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert "City of Cleveland Tennessee" in (Name of
Jurisdiction).
(2) Section 106.6.2 Insert "City of Cleveland Fee Schedule" in
(Appropriate Schedule).
(3) Section 106.6.3 Insert "50% of fee" in (Percentages in Two
Locations).
(4) Section 108.4 Insert "Code Violation, $50.00, 30 days" in (Offense,
Dollar Amount, Number of Days).
1Municipal code references
Cross connections: title 18.
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-18
(5) Section 108.5 Insert "$50.00 and $500.00" in (Dollar amounts in
Two Locations).
(6) Section 305.4.1 Insert "Six (6) inches" (Number of inches in Two
Locations).
(7) Section 903.1 Insert "Six (6) inches" (Number of Inches).
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out verbatim
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate
limits of the city.
Any matters in said code which are contrary to the existing ordinances of
the City of Cleveland, Tennessee shall prevail, any existing ordinances to the
contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (1981 Code, § 6-171, as
amended by Ord. of Oct. 1995, Ord. of July 1998, Ord. of 8/27/2001, and
Ord. #2009-71, Oct. 2009, and replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-602. Modifications. (1) Definitions. Wherever the plumbing code
refers to the "Chief Appointing Authority," and "Administrative Authority," it
shall mean the city manager. Whenever the plumbing code refers to the
"Governing Authority," it shall be deemed to be a reference to the city council.
Wherever "City Engineer," "Engineering Department," "Plumbing
Official," or "Inspector" is named or referred to, it shall mean the person
appointed or designated by the city manager to administer and enforce the
provisions of the plumbing code.
(2) Permit fees. The schedule of permit fees shall be established by
city council.
(3) Within said plumbing code, when reference is made to the duties
of a certain official named therein, that designated official of the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee who has duties corresponding to those of the named
official in said plumbing code shall be deemed to be the responsible official
insofar as enforcing the provisions of said plumbing code are concerned. (1981
Code, § 6-171, modified, as amended by Ord. of 7/27/98, and Ord. of 8/27/2001)
12-603. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the plumbing code has
been placed on file in the clerk's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (1981 Code, § 6-4, modified)
12-604. Owner, installer, etc., not relieved of any liability. This
chapter shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility or liability
of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any plumbing devices,
appliances or equipment for damage to persons or property caused by any defect
therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability for reason of the
examination authorized herein or the license and certificate issued as herein
provided. (1981 Code, § 6-172)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-19
12-605. License required; exceptions. No person shall engage in the
business of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing any plumbing devices,
appliances or equipment served or to be served by the Cleveland Utility System
unless such person has received a plumbing contractor's license and a certificate
therefor, nor shall any person except a person employed by and working under
the direction of a holder of a plumbing contractor's license in any manner
undertake to execute any work of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing
any plumbing devices, appliances or equipment; provided, however, that, no
license shall be required in order to execute any of the following classes of work:
(1) Any work involved in the manufacture, test or repair of plumbing
materials, devices, appliances or apparatus.
(2) The assembly, erection and connection of plumbing apparatus and
equipment by the manufacturer of such apparatus and equipment, but not
including any plumbing other than that involved in making plumbing
connections on the apparatus or equipment itself or between two (2) or more
parts of such apparatus or equipment.
(3) The maintenance and repair of its own plumbing equipment by
concerns through regular employees. (1981 Code, § 6-201, modified, as amended
by Ord. #2009-72, Oct. 2009)
12-606. Application for license. Before any license or certificate is
granted and before any expiring license is renewed the applicant shall fill out
an application for such license, certificate or renewal of license. The fee required
for the class of license to be granted or renewed shall accompany the application.
Such application shall state the class of license applied for, the name and place
of business of the applicant and the name of the representative of the applicant
who will act as supervisor of the work to be done under the license. Additional
information regarding training, apprenticeship and experience will be required
with the initial application. The applicant for any category of plumbing license
described in this chapter shall demonstrate that he or she has any qualifications
required by the State of Tennessee for carrying out such plumbing work as
demonstrated by the appropriate and valid Tennessee license and any other
such documentation as the State of Tennessee may require. (1981 Code, § 6-202,
modified, as amended by Ord. #2009-72, Oct. 2009)
12-607. Classes of licenses. Three (3) classes of licenses and
certificates therefor shall be issued, respectively: master plumbing contractor's
license; limited liability plumbing contractor's license (LLP); and water and
sewer line contractor's license.
(1) A master plumbing contractor's license shall entitle the holder
thereof to engage in the business of and to secure permits for the installations,
alteration, and repair of any plumbing devices, appliances, or equipment. Such
license must be prominently displayed at the holder's place of business.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-20
(2) A limited liability plumbing contractor's (LLP) license shall entitle
the holder thereof to engage in the business of and to secure permits for the
installations, alteration, and repair of any plumbing devices, appliances, or
equipment where the value of the plumbing work to be performed does not
exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Such license must be
prominently displayed at the holder's place of business.
(3) A water and sewer line contractor's license shall entitle the holder
thereof to engage in the business of and to secure permits for the installation of
water and sewer lines within five feet (5') of the exterior of a building or
structure. This license shall not entitle the holder thereof to engage in any
plumbing except the water and sewer line installation as described herein.
(1981 Code, § 6-203, modified, as amended by Ord. #2009-72, Oct. 2009)
12-608. Fees for licenses, permits, and inspections. (1) The city
council, in order to cover costs incurred by the city, hereby establishes fees for
the granting and renewal of licenses under this chapter. Such fees shall be
collected by the city clerk and shall be due upon application for such license. The
licenses fees shall be as follows:
Master plumber's license fee Seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
Limited liability plumber's (LLP) license fee Fifty dollars ($50.00)
Water and sewer contractor's license fee Fifty dollars ($50.00).
(2) The city council, in order to cover costs incurred by the city, hereby
establishes fees for plumbing permits and inspections as follows:
Plumbing permit Twenty dollars ($20.00) for every
permit plus four dollars ($4.00)
for every plumbing fixture
Sewer permit Four dollars ($4.00) for permit
plus five dollars ($5.00)
Water meter (extra or irrigation meter) Four dollars ($4.00) for permit
plus four dollars ($4.00)
Re-inspection fee Twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
For purposes of this section, a fixture shall mean any plumbing fixture as
defined by the adopted plumbing code. (1981 Code, § 6-204, replaced by Ord. of
10/9/2000, amended by Ord. #2005-27, June 2005, and Ord. #2009-72, Oct. 2009,
and replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-609. License form and content; requirements as to supervisor.
Each certificate for a plumbing contractor's license issued in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall specify the name of the person or firm licensed,
who shall be known as the holder of the license, and shall specify the name of
the person who has passed the examination, who shall be designated in the
certificate as the supervisor of all work to be done under the license. The person
designated in the certificate as the supervisor may be a person in the employ of
the holder of the license; or, if the holder is an individual, may be the holder
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-21
himself; or, if the holder is a firm, may be a member of the firm, or if the holder
is a corporation, may be an official of the corporation. The same shall not be
designated as the supervisor in two (2) or more such licenses issued to different
persons or firms. If the business associates with, or employment of the
supervisor by, the holder of a license terminates, such license shall become null
and void sixty (60) days after such termination. (1981 Code, § 6-205, modified)
12-610. Expiration and renewal of license. Each license required by
this chapter shall expire on the thirty-first day of December following the date
of its issuance, and shall be renewed upon application of the holder and payment
of the required fee at any time within thirty (30) days after the expiration date.
If not renewed within two years of the expiration date, the city may require the
applicant to take another examination unless such applicant shows good and
sufficient cause for his failure to make such application within thirty (30) days
after the expiration date. Such good and sufficient cause for a failure to renew
within thirty (30) days after the expiration date would include, but not
necessarily be limited to, active duty in the armed forces of the United States or
discontinuance of business by the licensee after which time the license works
continuously as an employee in the plumbing trade. In the case of military
service, application for renewal must be made within six (6) months of the date
of discharge from active duty; and in the case of a discontinuance of business,
application must be made within six (6) months of the discontinuance of
business. License renewal at a time beyond thirty (30) days from the expiration
date, where there is no good and sufficient cause, shall require the normal
license fee, plus an additional license fee for each year since the expiration not
to exceed two years (partial years to be pro-rated to the nearest month), plus a
fifty (50) dollar penalty. Nothing herein is intended to prohibit the renewal of
a license near but preceding its expiration date. (1981 Code, § 6-206, as
amended by Ord. of 10/9/2000)
12-611. License not transferable; may be suspended or revoked.
No license and certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be assignable or transferable. Any such license shall, after a
hearing, be suspended or revoked by the city if the person holding such license
willfully, or by reason of incompetence, repeatedly violates any provision of the
adopted plumbing code, state laws applying to plumbing, this chapter or any
ordinance relating to the installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of
plumbing devices, appliances and equipment. (1981 Code, § 6-207, modified, as
amended by Ord. #2009-72, Oct. 2009)
12-612. [Deleted.] (1981 Code, § 6-208, modified, as deleted by
Ord. #2009-72, Oct. 2009)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-22
12-613. [Deleted.] (1981 Code, § 6-209, modified, as deleted by
Ord. #2009-72, Oct. 2009)
12-614. [Deleted.] (1981 Code, 6-210, modified, as deleted by
Ord. #2009-72, Oct. 2009)
12-615. Passing grade; issuance of license. Any applicant for a
license required by this chapter making a grade of seventy (70) per cent or more
on the written examination shall be considered qualified for and the city shall
issue to the applicant the particular license which was applied for upon payment
of the required fees and the furnishing of any information required in the
regulations. All licenses shall be signed by the plumbing inspector and city
clerk. (1981 Code, § 6-212, modified)
12-616. Fee. Deleted. (1981 Code, § 6-213, as deleted by Ord. of
10/9/2000)
12-23
CHAPTER 7
DELETED
(This chapter was deleted by Ord. #2004-41, Nov. 2004)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-24
CHAPTER 8
GAS CODE1
SECTION
12-801. Title and definitions.
12-802. Purpose and scope.
12-803. Use of existing piping and appliances.
12-804. Bond and license.
12-805. Gas inspector and assistants.
12-806. Powers and duties of inspector.
12-807. Permits.
12-808. Inspections.
12-809. Certificates.
12-810. Fees.
12-811. Violations and penalties.
12-812. Nonliability.
12-813. Modifications.
12-801. Title and definitions. This chapter and the code herein
adopted by reference shall be known as the gas code of the city. The following
definitions are provided for the purpose of interpretation and administration of
the gas code.
(1) "Inspector" means the person appointed as inspector, and shall
include each assistant inspector, if any, from time to time acting as such under
this chapter by appointment of the city council.
(2) "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, or
any other organized group of individuals.
(3) "Gas company" means any person distributing gas within the
corporate limits or authorized and proposing to so engage.
(4) "Certificate of approval" means a document or tag issued and/or
attached by the inspector to the inspected material, piping, or appliance
installation, filled out, together with date, address of the premises, and signed
by the inspector.
(5) "Certain appliances" means conversion burners, floor furnaces,
central heating plants, vented wall furnaces, water heaters, and boilers.
12-802. Purpose and scope. The purpose of the gas code is to provide
minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe installation of
consumer's gas piping and gas appliances. All gas piping and gas appliances
installed, replaced, maintained, or repaired within the corporate limits of the
1Municipal code reference
Gas system administration: title 19, chapter 2.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-25
city shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and to the International
Fuel Gas Code,1 2012 edition, as prepared and adopted by the International
Code Council, Inc., and as amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert "City of Cleveland Tennessee" in (Name of
Jurisdiction).
(2) Section 106.6.2 Insert "City of Cleveland Fee Schedule" in
(Appropriate Schedule).
(3) Section 106.6.3 Insert "50% of fee" in (Percentages in Two
Locations).
(4) Section 108.4 Insert "Code Violation, $50.00, 30 days" in (Offense,
Dollar Amount, Number of Days).
(5) Section 108.5 Insert "$50.00 and $500.00" in (Dollar amounts in
Two Locations).
Said code is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out
verbatim herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the city.
Any matters in said code which are contrary to the existing ordinances of
the City of Cleveland, Tennessee shall prevail, any existing ordinances to the
contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ord. of Oct. 1995, as
amended by Ord. of July 1998, Ord. of 8/27/2001, and Ord. #2009-71, Oct. 2009,
and replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-803. Use of existing piping and appliances. Notwithstanding any
provision in the gas code to the contrary, consumer's piping installed prior to the
adoption of the gas code or piping installed to supply other than natural gas may
be converted to natural gas if the inspector finds, upon inspection and proper
tests, that such piping will render reasonably satisfactory gas service to the
consumer and will not in any way endanger life or property; otherwise, such
piping shall be altered or replaced, in whole or in part, to conform with the
requirements of the gas code.
12-804. Bond and license. (1) No person shall engage in or work at the
installation, extension, or alteration of consumer's gas piping or certain gas
appliances, until such person shall have secured a license as hereinafter
provided, and shall have executed and delivered to the mayor a good and
sufficient bond in the penal sum of $10,000, with corporate surety, conditioned
for the faithful performance of all such work, entered upon or contracted for, in
strict accordance and compliance with the provisions of the gas code. The bond
herein required shall expire on the first day of January next following its
approval by the city clerk, and thereafter on the first day of January of each
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-26
year a new bond, in form and substance as herein required, shall be given by
such person to cover all such work as shall be done during such year.
(2) Upon approval of said bond, the person desiring to do such work
shall secure from the city clerk a nontransferable license which shall run until
the first day of January next succeeding its issuance, unless sooner revoked.
The person obtaining a license shall pay any applicable license fees to the city
clerk.
(3) Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting an
individual from installing or repairing his own appliances or installing,
extending, replacing, altering, or repairing consumer's piping on his own
premises, or as requiring a license or a bond from an individual doing such work
on his own premises; provided, however, all such work must be done in
conformity with all other provisions of the gas code, including those relating to
permits, inspections, and fees.
12-805. Gas inspector and assistants. To provide for the
administration and enforcement of the gas code, the office of gas inspector is
hereby created. The inspector, and such assistants as may be necessary in the
proper performance of the duties of the office, shall be appointed or designated
by the city council.
12-806. Powers and duties of inspector. (1) The inspector is
authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of the gas code. Upon
presentation of proper credentials, he may enter any building or premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections or preventing violations
of the gas code.
(2) The inspector is authorized to disconnect any gas piping or fixture
or appliance for which a certificate of approval is required but has not been
issued with respect to same, or which, upon inspection, shall be found defective
or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such a
disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping, fixture, or
appliance disconnected by the inspector, which notice shall state that the same
has been disconnected by the inspector, together with the reason or reasons
therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove said notice or
reconnect said gas piping or fixture or appliance without authorization by the
inspector and such gas piping or fixture or appliance shall not be put in service
or used until the inspector has attached his certificate of approval in lieu of his
prior disconnection notice.
(3) It shall be the duty of the inspector to confer from time to time with
representatives of the local health department, the local fire department, and
the gas company, and otherwise obtain from proper sources all helpful
information and advice, presenting same to the appropriate officials from time
to time for their consideration.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-27
12-807. Permits. (1) No person shall install a gas conversion burner,
floor furnace, central heating plant, vented wall furnace, water heater, boiler,
consumer's gas piping, or convert existing piping to utilize natural gas without
first obtaining a permit to do such work from the mayor; however, permits will
not be required for setting or connecting other gas appliances, or for the repair
of leaks in house piping.
(2) When only temporary use of gas is desired, the clerk may issue a
permit for such use, for a period of not to exceed sixty (60) days, provided the
consumer's gas piping to be used is given a test equal to that required for a final
piping inspection.
(3) Except when work in a public street or other public way is involved
the gas company shall not be required to obtain permits to set meters, or to
extend, relocate, remove, or repair its service lines, mains, or other facilities, or
for work having to do with its own gas system.
12-808. Inspections. (1) A rough piping inspection shall be made after
all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such
piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been
attached thereto.
(2) A final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized
by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be
concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any
fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. This inspection shall
include a pressure test, at which time the piping shall stand an air pressure
equal to not less than the pressure of a column of mercury six (6) inches in
height, and the piping shall hold this air pressure for a period of at least ten (10)
minutes without any perceptible drop. A mercury column gauge shall be used
for the test. All tools, apparatus, labor, and assistance necessary for the test
shall be furnished by the installer of such piping.
12-809. Certificates. The inspector shall issue a certificate of approval
at the completion of the work for which a permit for consumer piping has been
issued if after inspection it is found that such work complies with the provisions
of the gas code. A duplicate of each certificate issued covering consumer's gas
piping shall be delivered to the gas company and used as its authority to render
gas service.
12-810. Fees. The city council, in order to cover costs incurred by the
city, hereby establishes the following fees for permits and inspections as follows:
Fuel gas permit Twenty dollars ($20.00) for every permit
plus five dollars ($5.00) per fixture
For purposes of this section, a fixture shall mean any fixture as defined by the
adopted fuel gas code. (as replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-28
12-811. Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate or fail
to comply with any of the provisions of the gas code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined under the general
penalty clause for this code of ordinances, or the license of such person may be
revoked, or both fine and revocation of license may be imposed.
12-812. Nonliability. This chapter shall not be construed as imposing
upon the municipality any liability or responsibility for damages to any person
injured by any defect in any gas piping or appliance mentioned herein, or by
installation thereof, nor shall the municipality, or any official or employee
thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the
inspection authorized hereunder or the certificate of approval issued by the
inspector.
12-813. Modifications. Within said gas code, when reference is made
to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated official of the
City of Cleveland, Tennessee who has duties corresponding to those of the
named official in said gas code shall be deemed to be the responsible official
insofar as enforcing the provisions of said gas code are concerned. (as added by
Ord. of 7/27/98, and amended by Ord. of 8/27/2001)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-29
CHAPTER 9
BUILDING MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION
12-901. Unsafe building abatement code adopted.
12-902. Modifications.
12-903. Available in clerk's office.
12-904. Violations.
12-901. Unsafe building abatement code adopted. Pursuant to
authority granted by Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506,
and for the purpose of regulating buildings and structures to insure structural
strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life
and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings,
structures or premises, within or without the city, the International Property
Maintenance Code,1 2012 edition as prepared and adopted by the International
Code Council, Inc., and as amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert "City of Cleveland Tennessee" in (Name of
Jurisdiction).
(2) Section 103.5 Insert "City of Cleveland Fee Schedule" in
(Appropriate Schedule).
(3) Section 112.4 Insert "$50.00 and $500.00" in (Dollar amount in Two
Locations).
(4) Section 302.4 Insert "Twelve (12) Inches " in (Height in Inches).
(5)Section 602.3 Insert "Labor Day to Memorial Day" in (Date in Two
Locations).
(6) Section 602.4 Insert "Labor Day to Memorial Day" in (Date in Two
Locations).
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out verbatim
herein, and is hereinafter referred to as the unsafe building abatement code, and
the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city.
Any matters in said code which are contrary to existing ordinances of the
City of Cleveland, Tennessee shall prevail, any existing ordinances to the
contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ord. of Oct. 1995, as
amended by Ord. of 7/27/98, Ord. of 8/27/2001, and Ord. #2009-71, Oct. 2009,
and replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-902. Modifications. Definitions. Whenever the unsafe building
abatement code refers to the "Chief Appointing Authority," or the "Chief
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-30
Administrator" it shall be deemed to be a reference to the city council. When the
"Building Official" is named it shall, for the purposes of the unsafe building
abatement code, mean such person as the city council has appointed or
designated to administer and enforce the provisions of the unsafe building
abatement code.
Within said unsafe building abatement code when reference is made to
the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated official of the City
of Cleveland, Tennessee who has duties corresponding to those of the named
official in said unsafe building abatement code shall be deemed to be the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said unsafe building
abatement code are concerned. The property maintenance officer is hereby
designated as the official responsible for administering and enforcing title 12,
chapter 9 of the Cleveland Municipal Code entitled "Building Maintenance
Code", and the property maintenance official shall be responsible for enforcing
the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, adopted under
§ 12-901 of the Cleveland Municipal Code. (as amended by Ord. of 7/27/98, Ord.
of 8/27/2001, and Ord. #2013-53, Nov. 2013)
12-903. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated § 6-54-502 one (1) copy of the unsafe building
abatement code has been placed on file in the clerk's office and shall be kept
there for the use and inspection of the public.
12-904. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision of the unsafe building abatement code as herein
adopted by reference and modified.
12-31
CHAPTER 10
MECHANICAL CODE1
SECTION
12-1001. Mechanical code adopted.
12-1002. Modifications.
12-1003. Available in clerk's office.
12-1004. Violations.
12-1005. Board established.
12-1006. Qualification of members.
12-1007. Chairman and vice chairman.
12-1008. Removal of members; compensation; quorum.
12-1009. Regular meetings.
12-1010. Appeals from decisions.
12-1011. Special meetings.
12-1012. Records to be open to inspection.
12-1013. Regulations authorized; printing.
12-1014. Licenses and certificates--required.
12-1015. Classes of licenses; limitations.
12-1016. City of Cleveland electrical license required.
12-1017. Appropriate license and certificate prerequisite to doing work;
exceptions.
12-1018. Not transferable.
12-1019. Suspension; revocation; denial of renewal.
12-1020. Review of renewal applications; statement required.
12-1021. To be written; records required.
12-1022. [Deleted.]
12-1023. [Deleted.]
12-1024. [Deleted.]
12-1025. Temporary license.
12-1026. [Deleted.]
12-1027. License fees.
12-1028. Disposition of fees.
12-1029. Notices.
12-1030. Licensee to supervise work under license; duties specified.
12-1031. Violations; penalty.
12-1032. Permit fees.
1Municipal code references
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-32
12-1001. Mechanical code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-516, and for the purpose
of regulating the installation and replacement of mechanical systems, including
ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning, and refrigeration systems,
incinerators, and other energy-related systems, the International Mechanical
Code1, 2012 edition as prepared and adopted by the International Code Council,
Inc., and as amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Insert "City of Cleveland Tennessee" in (Name of
Jurisdiction).
(2) Section 106.5.2 Insert "City of Cleveland Fee Schedule" in
(Appropriate Schedule).
(3) Section 106.5.3 Insert "50% of fee" in (Percentages in Two
Locations).
(4) Section 108.4 Insert "Code Violation, $50.00, 30 days" in (Offense,
Dollar Amount, Number of Days).
(5) Section 108.5 Insert "$50.00 and $500.00" in (Dollar amounts in
Two Locations).
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out verbatim
herein, and is hereinafter referred to as the mechanical code, and the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city.
Any matters in said code which are contrary to the existing ordinances of
the City of Cleveland, Tennessee shall prevail, any existing ordinances to the
contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ord. of Oct. 1995, as
amended by Ord. of July 1998, Ord. of 8/14/2000, Ord. of 8/27/2001, and
Ord. #2009-71, Oct. 2009, and replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-1002. Modifications. Definitions. Wherever the mechanical code
refers to the "Building Department," "Mechanical Official," or "Building
Official," or "Inspector" it shall mean the person appointed or designated by the
city council to administer and enforce the provisions of the mechanical code.
Within said mechanical code, when reference is made to the duties of a
certain official named therein, that designated official of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said
mechanical code shall be deemed to the responsible official insofar as enforcing
the provisions of said mechanical code are concerned. (as amended by Ord. of
July 1998, and Ord. of 8/27/2001)
12-1003. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated § 6-54-502 one (1) copy of the mechanical code has
been placed on file in the city clerk's office and shall be kept there for the use
and inspection of the public.
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-33
12-1004. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision of the mechanical code as herein adopted by
reference and modified.
12-1005. Board established. (1) There is hereby created and
established a mechanical board.
(2) The mechanical board shall consist of seven (7) members, to be
appointed by the city council. One member shall be a state licensed mechanical
contractor, CMC-C.
(3) Members of the mechanical board shall hold office for a term of two
(2) years until a successor is appointed or until the member is removed by the
city council. Beginning January 1, 2012, appointments to the mechanical board
shall be staggered as follows:
(a) Two (2) seats for a term of one (1) year;
(b) Two (2) seats for a term of two (2) years;
(c) Three (3) seats for a term of three (3) years. (Ord. of Sept.
1998, as amended by Ord. #2010-29, Aug. 2010)
12-1006. Qualification of members. (1) The members of the
mechanical board should consist of at least:
(a) One representative of the Chattanooga Gas Cleveland
Service Center.
(b) One representative of the Cleveland Utilities electrical
division.
(c) One member from the general public.
(d) One member who holds state mechanical contractor's
license.
(e) One member who holds state general contractor's license
classification BC;AB or BC-A.
(f) One member from TVA Cleveland Service Center.
(g) One member who is a licensed architect or license engineer,
by the Sate of Tennessee. (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as amended by Ord. of
8/14/2000)
12-1007. Chairman and vice chairman. (1) The mechanical board
shall select from its membership one member to serve as chairman and one
member to serve as vice chairman for at least one year and until their
successors are elected by the board. (Ord. of Sept. 1998)
12-1008. Removal of members; compensation; quorum. Any
member of the mechanical board may be removed for cause at any time by the
city council after ten (10) days written notice. Such board shall serve without
compensation. A minimum of four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. (Ord. of Sept. 1998)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-34
12-1009. Regular meetings. The mechanical board shall hold meetings
in January, May, and September for the purpose of conducting business.
Disciplinary hearings may be held at these meetings or at a special called
meeting, at the discretion of the chairman or vice chairman. Three (3) days
public notice shall be given prior to any meeting or special called meeting. (Ord.
of Sept. 1998)
12-1010. Appeals from decisions. Any person aggrieved by any action
or decision of the mechanical board shall have the right of appeal to the city
council by requesting an appeal in writing and by lodging such requests with the
city clerk within ten (10) days after such action or decision. Failure to appeal
within this time shall, without exceptions, constitute a waiver of the right to a
hearing. (Ord. of Sept. 1998)
12-1011. Special meetings. Special meetings of the mechanical board
may be called by the chairman or vice chairman of the board with three (3) days
public notice. (Ord. of Sept. 1998)
12-1012. Records to be open to inspection. Records of the meetings
of the mechanical board including the names of all licensees, shall be open for
inspection by the public at all reasonable times. (Ord. of Sept. 1998)
12-1013. Regulations authorized; printing. The mechanical board
may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with this division and
in such event shall have such rules and regulations printed for distribution.
These regulations may include the requirement that the mechanical contractor
furnish proof of financial responsibility. (Ord. of Sept. 1998)
12-1014. Licenses and certificates--required. No person shall engage
in or hold himself out as being in the business of installing, or replacing any
mechanical equipment in the city or on premises to be served by the Cleveland
Utilities, Electrical Division or Chattanooga Gas, Cleveland Service Center,
unless such person has received a mechanical contractor's license of the
appropriate class and a certificate therefor, or in the case of a firm or
corporation, unless it is owned or operated by, or has in its regular employment,
a person who has received a mechanical contractor's license of the appropriate
class and a certificate thereof. (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as amended by Ord. of
8/14/2000)
12-1015. Classes of licenses; limitations. Projects twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more must obtain a contractor's license with
the CMC or CMC-C classification, as a prime or subcontractor. (Ord. of Sept.
1998, as amended by Ord. of 8/14/2000, and replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June
2014)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-35
12-1016. City of Cleveland electrical license required. In order to
obtain an electrical permit for HVAC, the mechanical contractor shall have a
City of Cleveland Electrical License. To obtain a City of Cleveland Electrical
License the applicant shall be a State of Tennessee licensed electrical contractor
with a classification of "E" or "EC" or the applicant shall be a State of Tennessee
license electrician (LLE) and show required proof thereof. (Ord. of Sept. 1998,
as amended by Ord. of 1/8/2001)
12-1017. Appropriate license and certificate prerequisite to doing
work; exceptions. (1) For work that exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00). Any mechanical work done for compensation shall be done under
the supervision of a licensed contractor, and no person shall in any manner
engage in the business of installing or replacing mechanical equipment unless
such person has received or is working under the supervision of someone who
has received a mechanical contractor's license and certificate thereof, provided
that no license shall be required in order to execute any of the following classes
or work:
(a) Minor repair work such as replacement of fuses, or sockets,
replacement of lamps, and the connection of portable devices to suitable
receptacles which have been permanently installed.
(b) Any work involved in the manufacture, test or repair of
mechanical materials, devices, appliances or apparatus.
(c) The maintenance and repair of mechanical equipment by
manufacturing concerns through regular employees. (Ord. of Sept. 1998,
as amended by Ord. of 8/14/2000, and Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-1018. Not transferable. No license and certificate issued in
accordance with the provisions of this division shall be assignable or
transferable. (Ord. of Sept. 1998)
12-1019. Suspension; revocation; denial of renewal. (1) The
mechanical board shall revoke or suspend a license issued to any mechanical
contractor upon positive proof that such person:
(a) Knowingly violated the provisions of this article or the rules
and regulations of the board;
(b) Practices fraud or deception in making application for or
obtaining a mechanical license.
(c) Is incompetent to perform a service to the public as certified;
(d) Permitted his license of registration to be used, directly or
indirectly, by another to obtain or perform mechanical work or services;
(e) Is guilty of such other unprofessional or dishonorable
conduct of such nature as to deceive or defraud the public;
(f) Has done mechanical work in excess of that permitted by the
license held;
12-36
(g) Failed to comply with this code, the requirements of the
Standard Mechanical Code, repeatedly failed to obtain permits required
before commencing work; or fails to obtain required permits at all;
(h) Obtained a permit directly or indirectly for another, unless
the license holder shall have been the supervisor of all work covered by
the permit:
(i) Received from another any compensation wherein the sole
consideration thereof was the obtaining of a permit.
(i) The board may disapprove any renewal of a license
when the applicant has misused their license, has made any
intentional misstatement on such application, or has been guilty
of any act or conduct which would constitute grounds for
revocation or suspension of a license as herein provided; provided
however, the board shall not disapprove any renewal until after
the applicant has been afforded an opportunity to be heard after
(5) day's notice by registered mail or personal service of such a
notice.
(ii) No action of the board to suspend or revoke a
mechanical license shall become final until the alleged offender has
been given an opportunity to appear before the board to show
cause as to why such action should not be taken.
(iii) Notice, in writing, of the proposed action of the board
to revoke or suspend a license shall be given to the holder of such
license, stating the specific charges upon which such action is
based. The notice shall stipulate that a hearing will be scheduled
at a time and place set by the board for the party to show cause
why such action should not be made final. Such hearing shall not
be held less than five (5) days following notice to the party.
Failure to appear before the board to answer the specific charges
set forth in the notice shall be deemed just cause for final
revocation or suspension of a license.
(j) Expiration; renewal.
(i) Mechanical contractor license under this division
shall expire on the 31st day of March, following the date of its
issuance. All licenses shall be renewable upon application of the
holder within (30) days prior to the expiration date of the license
upon the payment of the annual fee set out in this division and
compliance with the statements required by the mechanical board.
(ii) Should a licensee allow their license to expire they
shall be required to pay fifty ($50.00) dollar fine plus their renewal
license fee for each year or portion there of that the license has
expired. No license shall be renewed that has expired longer than
two years. Any licensee who's license has expired longer than two
years shall appeal to the board for reinstatement; provided that,
12-37
if any licensee enters active service in the armed forces of the
United States, he shall be granted a renewal license upon his
application after discharge from such service if such application is
presented to the board within six (6) months following the date of
his discharge. (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as amended by Ord. of
8/14/2000)
12-1020. Review of renewal applications; statement required.
(1) Each applicant for renewal shall file a statement signed by the
applicant that he has not misused his license and that he has abided by this
code and the ordinances of the city pertaining to mechanical contractors and the
installing of any mechanical equipment.
(2) Each applicant shall show proof of having a current City of
Cleveland Business License.
(3) Examination--Application required, contents, qualifications.
(a) Generally. All persons now or hereafter desiring to engage
in mechanical contracting in the City of Cleveland, Tennessee, as a
mechanical contractor shall have a City of Cleveland mechanical license.
(b) Qualifications for a mechanical contractors license. Any
person shall be eligible for a mechanical contractor's license who:
(i) Has a professional license to practice mechanical
contracting in the State of Tennessee; or
(ii) Has proof of taking and passing the State of
Tennessee Mechanical Contractor's License Test as required by the
State of Tennessee.
(c) Proof of qualifications. The board may require written proof
of any of the above qualificaitons and it shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to provide such definite proof with their applications. (Ord. of
Sept. 1998, as amended by Ord. of 8/14/2000, and Ord. of 3/24/03)
12-1021. To be written; records required. Results of examinations
for mechanical contractor license shall be kept on file for a period of three (3)
years after the date of the examination. (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as amended by Ord.
of 8/14/2000)
12-1022. [Deleted.] (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as amended by Ord. of
8/14/2000, and deleted by Ord. of 3/24/03)
12-1023. [Deleted.] (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as deleted by Ord. of 3/24/03)
12-38
12-1024. [Deleted.] (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as amended by Ord. of
8/14/2000, and deleted by Ord. of 3/24/03)
12-1025. Temporary license. Deleted. (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as deleted
by Ord. of 8/14/2000)
12-1026. [Deleted.] (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as amended by Ord. of
8/14/2000, and deleted by Ord. of 3/24/03)
12-1027. License fees. (1) Fees for licenses granted or renewed under
this division for each year, or part thereof shall be seventy-five dollars and no
cents ($75.00) for a mechanical contractor. Such fees shall be collected by the
city clerk. (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as amended by Ord. of 8/14/2000, and
Ord. #2005-25, June 2005)
12-1028. Disposition of fees. Fees required by this division shall be
collected by the planning and inspections department and paid over to the city
clerk. (Ord. of Sept. 1998)
12-1029. Notices. Notice shall be considered sufficient when either
delivered personally to the person to whom said notice is directed or when
mailed to the last known address of the applicant as shown in the records of the
board. (Ord. of Sept. 1998)
12-1030. Licensee to supervise work under license; duties
specified. (1) Mechanical contractor license issued in accordance with the
provisions of this division shall specify the name of the holder of the license, who
shall be the supervisor of all work done under the license.
(2) The board of mechanical examiners and the mechanical inspector
shall be notified in writing of the name of the firm with whom the holder of the
license is associated.
(3) In case of a license holder who is the qualifying agent of a
corporation, firm or association, when the license holder ceases to be a
representative of such corporation, firm or association, the board shall contact
the corporation, firm or association to ascertain the status of the bids, contracts,
permits covering work being or to be performed in the city. In such cases the
board may at its discretion relieve any hardship and permit such work on a
temporary basis as it deems advisable. (Ord. of Sept. 1998, as amended by Ord.
of 8/14/2000)
12-1031. Violations; penalty. Any person who violates any of the
provisions of this division shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor for
each offense. (Ord. of Sept. 1998)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 12-39
12-1032. Permit fees. Fees for the issuance of permits shall be set by
the city council. The city council, in order to cover costs incurred by the city,
hereby establishes the following fees for permits and inspections as follows:
Mechanical Permit
New Construction $12.00 for first $1,000.00 plus
$2.00 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
Replacements, Alterations, Additions to
existing $6.00 for first $1,000.00 plus
$2.00 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
Re-inspection fee $25.00
(Ord. of Sept. 1998, as replaced by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
12-40
CHAPTER 11
[DELETED.]
(as deleted by Ord. #2009-71, Oct. 2009)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 12-41
CHAPTER 12
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION
12-1201. Adopted.
12-1202. Modifications.
12-1201. Adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by Tennessee Code
Annotated §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, the International Energy Conservation
Code, 2009 edition, as prepared and adopted by the International Code Council,
Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out
verbatim herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the city.
Pursuant to the requirement of Tennessee Code Annotated § 6-54-502,
one (1) copy of this code, has been filed with the city clerk and are available for
public use and inspection.
Any matters in said code which are contrary to the existing ordinances of
the City of Cleveland, Tennessee shall prevail, any existing ordinances to the
contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (as added by Ord. #2014-28,
June 2014)
12-1202. Modifications. When reference is made to the duties of
certain official named therein, that designated official of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee who has the duties corresponding to those of the named official in
said code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the
provisions of said code are concerned. (as added by Ord. #2014-28, June 2014)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 12-42
CHAPTER 13
MOBILE FOOD UNITS
SECTION
12-1301. Definitions.
12-1302. Mobile food units.
12-1303. Permit requirements.
12-1304. Operational requirements.
12-1305. Compliance with health regulations.
12-1301. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
this section:
(1) "Commissary" means any State of Tennessee licensed stationary
food establishment that serves mobile food dispensers, mobile food facilities,
vending machines or other food dispensing operations where
(a) Food, containers, or supplies are stored;
(b) Food is prepared or prepackaged for sale or service at other
locations;
(c) Utensils are cleaned; or
(d) Liquid and solid wastes are disposed of or potable water is
obtained.
(2) "Mobile food unit" means any motorized vehicle or trailer attached
to a motorized vehicle that includes a self-contained kitchen in which food is
prepared or processed and from which food is sold or dispensed to the ultimate
consumer. Mobile food units must be mobile and on wheels at all times during
operation. Mobile food units must be independent with respect to water, waste
water, and power utilities. A trailer shall remain attached to its towing vehicle
at all times.
This definition does not include pushcarts as regulated by city codes nor
vehicles from which only ice cream and other frozen food products are sold.
(3) "Operator" means any person holding a mobile food unit permit or
any person who is engaged in the selling or offering for sale, of food, beverages,
fruit or like consumable products from a mobile food unit. (as added by Ord.
#2014-44, Nov. 2014)
12-1302. Mobile food units. Mobile food units shall meet all applicable
requirements of this chapter in addition to the following requirements:
(1) No person shall engage in the business of a mobile food preparation
vehicle within the City of Cleveland without first having obtained all required
business licenses, a mobile food unit permit as required by § 12-1303(5) of the
Cleveland Municipal Code, and any permits, licenses and/or certifications
Change 16, December 14, 2015 12-43
required by Bradley County, the Bradley County Department of Health, and/or
the State of Tennessee.
(2) A mobile food unit permit, as authorized by the State of Tennessee
and the Cleveland Municipal Code, will not be issued to a person unless the
following conditions are met:
(a) The vehicle must be specially designed as a mobile food unit
and be in compliance with all applicable health regulations for Bradley
County and the State of Tennessee.
(b) The driver of the vehicle must have a current Tennessee
Driver's License, current automobile insurance (including liability
insurance) and current vehicle registration as required by Tennessee law
and enforced by law enforcement authorities.
(c) The vehicle may only operate in locations where the
operation of mobile food units are permitted under this chapter.
(d) All current permits must be posted in a conspicuous manner,
in compliance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-14-305.
(3) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to festivals,
community-wide projects, and other community-sponsored sales which may
occur on a periodic basis and which are submitted to and approved by the city.
(as added by Ord. #2014-44, Nov. 2014)
12-1303. Permit requirements. (1) The title of this permit shall be the
"Mobile Food Unit Permit."
(2) No person shall sell, or offer for sale, any food, beverage, fruit, or
like consumable product from any mobile food unit unless:
(a) Such person obtains a mobile food unit permit from the city
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
(b) Such sales are made from a mobile food unit under the
control of a mobile food unit operator; and
(c) The mobile food unit operator has obtained written
permission from the owner or lessee of the premises on which the mobile
food unit is located to operate on mobile food unit from the property.
(3) Any person desiring a mobile food unit permit shall make written
application to the city stating:
(a) Name, home address, business address, and telephone
number of the applicant and the name, address, and telephone number
of the owner of the mobile food unit, if other than the applicant, to be
used in the operator's business;
(b) A description of the type of food, beverage, fruit, or like
consumable product to be sold; and
(c) The VIN#, a brief description including make and model,
and at least two (2) photographs of the mobile food unit.
(4) Before any permit is issued by the city under this chapter, the
applicant must submit satisfactory evidence that the applicant has complied
Change 16, December 14, 2015 12-44
with the state business tax act and all state statutes and regulations controlling
health and dispensing of food. Nothing herein shall excuse any
applicant/operator from complying with all applicable state statutes and city
ordinances controlling health standards and requirements and the operation of
businesses.
(5) Upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the city shall
issue to the applicant a mobile food unit permit authorizing the operator to do
business upon payment of a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00); provided, the
applicant complies with the other provisions of this chapter. The permit fee shall
be used to help defray the cost of administering and enforcing the provisions of
this chapter.
(6) A permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for one (1) year
from the date of issuance and shall be renewed on an annual basis (concurrent
with the renewal and issuance of business licenses) upon proper application and
payment of the permit fee. Each permit shall be valid for only one (1) mobile
food unit. Each operator and/or applicant shall file an additional application and
pay an additional permit fee for each additional mobile food unit.
(7) All permits issued under this chapter shall be displayed inside the
mobile food unit at all times during the operation of the mobile food unit. The
permit shall be displayed in such a manner that it can be viewed from the
outside.
(8) The mobile food unit permit number shall be prominently displayed
on the outside of the mobile food unit.
(9) The operator shall have posted the current price per unit or
measure for each type of item sold. (as added by Ord. #2014-44, Nov. 2014)
12-1304. Operational requirements. (1) Mobile food units are
prohibited from operating upon city streets, sidewalks or public property within
the city limits.
(2) Mobile food units are prohibited from operating on private
property, except with prior written permission from the owner or lessee on
which the mobile food unit is located.
(3) Mobile food units may only operate in certain zoning districts in
allowed areas. Mobile food units may only operate on privately owned properties
which are zoned either CBD, CH, CG, IH, IL, MU, or PI.
(4) Mobile food units must not be parked within ten feet (10') of a city
right-of-way.
(5) No mobile food unit shall be equipped with any external electronic
sound-amplifying device. No operator shall shout, make any noise or use any
device for the purpose of attracting attention to the mobile food unit or the items
it offers for sale.
(6) Mobile food units shall be limited to the sale of food and
non-alcoholic drinks. The sale of other merchandise or services will not be
permitted.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 12-45
(7) Cooking must not be conducted while the vehicle is in motion.
(8) When not in use as allowed by § 12-1304(5), a mobile food unit shall
be en route to or parked at its commissary or other location approved by the
Bradley County Health Department that does not violate the provisions of this
chapter or any other applicable city ordinance.
(9) Signs which are permanently affixed to the mobile food unit shall
extend no more than six inches (6") from the vehicle. All signs shall be attached
to or painted on the mobile food unit. Electronic signs are prohibited, as are
signs that flash, cause interference with radio, telephone, television or other
communication transmissions; produce or reflect motion pictures; emit visible
smoke, vapor, particles, or odor; are animated or produce any rotation, motion
or movement. Signs may be indirectly illuminated, but no sign shall utilize any
exposed incandescent lamp with wattage of more than forty (40) watts.
(10) The operator must provide for the sanitary collection of all refuse,
litter and garbage within twenty-five feet (25') of the mobile food unit which is
generated by the mobile food unit operation or the patrons using that service
and shall remove all such waste materials from the location before the vehicle
departs. The operator is responsible to physically inspect the general area for
such items prior to the vehicle's departure.
(11) The operation of the mobile food unit is limited to the interior of the
unit. There shall be no outside seating implements in the form of benches,
tables, chairs or other furniture which may be used for eating or sitting, or any
other accessory structure other than containers for collection of refuse, litter and
garbage.
(12) Mobile food units shall not use stakes, rods, or any method of
support that must be drilled, driven, or otherwise fixed, into or onto asphalt,
pavement, curbs, sidewalks, or buildings. (as added by Ord. #2014-44, Nov.
2014)
12-1305. Compliance with health regulations. (1) Operators of
mobile food units shall comply with all regulations and laws governing mobile
food service establishments and food service establishments adopted by the
department of public health for Bradley County and enacted by the State of
Tennessee.
(2) Operators of mobile food units shall obtain all necessary health
certificates and permits.
(3) Operators of mobile food units shall comply with the requirements
for the examination of employees as required by this chapter. (as added by Ord.
#2014-44, Nov. 2014)
Change 17, July 23, 2018 12-46
CHAPTER 14
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION
12-1401. Adopted.
12-1402. Available in clerk's office.
12-1401. Adopted. Pursuant to the authority granted by Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International
Existing Building Code,1 2012 edition, as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change
of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic
buildings, as provided in said code; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said existing building code on file in the office
of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as is
fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes prescribed below.
The following sections are hereby revised:
1. Section 101.1 Insert "City of Cleveland Tennessee" in (Name of
Jurisdiction)
2. Section 1401.2 Insert "November 13, 2017" in (Date in One
Location). (as added by Ord. #2017-55, Nov. 2017)
12-1402. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the International
Existing Building Code, 2012 edition, has been placed on file in the city clerk's
office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. (as added
by Ord. #2017-55, Nov. 2017)
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
13-1
TITLE 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. ABANDONED AND DISCARDED VEHICLES.
3. SLUM CLEARANCE.
4. BLIGHTED AREAS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
13-101. Smoke, soot, cinders, etc.
13-102. Stagnant water.
13-103. Weeds and grass.
13-104. Overgrown and dirty lots.
13-105. Dead animals.
13-106. Health and sanitation nuisances.
13-107. Removal from property of unsafe and unhealthy man-made and
natural material at property owner's expense.
13-101. Smoke, soot, cinders, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to permit or cause the escape of such quantities of dense smoke, soot, cinders,
noxious acids, fumes, dust, or gases as to be detrimental to or to endanger the
health, comfort, and safety of the public or so as to cause or have a tendency to
cause injury or damage to property or business.
13-102. Stagnant water. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly
to allow any pool of stagnant water to accumulate and stand on his property
without treating it so as effectively to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. (1981
Code, § 10-76, modified)
13-103. Weeds and grass. Every owner or tenant of property shall
periodically cut the grass and other vegetation commonly recognized as weeds
on his property, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an
1Municipal code references
Animal control: title 10.
Toilet facilities in beer places: § 8-213(10).
Wastewater treatment: title 18, chapter 1.
Change 10, July 10, 2006 13-2
order by the code enforcement officer to cut such vegetation when it has reached
a height of over one (1) foot. (1981 Code, § 10-76, modified)
13-104. Overgrown and dirty lots.1 (1) Prohibition. Pursuant to the
authority granted to municipalities under Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 6-54-113, it shall be unlawful for any owner of record of real property to create,
maintain, or permit to be maintained on such property the growth of trees,
vines, grass, underbrush and/or the accumulations of debris, trash, litter, waste
tires, or garbage, or any other combination of the preceding elements so as to
endanger the health, safety or welfare of other citizens or to encourage the
infestation of rats and other harmful animals.
(2) Deleted. This subsection was deleted by Ord. of 6/18/2001.
(3) Designation of public officer or department. The city manager shall
designate an appropriate department or person to enforce the provisions of this
section.
(4) Notice to property owner. It shall be the duty of the department or
person designated by the city council to enforce this section to serve notice upon
the owner of record in violation of subsection (1) above, a notice in plain
language to remedy the condition within ten (10) days (or twenty (20) days if the
owner of record is a carrier engaged in the transportation of property or is a
utility transmitting communications, electricity, gas, liquids, steam, sewage, or
other materials), excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. The notice
shall be sent by registered or certified United States Mail, addressed to the last
known address of the owner of record. The notice shall state that the owner of
the property is entitled to a hearing, and shall, at the minimum, contain the
following additional information:
(a) A brief statement that the owner is in violation of § 13-104 of
the Cleveland Municipal Code, which has been enacted under the
authority of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-113, and that the property
of such owner may be cleaned-up at the expense of the owner and a lien
placed against the property to secure the cost of the clean-up;
(b) The person, office, address, and telephone number of the
department or person giving the notice;
(c) A cost estimate for remedying the noted condition, which shall
be in conformity with the standards of cost in the city; and
1Municipal code reference
Section 13-103 applies to cases where the city wishes to prosecute the
offender in city court. Section 13-104 can be used when the city seeks
to clean up the lot at the owner's expense and place a lien against the
property for the cost of the clean-up but not to prosecute the owner in
city court.
This title, chapter 2.
Change 10, July 10, 2006 13-3
(d) A place wherein the notified party may return a copy of the
notice, indicating the desire for a hearing.
(5) Clean-up at property owner's expense. If the property owner of record
fails or refuses to remedy the condition within ten (10) days after receiving the
notice (twenty (20) days if the owner is a carrier engaged in the transportation
of property or is a utility transmitting communications, electricity, gas, liquids,
steam, sewage, or other materials), the department or person designated by the
city manager to enforce the provisions of this section shall immediately cause
the condition to be remedied or removed at a cost in conformity with reasonable
standards, and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the owner of the
property. Upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds in
Bradley County, the costs shall be a lien on the property in favor of the
municipality, second only to liens of the state, county, and municipality for
taxes, any lien of the municipality for special assessments, and any valid lien,
right, or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior
to the filing of such notice. These cost shall be placed on the tax rolls of the
municipality as a lien and shall be added to property tax bills to be collected at
the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the
owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to
the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes.
(6) Appeal. The owner of record who is aggrieved by the determination
and order of the public officer may appeal the determination and order to the
city manager. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days
following the receipt of the notice issued pursuant to subsection (3) above. The
failure to appeal within this time shall, without exception, constitute a waiver
of the right to a hearing.
(7) Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by an order or act of the city
manager under subsection (5) above may seek judicial review of the order or act.
The time period established in subsection (4) above shall be stayed during the
pendency of judicial review.
(8) Supplemental nature of this section. The provisions of this section
are in addition and supplemental to, and not in substitution for, any other
provision in the municipal charter, this municipal code of ordinances or other
applicable law which permits the city to proceed against an owner, tenant or
occupant of property who has created, maintained, or permitted to be
maintained on such property the growth of trees, vines, grass, weeds,
underbrush and/or the accumulation of the debris, trash, litter, or garbage or
any combination of the preceding elements, under its charter, any other
provisions of this municipal code of ordinances or any other applicable law. (as
amended by Ord. of 6/18/2001, and Ord. #2005-45, Nov. 2005)
13-105. Dead animals. Any person owning or having possession of any
dead animal not intended for use as food shall promptly bury the same or notify
13-4
the animal control officer and dispose of such animal in such manner as the
animal control officer shall direct. (1981 Code, § 10-18, modified)
13-106. Health and sanitation nuisances. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him to become
or remain in a filthy condition, or permit the use or occupation of same in such
a manner as to create noxious or offensive smells and odors in connection
therewith, or to allow the accumulation or creation of unwholesome and
offensive matter or the breeding of flies, rodents, or other vermin on the
premises to the menace of the public health or the annoyance of people residing
within the vicinity.
13-107. Removal from property of unsafe and unhealthy manmade
and natural material at property owner's expense. (1) Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any real property in the city to create,
maintain or permit to be maintained on such property any unsafe and unhealthy
man-made and natural materials, including junk motorized and non-motorized
vehicles and carriage of every kind and description, debris, trash, litter and
garbage, and growth of vegetation, including weeds, trees, vines, grass and
underbrush.
(2) Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to every
piece of real property in the city, including, but not limited to, residential
commercial, industrial and business property, whether is occupied or
unoccupied.
(3) Designation of enforcement officer. The city manager shall
designate an appropriate department or person to enforce the provisions of this
section.
(4) Notice to property owners. It shall be the duty of the enforcement
department or officer to service notice upon the owner of record of the property
in violation of subsection (1) above, a notice in plain language to remedy the
condition within ten (10) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays. The notice shall be sent by registered or certified U.S. Mail, addressed
to the last known address of the owner of record. The notice shall state that the
owner of the property is entitled to a hearing, and shall, at a minimum contain
the following information:
(a) A brief statement that the owner is in violation of § 13-107
of the Cleveland Municipal Code, and that the property in violation of
that section may be cleaned-up at the expense of the owner, and a lien
placed against the property to secure the cost of the clean-up,
(b) The person, office, address, and telephone number of the
enforcement department or officer giving the notice;
(c) A cost estimate for remedying the noted condition, which
shall be in conformity with the standards of costs in the city; and
13-5
(d) A place wherein the notified party may return a copy of the
notice, indicating the desire for a hearing.
(5) Clean-up at property owner's expense. If the property owner of
record fails or refuses to remedy the condition within ten (10) days after
receiving the notice, the enforcement department or officer shall immediately
cause the condition to be remedied or removed at a cost in conformity with
reasonable standards, and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the owner
of the property. Upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of
deeds in Bradley County, the costs shall be a lien on the property in favor of the
city, second only to liens of the state, county and city for property taxes, and lien
of the city for special assessments, and any valid lien, right or interest in such
property duly recorded or perfected, prior to the filing of such notice, and the
expenses shall be collected by the city's tax collector at the same time and in the
same manner as property taxes are collected.
(6) Appeal. The owner of record who is aggrieved by the determination
of the enforcement department or officer may appeal the determination and
order to the city manager. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within
ten (10) days following the receipt of the notice issued pursuant to subsection (3)
above. The failure to appeal within this time shall, without exception constitute
a waiver of the right to a hearing.
(7) Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by an order or act of the
enforcement department or officer or city manager under subsection (5) above,
shall be stayed during the pendency of judicial review.
(8) Supplemental nature of this section. The provisions of this section
shall be supplemental to, and not in substitution for, any other provision in the
municipal charter, this municipal code of ordinances, or other applicable law
which permits the city to proceed against a property owner, tenant or occupant
of property who has created maintained or permitted to be maintained on such
property unsafe and unhealthy man-made and natural materials. (as added by
Ord. of 6/18/2001)
13-6
CHAPTER 2
ABANDONED AND DISCARDED VEHICLES--AND IMPROPERLY
STORED PORTABLE BUILDINGS
SECTION
13-201. Definitions.
13-202. Abandoning prohibited.
13-203. Leaving nonoperating junked vehicle on street prohibited.
13-204. Location or presence of discarded, or abandoned, or inoperable, or
unlicensed vehicles or improperly stored portable buildings within
city deemed a public nuisance; exceptions.
13-205. Screening of otherwise lawfully located inoperable and unlicensed
vehicles.
13-206. Penalties.
13-201. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
(1) "Abandoned vehicle" shall mean any vehicle or part thereof which
is left unattended on public or private property for more than thirty (30) days,
or a vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of more
than forty-eight (48) hours, or a vehicle that has remained on private property
without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more
than forty-eight (48) hours.
(2) "Discarded vehicle" shall mean any vehicle or part thereof which:
(a) is inoperative and which does not have lawfully affixed
thereto an unexpired license plate or plates and which is wrecked,
dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded; or
(b) remains inoperable and without unexpired license plate or
plates affixed thereto for a continuous period of more than thirty (30)
days.
(3) "Property" shall mean any property within the city which is not a
street, highway or public right-of-way.
(4) "Vehicle" shall mean a machine propelled by power other than
human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads,
runners or slides and transport person or property or pull machinery, and shall
include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors,
and wagons. For purposes of this title 13 of the Cleveland Municipal Code,
"vehicle" shall also include watercraft and aircraft.
(5) For purposes of this title 13 of the Cleveland Municipal Code,
"portable buildings" shall include structures such as mobile homes, office
trailers, portable kitchens, tents, or other structures for human occupancy or
storage that are to designed to be transported intact or in sections.
13-7
(6) For purposes of this title 13 of the Cleveland Municipal Code,
"improperly stored portable buildings" shall be deemed to include any portable
building located or maintained on a property so as to exhibit one or more of the
health hazard conditions applicable to vehicles as described in § 13-204.
However, the use of a portable building for its designed purpose would not
constitute a health hazard (e.g. sheltering a dog in a doghouse) apart from other
conditions. Portable buildings, except when held for sale or lease on a personattended
sales or rental lot that is properly zoned and developed in compliance
title 14, chapter 2 of the Cleveland Municipal Code, will be considered
improperly stored if they are stored or abandoned on any property for more than
30 days such that the portable building is not connected to public water and
sewer if so designed, or such that the portable building installation was without
a required permit or in violation of a condition of the required permit, or such
that the portable building is open or otherwise not secure from entry, or such
that the portable building is not properly secured with an approved foundation
or anchoring system. Relocation of a portable building prior to the end of the
aforementioned 30-day period shall not change the effective date of the violation
or otherwise cure the violation unless such relocation is in a place and manner
that would not constitute the improper placement of a portable building at the
end of the 30-day period. Portable buildings, when permitted in accordance with
temporary use provisions in title 14, chapter 2, section 2.16 and maintained and
removed in accordance with said permit, shall not be considered as improperly
stored.
(7) "Inoperative" and "inoperable," as applied to vehicles, shall mean
any vehicle that is not roadworthy if designed to be driven on public streets; or
any vehicle that cannot be moved under its own power if designed to be moved
under its own power, or a vehicle designed to be towed or hauled that is not safe
and roadworthy for towing or hauling, or vehicle parts that are not assembled
so as to comprise a complete vehicle. Conditions that would render a vehicle not
roadworthy would include damage or disrepair of the vehicle such that it cannot
be moved, steered, and stopped as designed, or a condition of the vehicle such
that it cannot be operated in compliance with applicable traffic laws. Vehicle
damage that is of a purely aesthetic nature would not, apart from other
conditions, constitute an inoperable vehicle condition. When applied in
particular to watercraft or aircraft, the terms "inoperative" and "inoperable"
shall also include being wrecked or otherwise incapable of being safely operated
in the water or air as designed.
(8) "Unlicensed," as applied to vehicles, shall mean a vehicle without
unexpired license plates or a vehicle without other lawfully required registration
that is currently valid.
(9) "Health hazard," for the purposes of this ordinance pertaining to
inoperable vehicles shall include, but are not necessarily be limited to, the
following conditions: a vehicle passenger compartment, trunk, or other normally
enclosed area that is open to the elements; vegetation growing on, within, or
13-8
under the vehicle other than grass maintained at an otherwise lawful height;
storage of junk, garbage, or debris on or within the vehicle; infestation of the
vehicle by rats, snakes or other vermin; standing water on or within the vehicle
so as to create a potential breeding ground for mosquitos; use of the vehicle for
the unsafe storage of hazardous materials; use of a vehicle for human habitation
where it is not designed for human habitation; use of a vehicle designed for
human habitation for such habitation where the vehicle is not properly
connected with utilities and otherwise in compliance with zoning, building,
housing, and property maintenance regulations; occupancy of the vehicle for the
conduct of activities that are criminal or otherwise unlawful; or use of the
vehicle to shelter or confine animals. (1981 Code, § 15-131, modified, as
amended by Ord. of 12/10/2001)
13-202. Abandoning prohibited. No person shall abandon any vehicle
within the city, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the
city, for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle
reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. (1981 Code, § 15-132)
13-203. Leaving nonoperating junked vehicle on street
prohibited. No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating,
wrecked, or junked vehicle on any street, alley or highway within the city, or on
any public right-of-way. (1981 Code, § 15-133)
13-204. Location or presence of discarded, or abandoned, or
inoperable, or unlicensed vehicles or improperly stored portable
buildings within city deemed a public nuisance; exceptions. The location
or presence of any discarded, or abandoned, or inoperable, or unlicensed vehicle
or improperly stored portable building on any lot, tract, or parcel of land, or
portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the
City of Cleveland shall be deemed a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to cause or maintain such a public nuisance by improperly
storing a portable building, as described in subsection 13-201(6) above, on his
or her property or on the property of another, or to suffer, allow, or permit such
improper storage of a portable building on his or her property. It shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to cause or maintain such public nuisance
by wrecking, dismantling, rendering inoperable, storing in an inoperable
condition, abandoning, or discarding his or their vehicle or vehicles on the
property of another or to suffer, permit, or allow the same to be placed, located,
maintained or exist upon his or their own real property; provided that his
section shall not apply to:
(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property;
13-9
(2) Abandoned, discarded, unlicensed, or inoperable vehicles or parts
thereof stored in the location of a lawfully existing junkyard, salvage yard, or
automobile disassembler that is operated and maintained in a lawful manner;
(3) A vehicle stored in a lawful place and manner by the city or other
governmental authority in an appropriate storage place or depository;
(4) One or more inoperable vehicles stored in ordinary public view for
less than 30 days for the purposes of repair when such storage is otherwise
lawful. This exception is subject to the condition that the relocation of such
vehicles prior to the end of the aforementioned 30-day period would not change
the effective date of the violation or otherwise cure the violation unless the
relocation was in such a place and manner so as not to be in violation of this
ordinance at the end of the 30-day period;
(5) Inoperable vehicles held for repair by a properly zoned and licensed
vehicle dealer or vehicle repair establishment provided that such vehicles are
screened in accordance with § 13-205 and provided that such vehicles are stored
in a manner that does not produce health hazard conditions described in
§ 13-201(9). Such vehicles held in this manner shall not exceed the greater of
four vehicles or one vehicle per 7500 square feet or fraction thereof of land area
in the site occupied by the vehicle dealer or vehicle repair establishment;
(6) Unlicensed but operable vehicles held for sale or lease by a licensed
vehicle dealer in an otherwise lawful place and manner; or
(7) Less than three unlicensed or inoperable vehicles when stored on
private property in a manner screened from ordinary public view as provided in
§ 13-205 and maintained so as not to create a health hazard as described in
§ 13-201(9). (1981 Code, § 15-134, as amended by Ord. of 12/10/2001)
13-205. Screening of otherwise lawfully located inoperable and
unlicensed vehicles. Where unlicensed or inoperable vehicles are stored in
a manner otherwise in compliance with this ordinance, such storage shall be
behind the front building line of the principal structure on the site and shall be
screened from the view of neighboring properties. Screening may be by means
of a building, structure, wall, fence, landscaped earthen berm, evergreen trees
or shrubs, or natural topographic feature, or a combination thereof. Screening
must be otherwise lawful and maintained in good condition. Vegetation
normally considered weeds, fences or walls made with scrap or junk material,
or piles of rock, earth, logs, or debris would not constitute proper screening.
Screening must be accomplished in a manner that does not create a traffic
hazard or otherwise violate the site development standards in title 14, chapter
2, section 3.0 of the Cleveland Municipal Code. Screening must be of proper
height, position, and opacity to hide the vehicle from ordinary public view and
from the view of neighboring properties. (as added by Ord. of 12/10/2001)
13-206. Penalties. Any person or persons violating this ordinance shall,
upon conviction, be fined not less than two (2) or more than fifty (50) dollars for
13-10
each offense and such person or persons shall be liable for court costs. Each day
that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. It is further
provided that the foregoing penal provisions are not intended to be the exclusive
means of enforcing this ordinance, and violation of the provisions hereof is
expressly declared to be a public nuisance, and, in addition to the fines herein
provided above, the nuisance shall be abatable in law or in equity as in the case
of other nuisances. (as added by Ord. of 12/10/2001)
13-11
CHAPTER 3
SLUM CLEARANCE1
SECTION
13-301. Findings of council.
13-302. Definitions.
13-303. "Public officer" designated; powers.
13-304. Initiation of proceedings; hearings.
13-305. Orders to owners of unfit structures.
13-306. When public officer may repair, etc.
13-307. When public officer may remove or demolish.
13-308. Lien for expenses; sale of salvage materials; other powers not
limited.
13-309. Basis for a finding of unfitness.
13-310. Service of complaints or orders.
13-311. Enjoining enforcement of orders.
13-312. Additional powers of public officer.
13-313. Powers conferred are supplemental.
13-314. Structures unfit for human habitation deemed unlawful.
13-301. Findings of council. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 13-21-101, et seq., the city council finds that there exists in the city structures
which are unfit for human occupation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the
hazards of fire, accident or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or
unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety and morals, or
otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city.
13-302. Definitions. (1) "Municipality" shall mean the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee, and the areas encompassed within existing city limits or
as hereafter annexed.
(2) "Governing body" shall mean the city council charged with
governing the city.
(3) "Public officer" shall mean the officer or officers who are authorized
by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed herein and pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-21-101, et seq.
(4) "Public authority" shall mean any housing authority or any officer
who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 13, chapter 21.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 13-12
state relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning
structures in the city.
(5) "Owner" shall mean the holder of title in fee simple and every
mortgagee of record.
(6) "Parties in interest" shall mean all individuals, associations,
corporations and others who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who
are in possession thereof.
(7) "Structures" shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof,
used for human occupation and intended to be so used, and includes any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
13-303. "Public officer" designated; powers. There is hereby
designated and appointed a "public officer," to be the property maintenance
officer of the city, to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, which
powers shall be supplemental to all others held by the property maintenance
officer. (as amended by Ord. #2013-53, Nov. 2013)
13-304. Initiation of proceedings; hearings. Whenever a petition is
filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents
of the city charging that any structure is unfit for human occupancy or use, or
whenever it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any structure
is unfit for human occupation or use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served
upon the owner of, and parties in interest of, such structure a complaint stating
the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the public officer (or his designated agent) at a place therein fixed, not
less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the service of the
complaint; and the owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint; and the rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before
the public officer.
13-305. Orders to owners of unfit structures. If, after such notice
and hearing as provided for in the preceding section, the public officer
determines that the structure under consideration is unfit for human occupancy
or use, he shall state in writing his finding of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
order:
(1) If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not exceeding
fifty percent [50%] of the reasonable value), requiring the owner, during the
time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such structure to render
Change 15, August 11, 2014 13-13
it fit for human occupancy or use or to vacate and close the structure for human
occupancy or use; or
(2) If the repair, alteration or improvement of said structure cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not to exceed
fifty percent [50%] of the value of the premises), requiring the owner within the
time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such structure.
13-306. When public officer may repair, etc. If the owner fails to
comply with the order to repair, alter, or improve or to vacate and close the
structure as specified in the preceding section hereof, the public officer may
cause such structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and
closed; and the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for
human occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building for human
occupancy or use is prohibited and unlawful."
13-307. When public officer may remove or demolish. If the owner
fails to comply with an order, as specified above, to remove or demolish the
structure, the public officer may cause such structure to be removed and
demolished.
13-308. Lien for expenses; sale of salvaged materials; other
powers not limited. The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public
officer shall be assessed against the owner of the property, and shall upon the
filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds of Bradley County, be
a lien on the property in favor of the municipality, second only to liens of the
state, county and municipality for taxes, any lien of the municipality for special
assessments, and any valid lien, right, or interest in such property duly recorded
or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be
collected by the municipal tax collector or county trustee at the same time and
in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the
costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty
and interest as delinquent property taxes. In addition, the municipality may
collect the costs assessed against the owner through an action for debt filed in
any court of competent jurisdiction. The municipality may bring one action for
debt against more than one or all of the owners of properties against whom said
costs have been assessed and the fact that multiple owners have been joined in
one action shall not be considered by the court as a misjoinder of parties. If the
structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the
materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the
cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited
in the chancery court of Bradley County by the public officer, shall be secured
13-14
in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such
court provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the City of Cleveland to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise.
13-309. Basis for a finding of unfitness. The public officer defined
herein shall have the power and may determine that a structure is unfit for
human occupation and use if he finds that conditions exist in such structure
which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants
or users of such structure, the occupants or users of neighboring structures or
other residents of the City of Cleveland; such conditions may include the
following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein
increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural
defects; and uncleanliness.
13-310. Service of complaints or orders. Complaints or orders issued
by the public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon persons,
either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such person
is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit
to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons
may be made by publishing the same once each week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. In addition, a copy of
such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall also
be filed for record in the Register's Office of Bradley County, Tennessee, and
such filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices
provided by law.
13-311. Enjoining enforcement of orders. Any person affected by an
order issued by the public officer served pursuant to this chapter may file a suit
in chancery court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying
out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon the filing of such suit,
issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final
disposition of the cause; provided, however, that within sixty (60) days after the
posting and service of the order of the public officer, such person shall file such
suit in the court.
The remedy provided herein shall be the exclusive remedy and no person
affected by an order of the public officer shall be entitled to recover any damages
for action taken pursuant to any order of the public officer, or because of
noncompliance by such person with any order of the public officer.
13-15
13-312. Additional powers of public officer. The public officer, in
order to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter,
shall have the following powers in addition to those otherwise granted herein:
(1) To investigate conditions of the structures in the city in order to
determine which structures therein are unfit for human occupation or use;
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he may designate.
13-313. Powers conferred are supplemental. This chapter shall not
be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the city with regard to the
enforcement of the provisions of its charter or any other ordinances or
regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers
conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers
conferred by the charter and other laws.
13-314. Structures unfit for human habitation deemed unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of record to create, maintain or permit to be
maintained in the city structures which are unfit for human occupation due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities,
lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions
rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to
the health, safety and morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the
residents of the city.
Change 15, August 11, 2014 13-16
CHAPTER 4
BLIGHTED AREAS
SECTION
13-401. Findings of council.
13-402. Definitions.
13-403. Vacant property review commission created.
13-404. Eminent domain--authority of city to acquire blighted, deteriorated
properties.
13-405. Same--Determination by vacant property review commission prior to
initiation of proceedings by city.
13-406. Same--Institution by city pursuant to certain conditions and
certification.
13-407. When disclosure of interest required by city officers, employees.
13-408. Enforcement officer.
13-401. Findings of council. (1) The city council hereby finds:
It is hereby found:
(a) That there exists in the City of Cleveland blighted and
deteriorated properties in neighborhoods which cause the deterioration
of those and contiguous neighborhoods and constitute a serious and
growing menace which is injurious to the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the residents of the city and are beyond remedy
and control solely by regulatory process in the exercise of the police
power.
(b) That the existence of blighted and deteriorated properties
within neighborhoods, and the growth and spread of blight and
deterioration or the threatened deterioration of other neighborhoods and
properties:
(i) Contribute substantially and increasingly to the
spread of disease and crime, and to losses by fire and accident;
(ii) Necessitate expensive and disproportionate
expenditure of public funds for the preservation of public health
and safety, for crime prevention, correction, prosecution, and
punishment, for the treatment of juvenile delinquency, for the
maintenance of adequate police, fire and accident protection, and
for other public services and facilities;
(iii) Constitute an economic and social liability;
(iv) Substantially impair or arrest the sound growth of
the community;
(v) Retard the provision of decent, safe, and sanitary
housing accommodations;
(vi) Depreciate assessable values;
13-17
(vii) Cause an abnormal exodus of families from these
neighborhoods; and
(viii) Are detrimental to the health, the well being and the
dignity of many residents of these neighborhoods;
(c) That this menace cannot be effectively dealt with by private
enterprise without the aid provided herein;
(d) That the benefits, which would result from eliminating the
blighted properties, that cause the blight and deterioration of
neighborhoods will accrue to the inhabitants of the neighborhoods in
which these conditions exist and to the inhabitants of this state generally.
(2) It is hereby declared:
(a) That it is the policy of the City of Cleveland to protect and
promote the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city by
eliminating the blight and deterioration of neighborhoods through the
elimination of blighted and deteriorated properties within these
neighborhoods;
(b) That the elimination of such blight and deterioration and the
preparation of the properties for sale or lease, for development or
redevelopment, constitute a public use and purpose for which public
money may be expended and private property acquired and are
governmental functions in the interest of the health, safety, and welfare
of the people of Cleveland, and
(c) That the necessity in the public interest for the provision
enacted herein is hereby declared to be legislative determination. (as
added by Ord. of 7/9/2001)
13-402. Definitions. Unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) "Blighted" or "deteriorated" property means any vacant structure
or vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground in a predominantly built-up
neighborhood; provided, however, "blighted" or "deteriorated" shall not be
construed to apply to any property used for agricultural purposes:
(a) Which because of physical condition or use is regarded as a
public nuisance at common law or has been declared a public nuisance in
accordance with local housing, building, plumbing, fire or related codes;
(b) Which because of physical condition, use or occupancy is
considered an attractive nuisance to children, including but not limited
to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or
structures;
(c) Which because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermininfested
or lacking in the facilities and equipment required by the
housing code of the municipality, has been designated by the appropriate
agency or department responsible for enforcement of the code as unfit for
human habitation;
13-18
(d) Which is a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to the
safety of persons or property;
(e) From which the utilities, plumbing, heating, sewerage or
other facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered
ineffective so that the property is unfit for its intended use;
(f) Which by reason of neglect or lack of maintenance has
become a place for accumulation of trash and debris, or a haven for
rodents or other vermin;
(g) Which has been tax delinquent for a period of at least three
(3) years; or
(h) Which has not been rehabilitated within the time
constraints placed upon the owner by the appropriate code enforcement
agency.
(2) "City" means City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
(3) "Redevelopment" means the planning or replanning, design or
redesign, acquisition, clearance, development and disposal or any combination
of these, of a property in the preparation of such property for residential and
related uses, as may be appropriate or necessary.
(4) "Residential and related use" shall mean residential property for
sale or rental and related uses; including, but not limited to, park and recreation
area, neighborhood community service, and neighborhood parking lots;
(5) "Vacant property review commission" means commission
established by ordinance to review vacant properties to make a written
determination of blight and deterioration. (as added by Ord. of 7/9/2001)
13-403. Vacant property review commission created. (1) The city
council of the city finds and declares that there exists in the city blighted or
deteriorated properties and that there is in the city for the exercise of powers,
functions and duties conferred by Public Chapter No. 1034 of the Public Acts of
1990.
(2) There is hereby established a vacant property review commission
which shall certify properties as blighted or deteriorated to the legislative body.
The number of members that will serve on the commission shall be five (5), all
of whom must be residents of the city. Members shall be appointed by the chief
executive officer and approved by the legislative body. The first five (5)
members shall hold office as follows: Two (2) members, until June 2002; two (2)
members, until June 2003; and one (1) member, until June 2004. Thereafter,
such members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years, or until their
successors are appointed; however, any member may be removed for cause at
any time by the city council. The vacant property review commission shall serve
without compensation. No officer or employee of the city whose duties include
enforcement of local housing, building, plumbing, fire or related codes shall be
appointed to the commission. (as added by Ord. of 7/9/2001)
13-19
13-304. Eminent domain--authority of city to acquire blighted,
deteriorated properties. The city may acquire, by eminent domain pursuant
to Tennessee Code Annotated, title 29, chapters 16 and 17, any property
determined to be blighted or deteriorated pursuant to this act, and shall have
the power to hold, clear, manage or dispose of property so acquired for
residential and related use, pursuant to the provisions of this division. (as
added by Ord. of 7/9/2001)
13-305. Same--determination of vacant property review
commission prior to initiation of proceedings by city. (1) The city shall
not institute eminent domain proceedings pursuant to Public Chapter No. 1034
of the Public Acts of 1990 unless the vacant property review commission has
certified that the property is blighted or deteriorated. A property which has
been referred to the vacant property review commission by an agency of the city
as blighted or deteriorated may only be certified to the legislative body as
blighted or deteriorated may only be certified to the legislative body as blighted
and deteriorated after the vacant property review commission has determined:
(a) That the owner of the property or designated agent has been
sent an order by the appropriate agency of the city to eliminate the
conditions which are in violation of local codes or law;
(b) That the property is vacant;
(c) That the property is blighted and deteriorated;
(d) That the vacant property review commission has notified the
property owner or designated agent that the property has been
determined to be blighted or deteriorated and the time period for
correction of such condition has expired and the property owner or agent
has failed to comply with notice; and
(e) That the planning commission of the city has determined
that the reuse of the property for residential and related use is in keeping
with the comprehensive plan.
(2) The findings required by subsection (a) of this section shall be in
writing and included in the report to the legislative body.
(3) The vacant property review commission shall notify the owner of
the property or a designated agent that a determination of blight or
deterioration has been made and that failure to eliminate the conditions causing
the blight shall render the provision subject to condemnation by the city under
the provisions of Public Chapter 1034 of the Public Acts of 1990. Notice shall be
mailed to the owner or designated agent by certified mail, return receipt
requested. However, if the address of the owner or a designated agent is
unknown and cannot be ascertained by the vacant property review commission
in the exercise of reasonable diligence, copies of the notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the property affected. The written notice sent to the owner
or his agent shall describe the conditions that render the property blighted and
Change 15, August 11, 2014 13-20
deteriorated, and shall demand abatement of the conditions within ninety (90)
days of the receipt of such notice.
(4) An extension of the ninety-day time period may be granted by the
vacant property review commission if the owner or designated agent
demonstrates that such period is insufficient to correct the conditions cited in
the notice. (as added by Ord. of 7/9/2001)
13-406. Same--institution by city pursuant to certain conditions
and certifications. The city may institute eminent domain proceedings
pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, title 29, chapters 16 and 17, against any
property, which has been certified as blighted or deteriorated by the vacant
property review commission if it finds:
(1) That such property has deteriorated to such an extent as to
constitute a serious and growing menace to the public health, safety and
welfare;
(2) That such property is likely to continue to deteriorate unless
corrected;
(3) That the continued deterioration of such property may contribute
to the blighting or deterioration of the area immediately surrounding the
property; and
(4) That the owner of such property has failed to correct the
deterioration of the property. (as added by Ord. of 7/9/2001)
13-407. When disclosure of interest required by city officers,
employees. No officer or employee of the city, or of the vacant property review
commission, who in the course of his duties is required to participate in the
determination of property blight or deterioration or the issuance of notices on
code violations which may lead to a determination of blight or deterioration,
shall acquire any interest in any property declared to be blighted or
deteriorated. If any such officer or employee owns or has financial interest,
direct or indirect, in any property certified to be blighted or deteriorated, he
shall immediately disclose, in writing, such interest to the vacant property
review commission and to the legislative body and such disclosure shall be
entered in the minutes of the vacant property review commission and of the
legislative body. Failure to so disclose such interest shall constitute misconduct
in office. No payment shall be made to any officer or employee for any property
or interest therein acquired by the municipality from such officer or employee
unless the amount of such payment is fixed by court order in eminent domain
proceedings, or unless payment is unanimously approved by the legislative body.
(as added by Ord. of 7/9/2001)
13-408. Enforcement officer. The property maintenance officer is
hereby designated as the official responsible for administering and enforcing
Change 15, August 11, 2014 13-21
title 13, chapter 4 of the Cleveland Municipal Code entitled the "Blighted
Areas." (as added by Ord. #2013-53, Nov. 2013)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-1
TITLE 14
ZONING AND LAND USE CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. PLANNING COMMISSION.
2. ZONING ORDINANCE.
3. [DELETED.]
4. AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS.
5. SIGN CONTROL REGULATIONS.
6. FENCING REGULATIONS ON LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS.
7. MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS.
8. TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS.
9. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
10. FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION ORDINANCE.
11. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SITING CELLULAR COMMUNICATION
TOWERS.
12. HISTORIC PRESERVATION.
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION1
SECTION
14-101. Created.
14-102. Membership.
14-103. Organization, rules, and staff.
14-104. Powers and duties.
14-105. Oath of office.
14-101. Created. In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and
harmonious development of the municipality which will, in accordance with
existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order,
convenience, prosperity and the general welfare as well as efficiency and
economy in the process of development, the municipal planning commission is
hereby created and established as authorized by the Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 13-4-101 et seq., and such planning commission shall be organized and
empowered as hereinafter set out. (1981 Code, § 17-16)
1Municipal code references
Airport commission: title 2, chapter 1.
Airport zoning regulations: title 14, chapter 4.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 14-2
14-102. Membership. The municipal planning commission shall consist
of nine (9) members. One of the members shall be the mayor, or his designee,
excluding city employees, one shall be a council member selected by the city
council, and the seven (7) remaining members shall be citizens, appointed by the
mayor. The terms of the appointive members shall be for three (3) years. Any
vacancy on an appointive membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by
the mayor, who shall have the authority to remove any appointive member for
sufficient and just reason. The term of the member selected from the city
council shall run concurrently with his membership on the city council. All
members shall serve without compensation. (1981 Code, § 17-17, modified)
14-103. Organization, rules, and staff. The municipal planning
commission shall elect its chairman from its appointive members. The term of
the chairman shall be for one year with eligibility for reelection. The
commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and for recording
its findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. (1981
Code, § 17-18, modified)
14-104. Powers and duties. The municipal planning commission shall
have all the powers, duties and responsibilities as set forth in Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 13, chapters 4 and 7, as amended. (1981 Code, § 17-19)
14-105. Oath of office. Before beginning a term of service on the
municipal planning commission, a member shall take the following oath of
office:
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the
United States, the Constitution of the State of Tennessee, and that I will
perform with fidelity the duties of the office to which I have been appointed
and which I am about to assume." (as added by Ord. #2004-23, June 2004)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-3
CHAPTER 2
ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance.
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance. Land use
within the City of Cleveland shall be governed by the, zoning ordinance and any
amendments thereto.1
1The Cleveland Zoning Ordinance, and any amendments, is included in this
municipal code as Appendix C.
Amendments to the zoning map are of record in the office of the city
recorder.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-4
CHAPTER 3
[DELETED]
This chapter was deleted by Ord. #2006-3, Jan. 2006.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-5
CHAPTER 4
AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS1
SECTION
14-401. Definitions.
14-402. Airport zoning map.
14-403. Zones.
14-404. Height limits.
14-405. Use restrictions.
14-406. Nonconforming uses.
14-407. Variances.
14-408. Permits.
14-409. Hazard marking and lighting.
14-410. Appeals.
14-411. Administrative agency.
14-412. Board of zoning appeals; powers.
14-413. Judicial review.
14-401. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context
otherwise requires:
(1) "Airport" means the Municipal Airport, Cleveland, Tennessee.
(2) "Airport hazard" means any structure or tree or use of land which
obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking-off
at the airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking-off of aircraft.
(3) "Landing area" means the area of the airport used for the landing,
take-off or taxiing of aircraft.
(4) "Nonconforming use" means any structure, tree or use of land
which does not conform to a regulation prescribed in this chapter or an
amendment thereto, as of the effective date of such regulations.
(5) "Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation,
company, association, joint stock association or body politic, and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof.
(6) "Structure" means any object constructed or installed by man,
including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead
transmission lines.
(7) "Tree" means any object of natural growth. (1981 Code, § 3-36)
1Municipal code reference
Airport commission: title 2, chapter 1.
State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 42-6-101 et seq.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-6
14-402. Airport zoning map. In order to outline definitely the
horizontal and vertical limits beyond which the projection of any structure or
tree will constitute an airport hazard, the Airport Zoning Map, dated October
7, 1959, of the Cleveland Municipal Airport, Cleveland, Tennessee, which is on
file with the city is hereby incorporated into this chapter and made a part
thereof.
(1) The established elevation of the airport is eight hundred
seventy-three (873) feet MSL.
(2) The airport reference point is established at a location described as
follows: A point on the center line of the paved runway, said point being located
one thousand six hundred fifty (1,650) feet from the southwest end of the
runway pavement, as evidenced by the map of the elevation of restricted zone
which is on file with the city and made a part hereof dated July 13, 1961. (1981
Code, § 3-37, modified)
14-403. Zones. In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there
are hereby created and established certain zones which include the airport
approach surface zones, horizontal surface zones, conical surface zones and
transitional surface zones, as shown on the airport zoning map, which is on file
with the city. The surface for each of these zones constitutes a ceiling above
which no structures or objects of natural growth are to be constructed or allowed
to grow. The geographical areas to which the requirements and limits are to
apply are the areas lying directly beneath the approach surface zone, horizontal
surface zone, conical surface zone, and transitional surface zone. The limits of
these zones are shown with controlling contours on the zoning maps, which are
on file with the city.
(1) Approach surface zones. The approach surface zone is an inclined
plane located directly above the approach area. The approach areas for each
particular runway are symmetrically located with respect to the extended
runway center line and have lengths and widths as shown on the airport zoning
map, which is on file with the city, which also shows the slopes of the respective
approach surface zones.
(2) Horizontal surface zone. The horizontal surface zone is a plane,
circular in shape, with its height one hundred fifty (150) feet above the
established airport elevation and having a radius from the airport reference
point as indicated on the airport zoning map, which is on file with the city.
(3) Conical surface zone. The conical surface zone extends upward and
outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface zone with a slope of 20:1
measured in a vertical plane passing through the airport reference point.
Measuring radially outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface zone,
the conical surface extends for a horizontal distance as shown on the airport
zoning map, which is on file with the city.
(4) Transitional surface zone. The transitional surface zones are
inclined planes with a slope of 7:0 measured upward and outward in a vertical
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-7
plane at right angles to the center line of the runway. The transitional surface
zones, symmetrically located on either side of the runway, extend upward and
outward from a line on either side of the runway which is parallel to and level
with the runway center line. These parallel lines are at a horizontal distance
from the runway center line equal to one-half of the minimum width of each
approach area as shown on the airport zoning map, which is on file with the city.
(1981 Code, § 3-38, modified)
14-404. Height limits. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter no
structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any
airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or
transitional surface zone to a height in excess of the height limit herein
established for such zone. For purposes of this regulation, height limits shown
on the airport zoning map, which is on file with the city, are hereby established
for each of the zones in question. (1981 Code, § 3-39, modified)
14-405. Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
chapter, no use may be made of land within any airport approach surface zone,
horizontal surface zone, conical surface or transitional surface zone, in such
manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between
the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between
airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport,
impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endanger the landing,
taking-off, or maneuvering of aircraft. (1981 Code, § 3-40)
14-406. Nonconforming uses. The regulations prescribed in §§ 14-404
and 14-405 shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other
change or alterations of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations
as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance from
which this chapter was derived, and which was diligently prosecuted and
completed within two (2) years thereof. (1981 Code, § 3-41)
14-407. Variances. Any person desiring to erect any structure or
increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his
property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may
apply for a variance therefrom. Such variance shall be allowed where a literal
application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the
public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of
this chapter. (1981 Code, § 3-42)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-8
14-408. Permits. (1) Future uses. No material change shall be made
in the use of land, and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or
otherwise established in any airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface
zone, conical surface zone or transitional surface zone, unless a permit shall
have been applied for and granted. Each such application shall indicate the
purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit
it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform
to the regulations therein prescribed. If such determination is in the
affirmative, the permit applied for shall be granted.
(2) Existing uses. Before any existing use, structure or tree may be
replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher, or
replanted, within any airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface zone,
conical surface zone or transitional surface zone, a permit must be secured
authorizing such replacement, change or repair. No such permit shall be
granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or
permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to be made or become higher, or
become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of
the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or than it is when the
application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for a
permit for replacement, change or repair of existing use, structure or tree shall
be granted. (1981 Code, § 3-43)
14-409. Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance
granted under §§ 14-407 or 14-408 may, if such action is deemed advisable to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter and reasonable in the circumstances, be
so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to
permit the city, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon
such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence
of an airport hazard. (1981 Code, § 3-44)
14-410. Appeals. (1) Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any
decision of the city building inspector made in its administration of this chapter,
may appeal to the board of zoning appeals for which provision is made in
§ 14-412.
(2) All appeals taken under this section must be taken within a
reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the city
building inspector and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The city building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(3) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the city building inspector certifies to the board, after the
notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-9
In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by order of the
board on notice to the city building inspector and on due cause shown.
(4) The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal,
give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same
within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney.
(5) The board may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify, the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought be made.
(6) The board shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of
law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts
in reversing, or affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision or
determination which comes before it under the provisions of this chapter.
(7) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall
be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
city building inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon
which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation in this
chapter. (1981 Code, § 3-45)
14-411. Administrative agency. The city building inspector is hereby
designated the administrative agency charged with the duty of administering
and enforcing the regulations prescribed in this chapter. The duties of the city
building inspector shall include that of hearing and deciding all permits under
§ 14-408, but the city building inspector shall not have or exercise any of the
powers or duties herein delegated to the board of zoning appeals. (1981 Code,
§ 3-46)
14-412. Board of zoning appeals; powers. The board of zoning
appeals of the city, in addition to the powers and duties heretofore conferred
upon such board shall have and exercise the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the city building inspector in the enforcement of this
chapter;
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter
upon which such board may be required to pass by subsequent ordinances;
(3) To hear and decide specific variances under § 14-407. (1981 Code,
§ 3-47)
14-413. Judicial review. Any person aggrieved or taxpayer affected by
any order or decision of the board of zoning appeals may have said order or
decision reviewed by either the Circuit or Chancery Court as provided by
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 27, chapter 9. (1981 Code, § 3-48)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-10
CHAPTER 5
SIGN CONTROL REGULATIONS1
SECTION
14-501. Along Paul Huff Parkway.
14-501. Along Paul Huff Parkway. (1) Boundary. The rules [set out
in this section] apply only to the following described property along the Paul
Huff Parkway from six hundred (600) feet west of the intersection of North Lee
Highway (U.S. 11):
Situated in the Third Civil District of Bradley County and in the First
Ward of the City of Cleveland, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at a point in the west line of U.S. Highway No. 11 at the
southeast corner of the Donald Ledford Property; thence South 38 degrees
11 minutes West with the west line of U.S. Highway No. 11, 613.1 feet to
a point; thence North 49 degrees 43 minutes West 9.5 feet to a point;
thence continuing with the west line of said Highway South 38 degrees
11 minutes West, 309.2 feet to a point and corner with McLain property;
thence North 72 degrees 02 minutes West with McLain's property line,
865.3 feet to a point; thence continuing with McLain's property line North
37 degrees 27 minutes West, 194.3 feet to a point; thence South 82
degrees 34 minutes West with McLain's property line, 76.4 feet to a point
and corner with Duff property; thence with the Duff property line the
following courses and distances: North 12 degrees 52 minutes East, 22.5
feet; North 58 degrees 50 minutes West, 270 feet; North 45 degrees 44
minutes West, 224.7 feet; North 39 degrees 54 minutes West, 141.8 feet;
North 33 degrees 54 minutes West, 105.7 feet; North 31 degrees 13
minutes West, 632.4 feet; North 34 degrees 13 minutes West, 291.9 feet;
North 45 degrees 43 minutes West, 55.5 feet; North 53 degrees 47
minutes West, 98.8 feet; and North 48 degrees 22 minutes West, 105 feet,
more or less, to the center line of Mouse Creek; thence in a northeasterly
direction with the center line of Mouse Creek, 1620 feet, more or less, to
a point 200 feet southwest of the southwest corner of Lot 21 of Sequoia
Grove Subdivision; thence South 54 degrees 59 minutes East, 560 feet,
more or less, to a point; thence South 64 degrees 27 minutes East, 1,003
feet, more or less, to a point; thence South 68 degrees 26 minutes East,
1Municipal code references
Building, utility, etc. codes: title 12.
Fire protection and fireworks: title 7.
Traffic control: title 15.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-11
565 feet, more or less, to a point in the west line of Cawood property;
thence with Cawood's line South 35 degrees 30 minutes West, 329.9 feet
to a point; thence continuing with Cawood's line, South 61 degrees 21
minutes East, 964.8 feet to a point and corner with Preston property;
thence South 36 degrees 57 minutes West, 176.9 feet to a point; thence
South 37 degrees 35 minutes West, 78.6 feet to a point; thence South 37
degrees 16 minutes West, 292.6 feet to a point; thence South 52 degrees
59 minutes East, 81.8 feet to a point; thence South 36 degrees 58 minutes
West, 19.8 feet to a point; thence South 60 degrees 10 minutes East, 133.8
feet to a point; thence South 39 degrees 45 minutes East, 75 feet to a
point; thence North 82 degrees 56 minutes West, 63.1 feet to a point;
thence North 60 degrees 11 minutes West, 165.8 feet to a point; thence
South 38 degrees 00 minutes West, 33.25 feet to a point; thence South 52
degrees 00 minutes East, 468.56 feet to a point, the place of beginning.
There is specifically EXCLUDED from the foregoing described tract of land any
portion of the same that lies within the floodway district.
(2) Prohibited signs: [Within the above described area, the following
signs are prohibited:]
(a) Any sign or device that advertises a business, product,
service, event, etc., that is not located on nor connected with the site upon
which the sign or device is located.
(b) Any sign or device that is movable or is designed to be moved
from place to place.
(c) Any sign or device that is illuminated in a manner to
resemble or imitate traffic signals, emergency vehicles or the like.
(d) Any sign or device that uses bulbs that are reflective,
pulsating lights or generally are flashing lights.
(e) Any sign or device that requires guywires or excessive,
unsightly bracing for support.
(3) Permitted signs: [Within the area described in subsection (1), the
following signs are permitted:]
(a) Signs designed to advertise the location of businesses and
services located on the same site as the sign or device (on-premises), as
permitted by appropriate zoning law.
(b) Each project or development shall be restricted to one (1)
ground-mounted sign per street front. This sign is intended to identify
businesses and services in the project by name and address. The sign can
also have features that provide for changeable copy to notify of events,
sales, etc.
(c) Service stations or businesses dealing in the sale of
petroleum products to the public are allowed one (1) sign per street front
in addition to those allowed in subsection (3)(b) above that identify the
brand and name and/or address of the business.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-12
(d) Traffic directional signs.
(4) Exemptions: A sign existing on a property within the corporate
limits of the City of Cleveland prior to the enactment or subsequent amendment
of this chapter shall be eligible to be replaced on the same property, however,
the sign face shall be no larger, measured by square footage, than the existing
size of the sign and the relocation is caused generally by circumstances beyond
the control of the owner of the property or the sign. (1981 Code, § 20.5-26, as
amended by Ord. of Jan. 1999)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-13
CHAPTER 6
FENCING REGULATIONS ON LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS
SECTION
14-601. City council to establish limited access highways.
14-602. Fencing.
14-603. Request to remove fencing.
14-601. City council to establish limited access highways. The city
council may designate some locally-owned streets as limited access highways,
and negotiate with affected property owners for the right to limit said access.
(Ord. of Nov. 1994)
14-602. Fencing. When such limited access highways are established,
the city engineer shall be responsible for erecting chainlink fencing designating
the limited access. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any individual,
corporation, or partnership to remove, or have removed, any portion of said
fencing without written permission from the city council. (Ord. of Nov. 1994)
14-603. Request to remove fencing. The city council will not remove
any fencing on state or federally owned limited access highways. The city
council may remove some fencing on city-owned limited access highways,
provided the following conditions are met:
(1) The fencing only is removed, but not the limited access provisions;
(2) An appropriate number of signs stating "Limited Access Highway -
Entrance Permits Required" must be erected where the fencing is removed; and
(3) The property fronting the fencing must be developed, or a detailed
site plan approved prior to any approval to remove the fencing.
(4) If the property becomes vacant for more than 180 days, the city
council may, at its discretion, require the fencing to be re-installed. (Ord. of
Nov. 1994)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-14
CHAPTER 7
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION
14-701. Definitions.
14-702. Plan, R-4 zoning, permits required.
14-703. Location of mobile homes restricted.
14-704. Upgrade of substandard or single lot mobile home.
14-705. Non-conforming use-remedy.
14-706. Administration and enforcement.
14-707. Compliance.
14-708. Authorization.
14-709. Minimum size.
14-710. Minimum number of spaces.
14-711. Mobile home park design standards.
14-712. Street construction standards.
14-713. Appeals.
14-714. Mobile homes or parks in annexed areas.
14-715. Charges.
14-701. Definitions. Except as specifically defined herein, all words
used have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the
context. For this purpose certain words or terms are defined as follows:
(1) "Buffer strip" shall mean an evergreen buffer which shall consist
of a greenbelt planted strip not less than ten (10) feet in width. Such a
greenbelt shall be composed of one row of evergreen trees, spaced not more than
forty (40) feet apart and not less than two (2) rows of shrubs or hedge, spaced
not more than five (5) feet apart and which grow to a height of five (5) feet or
more after one full growing season and which shrubs will eventually grow to not
less than ten (10) feet.
(2) "Lot of record" is a lot the boundaries of which are filed as a legal
record in the Bradley County Register of Deeds office prior to the effective date
of this ordinance.
(3) "Mobile home (trailer)" shall mean a detached single-family
dwelling unit with any or all of the following characteristics:
(a) Is not self-propelled, but is transportable on its own or
detachable wheels, or on a flat bedded or other trailer, in one or more
sections which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in
width, or thirty-five (35) feet or more in length, or when erected on site
is three hundred twenty (320) feet or more square feet;
(b) A single, self-contained unit that is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities;
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-15
(c) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained therein; and
(d) Includes any units which meet the definition of a mobile
home as defined by national codes, federal legislation, or Tennessee Code
Annotated.
Except that such terms shall also include any structure which
meets all of the requirements of this section, except the size
requirements, provided the manufacturer complies with the standards
established under Tennessee state law.
(4) "Mobile home park" is an area of land used by the landowner for
the accommodation of three (3) or more mobile homes to be used for dwelling or
sleeping purposes.
(5) "Mobile home space" is an area of land used or intended for the use
of one mobile home.
(6) "Mobile home subdivision" is a subdivision of land specifically
created to accommodate mobile homes on individual lots which are sold in fee
simple.
(7) "Non-conforming use" is a mobile home that is not located either
on a single lot of record as the principal structure or in an approved mobile home
park prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
(8) "Principal structure" is the mobile home used as the main
residential structure on the lot.
(9) "Skirting" is the permanent enclosure of the space between the
ground and the floor of the mobile home unit with weather resistant, compatible
materials. (1981 Code, § 13-1, as amended by Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-702. Plan, R-4 zoning, permits required. A process is required for
mobile home parks and travel parks. Fees charged under the permit
requirement are for inspection and administration. Property must be zoned R-4
and a mobile home park plan approved by the Cleveland Municipal Planning
Commission prior to the issuance of a permit. (1981 Code, § 13-2, as amended
by Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-703. Location of mobile homes restricted. The location of a
mobile home is allowed inside the Cleveland corporate limits only in either of
the following situations:
(1) An existing mobile home, located on a single lot as the principal
structure and serviced by public utilities on the effective date of this ordinance;
or
(2) An approved mobile home park. (1981 Code, § 13-3, as amended
by Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-704. Upgrade of substandard or single lot mobile home. A
single mobile home, located on a lot of record as the principal structure on the
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-16
effective date of this ordinance, may be upgraded by replacement under the
following conditions:
(1) The replacement mobile home unit is five (5) years old or less on
the date the unit is placed on the lots ;
(2) Complete skirting of the replacement unit, using weather resistant
materials that are similar to the new mobile home. (Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-705. Non-conforming use-remedy. The owner or occupant of any
non-conforming mobile home already placed on a lot, on or before 1-24-94 will
be permitted to reside at the present location. However, if at any time the
ownership or occupancy of either the lot or mobile home shall change or if such
mobile home owner shall change, the owner shall be given a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days in which to remove such mobile home and to comply with all
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-706. Administration and enforcement. It shall be the duty of the
city building inspector to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The city building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of mobile home parks. The city building
inspector shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or
public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions
relating to the enforcement of this chapter. (1981 Code, § 13-5, as amended by
Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-707. Compliance. To insure compliance with the provisions of this
mobile home chapter, utility services will be connected only when the mobile
home has been found by the chief building inspector to meet applicable code
requirements and the chief building inspector has issued the appropriate
permit(s).
Cleveland Utilities, Electric and Water Division, shall be presented with
a copy of the mobile home permit, signed by the chief building inspector, as part
of the owner(s) application for utility services. Should the owner or applicant
fail to provide a signed copy of the permit, Cleveland Utilities shall deny service
until the proper procedure to acquire permit(s) is completed. (Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-708. Authorization. The chief building inspector is authorized to
suspend or revoke a mobile home or mobile home park permit in cases where the
owner(s) failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance or other
applicable city code has resulted in a threat to the public health, safety or
welfare. (Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-709. Minimum size. The tract of land for the mobile home park
shall comprise an area of not less than one and one-half (1½) acres. The tract
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-17
of land shall consist of a single plot so dimensioned and related as to facilitate
efficient design and management. (Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-710. Minimum number of spaces. Minimum number of spaces
completed and ready for occupancy before first occupancy is three (3). (Ord. of
Jan. 1994)
14-711. Mobile home park design standards. (1) Site requirements.
Each mobile home park shall be located outside of flood hazard areas on a
well-drained site.
(2) Minimum mobile home park size. One and one-half (1½) acres.
(3) Size of mobile home spaces. Each mobile home space shall be at
least four thousand (4,000) square feet, including parking area, with a minimum
width of forty (40) feet. Each mobile home located in a mobile home park shall
be situated such that there is at least:
(a) Ten (10) feet from the mobile home to any adjacent property
line;
(b) Twenty-five (25) feet from the mobile home to any public
street right-of-way;
(c) Ten (10) feet from the mobile home to any private roads or
access drives within the mobile home park;
(d) Ten (10) feet of clear and open space between the mobile
home and any adjacent mobile home and its attachments, and between
the mobile home and any other buildings;
(e) Applications for a mobile home park shall be filed with and
issued by the city building inspector subject to the planning commission's
approval of the mobile home park plan. Applications shall be in writing
and signed by the applicant and shall be accompanied with an approved
plan of the proposed mobile home park. The plan shall contain the
following information and conform to the following requirements:
(i) The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale
not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one inch;
(ii) Name and address of owner of record;
(iii) Proposed name of park;
(iv) North point and graphic scale and date;
(v) Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the
mobile home park;
(vi) Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and
distance;
(vii) Names of owners of record of adjoining land;
(viii) Existing streets, utilities, easements, and
watercourses on and adjacent to the tract;
(ix) Proposed design including streets, proposed street
names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, land to
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-18
be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and any land to be used
for purposes other than mobile home spaces;
(x) Provisions for water supply, sewerage and drainage;
(xi) Such information as may be required by the city to
determine if the proposed park will comply with legal
requirements;
(xii) The applications and all accompanying plans and
specifications shall be filed in triplicate.
(f) Certificates that shall be required are:
(i) Owners certification;
(ii) Planning commission's approval signed by the
chairman; and
(iii) Any other certification deemed necessary by the
planning commission. (Ord. of Jan. 1994, modified)
14-712. Street construction standards. Same as city "Minimum
Construction Standards for Acceptance of Streets Dedicated to the City for Use
and Maintenance of Public Ways". (Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-713. Appeals. Any party aggrieved because of an alleged error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector
in the enforcement of this ordinance may appeal for and receive a hearing by the
Cleveland Board on Zoning Appeals (BZA), (advised by the city attorney) for an
interpretation of pertinent chapter provisions. In exercising this power of
interpretation of the chapter, the Cleveland Board on Zoning Appeals, with
advice from the city attorney, may, in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance, reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the building inspector.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the BZA may seek review by a
court of records of such decision in the manner provided by the laws of the state.
(1981 Code, § 13-6, as amended by Ord. of Jan. 1994)
14-714. Mobile homes or parks in annexed areas. A mobile home
or mobile home park that is annexed into the Cleveland corporate limits and is
found to be of substandard condition or not in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter and/or the Standard Housing Code, Southern Building Code
Congress International, as amended shall be provided a period of not to exceed
two (2) years from the effective date of annexation to comply with applicable
law. Should the owner(s) fail to comply within the time provided, the unit(s)
shall be declared as a non-conforming use by the chief building inspector or
housing official, as appropriate, and the provisions of the Cleveland Municipal
Zoning Ordinance, shall apply to remedy the non-conforming use. (Ord. of Jan.
1994)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-19
14-715. Charges. Fees shall be charged as follows for mobile home park
permits:
(1) Permit fee. A fee of $25.00 per mobile home unit space in addition
to the basic permits as provided by city law as amended.
(2) Annual operating fee. An annual fee of $10.00 per mobile home
unit space, payable by June 30 of each year is required to operate a mobile home
park inside the city limits.
(3) Effective date. Enforcement of these charges shall begin June 30,
1995. (Ord. of Jan. 1994, modified)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-20
CHAPTER 8
TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
SECTION
14-801. Permit required.
14-802. Fee.
14-803. Application for permit.
14-804. Location restricted.
14-805. Inspections by city building inspector or city environmentalist.
14-806. Length of occupancy.
14-807. Minimum size of travel trailers space.
14-808. Site planning improvement standards.
14-801. Permit required. No place or site within the city shall be
established or maintained by any person as a travel trailer park unless he holds
a valid permit issued by the city building inspector in the name of such person
for the specific travel trailer park. The city building inspector is authorized to
issue, suspend or revoke permits in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (1981 Code, § 13-56)
14-802. Fee. An annual permit fee for each travel trailer park in the
amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be required. (1981 Code, § 13-57)
14-803. Application for permit. Applications for travel trailer park
permits shall meet the same requirements as contained in § 14-711. (1981 Code,
§ 13-58)
14-804. Location restricted. It shall be unlawful for any travel trailer
to be occupied or serviced outside of any properly designated travel trailer park.
This provision shall not apply to the storage of travel trailers, provided such
trailer unit is neither temporarily or permanently occupied as a dwelling unit
while within the city limits. (1981 Code, § 13-59)
14-805. Inspections by city building inspector or city
environmentalist. The city building inspector or city environmentalist is
hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition
of travel trailer parks, in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the
health and safety of the occupants of travel trailer parks and of the general
public. The building inspector or city environmentalist shall have the power to
enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose
of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this
chapter. (1981 Code, § 13-60, modified)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-21
14-806. Length of occupancy. Travel trailer spaces shall be rented by
the day or week only, and the occupant of such space shall remain in the same
travel trailer park not more than fourteen (14) days. (1981 Code, § 13-61)
14-807. Minimum size of travel trailers space. Each travel trailer
space shall have a minimum width of thirty (30) feet and a minimum length of
fifty (50) feet. (1981 Code, § 13-62)
14-808. Site planning improvement standards. Site planning
improvements shall conform to the standards established in Regulations VI-XX
of the "State Regulations Governing the Construction Operation and
Maintenance of Organized Camps in Tennessee," as provided in Tennessee Code
Annotated §§ 68-110-101 through 68-110-106. (1981 Code, § 13-63)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-22
CHAPTER 9
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION
14-901. Subdivision regulations to be governed by ordinance.
14-901. Subdivision regulations to be governed by ordinance.
Subdivision regulations of the City of Cleveland shall be governed by Ordinance
titled "Subdivision Regulations" adopted July 13, 1998, a copy of which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference.1
1Ordinance dated July 13, 1998, and any amendments thereto, are of
record in the office of the city clerk.
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-23
CHAPTER 10
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-1001. Findings of fact, purpose and objectives.
14-1002. Definitions.
14-1003. General provisions.
14-1004. Administration.
14-1005. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
14-1006. Variance procedures.
14-1007. Conflicts with other ordinances.
14-1008. [Deleted.]
14-1009. [Deleted.]
14-1010. [Deleted.]
14-1011. [Deleted.]
14-1012. [Deleted.]
14-1013. [Deleted.]
14-1014. [Deleted.]
14-1015. [Deleted.]
14-1016. [Deleted.]
14-1017. [Deleted.]
14-1018. [Deleted.]
14-1001. Findings of fact, purpose and objectives. (1) Findings of
fact.
(a) The City of Cleveland, Tennessee, Mayor and its Legislative
Body wishes to maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) and in order to do so must meet the NFIP regulations
found in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), ch. 1,
section 60.3.
(b) Areas of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee are subject to
periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(c) Flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and
velocities; by uses in flood hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods; or
construction which is inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-24
(2) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. This ordinance is designed to:
(a) Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to flooding or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood
heights, or velocities;
(b) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community
facilities, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
(c) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
(d) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development
which may increase flood damage or erosion;
(e) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards
to other lands.
(3) Objectives. The objectives of this ordinance are:
(a) To protect human life, health, safety and property;
(b) To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood
control projects;
(c) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(d) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(e) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and
bridges located in floodprone areas;
(f) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and development of floodprone areas to minimize blight in
flood areas;
(g) To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that
property is in a floodprone area;
(h) To maintain eligibility for participation in the NFIP.
(Ord. of July 1998, as replaced by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and
Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1002. Definitions. To give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application given its stated
purpose and objectives.
(1) "Accessory structure" means a subordinate structure to the
principal structure on the same lot and, for the purpose of this ordinance, shall
conform to the following:
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-25
(a) Accessory structures shall only be used for parking of
vehicles and storage.
(b) Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential.
(c) Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters.
(d) Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, which otherwise may result in
damage to other structures.
(e) Utilities and service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or otherwise protected from intrusion of
floodwaters.
(2) "Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed
expansion to the perimeter or height of a building.
(3) "Appeal" means a request for a review of the local enforcement
officer's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a
variance.
(4) "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with one percent (1%) or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (1'--3')
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
(5) "Area of special flood-related erosion hazard" is the land within a
community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion
losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary
Map (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion
hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further
refined.
(6) "Area of special flood hazard" see "special flood hazard area."
(7) "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. This term is also referred to as the
100-year flood or the one percent (1% ) annual chance flood.
(8) "Basement" means any portion of a building having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
(9) "Building" see "structure."
(10) "Development" means any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
(11) "Elevated building" means a non-basement building built to have
the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by
means of solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-26
the unimpeded movement of floodwater, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building
during a base flood event.
(12) "Emergency flood insurance program" or "emergency program"
means the program as implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with
section 1336 of the Act. It is intended as a program to provide a first layer
amount of insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the
initial FIRM.
(13) "Erosion" means the process of the gradual wearing away of land
masses. This peril is not "per se" covered under the program.
(14) "Exception" means a waiver from the provisions of this ordinance
which relieves the applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order
or other determination made or issued pursuant to this ordinance.
(15) "Existing construction" means any structure for which the "start
of construction" commenced before the effective date of the initial floodplain
management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that
community's participation in the NFIP.
(16) "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by
the community as a basis for that community's participation in the NFIP.
(17) "Existing structures" see "existing construction."
(18) "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision"
means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
(19) "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(20) "Flood elevation determination" means a determination by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) of the water surface
elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent (1%)
or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.
(21) "Flood elevation study" means an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface
elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) or flood-related erosion hazards.
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-27
(22) "Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of
a community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of areas of special flood
hazard have been designated as Zone A.
(23) "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a
community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard or the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.
(24) "Flood insurance study" is the official report provided by FEMA,
evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface
elevation of the base flood.
(25) "Floodplain" or "flood prone area" means any land area susceptible
to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
(26) "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage,
including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works
and floodplain management regulations.
(27) "Flood protection system" means those physical structural works
for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which
have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the
extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the
extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
(28) "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities and structures and their contents.
(29) "Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which
results in flooding.
(30) "Flood-related erosion area" or "flood-related erosion prone area"
means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which
due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or
wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.
(31) "Flood-related erosion area management" means the operation of
an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and floodplain
management regulations.
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-28
(32) "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
(33) "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet
above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
(34) "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
(35) "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of
the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a
structure.
(36) "Historic structure" means any structure that is:
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(c) Individually listed on the Tennessee inventory of historic
places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(d) Individually listed on the City of Cleveland, Tennessee
inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(i) By the approved Tennessee program as determined
by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(ii) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior.
(37) "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen
embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering
practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide
protection from temporary flooding.
(38) "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of
a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-29
devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound
engineering practices.
(39) "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of this ordinance.
(40) "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one (1)
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
(41) "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
(42) "Map" means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by FEMA.
(43) "Mean sea level" means the average height of the sea for all stages
of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within
the floodplain. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
(44) "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" means, as corrected
in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
(45) "New construction" means any structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain
management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structure.
(46) "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of the ordinance comprising this chapter or the effective
date of the initial floodplain management ordinance and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structure.
(47) "North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)" means, as corrected in
1988, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
(48) "100-year flood" see "base flood."
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-30
(49) "Person" includes any individual or group of individuals,
corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and
local governments and agencies.
(50) "Reasonably safe from flooding" means base flood waters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood
hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not
damage existing or proposed structures.
(51) "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is:
(a) Built on a single chassis;
(b) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;
(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck;
(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
(52) "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.
(53) "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
(54) "Special flood hazard area" is the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99.
(55) "Special hazard area" means an area having special flood, mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or
FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.
(56) "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; and includes the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-31
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
(57) "State coordinating agency." The Tennessee Department of
Economic and Community Development's Local Planning Assistance Office, as
designated by the Governor of the State of Tennessee at the request of FEMA
to assist in the implementation of the NFIP for the state.
(58) "Structure" for purposes of this ordinance, means a walled and
roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
(59) "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
(60) "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, alteration or other improvement of a structure in which
the cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the "start of construction" of the initial improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the
actual repair work performed.
(a) The market value of the structure should be:
(i) The appraised value of the structure prior to the start
of the initial improvement; or
(ii) In the case of substantial damage, the value of the
structure prior to the damage occurring.
(b) The term does not, however, include either:
(i) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been pre-identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions and not solely triggered by an
improvement or repair project; or
(ii) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a "historic structure."
(61) "Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or
improvement commenced.
(62) "Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this
ordinance.
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-32
(63) "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development
to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(64) "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, where specified, of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. (as added by
Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and replaced by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1003. General provisions. (1) Application. This ordinance shall
apply to all areas within the incorporated area of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee.
(2) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas
of special flood hazard identified in the City of Cleveland, Tennessee, as
identified by FEMA, and in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM), Community Panel Numbers 47011C109E, 47011C110E,
47011C117E, 47011C119E, 47011C120E, 47011C125E, 47011C126E,
47011C127E, 47011C128E, 47011C129E, 47011C136E, 47011C137E,
47011C138E, 47011C139E, 47011C150E, 47011C207E, 47011C210E,
47011C230E, dated February 7, 2007, along with all supporting technical data,
and letters of map revision affecting the aforementioned FIRM Community
Panel Numbers approved by FEMA, are adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this ordinance.
(3) Requirement for development permit. A development permit shall
be required in conformity with this ordinance prior to the commencement of any
development activities. This development permit requirement applies to all
properties lying partially or completely within a SFHA or which are within sixty
feet (60') of any stream or watercourse.
(4) Compliance. No land, structure or use shall hereafter be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
(5) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance is not intended
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this ordinance conflicts or overlaps with another
regulatory instrument, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
(6) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this
ordinance, all provisions shall be:
(a) Considered as minimum requirements;
(b) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under Tennessee statutes.
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-33
(7) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(8) Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance
or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance
shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as other misdemeanors as provided
by law. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon adjudication therefore, be fined as prescribed by
Tennessee statutes, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee from taking such other lawful actions to prevent or remedy any
violation. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and replaced by
Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1004. Administration. (1) Designation of ordinance administrator.
The stormwater manager is hereby appointed as the administrator to implement
the provisions of this ordinance.
(2) Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be
made to the administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any
development activities. The development permit may include, but is not limited
to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale and showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and
drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required:
(a) Application stage. (i) Elevation in relation to mean sea
level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all
buildings where base flood elevations are available, or to certain
height above the highest adjacent grade when applicable under
this ordinance.
(ii) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
non-residential building will be floodproofed where base flood
elevations are available, or to certain height above the highest
adjacent grade when applicable under this ordinance.
(iii) A FEMA Floodproofing Certificate from a Tennessee
registered professional engineer or architect that the proposed
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-34
non-residential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 14-1005(1) and (2).
(iv) Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(b) Construction stage. Within AE Zones, where base flood
elevation data is available, any lowest floor certification made relative to
mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of, a
Tennessee registered land surveyor and certified by same. The
administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the
development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential
building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct
supervision of, a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect
and certified by same.
Within approximate A Zones, where base flood elevation data is not
available, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the
measurement of the lowest floor of the building relative to the highest
adjacent grade. The administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest
floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a
non-residential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under
the direct supervision of, a Tennessee registered professional engineer or
architect and certified by same.
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit
holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the
lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level upon the completion of the
lowest floor or floodproofing.
Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall
be at the permit holder's risk. The administrator shall review the
above-referenced certification data. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue
a stop-work order for the project.
(3) Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) Review all development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied, and that proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(b) Review proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which
approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C.
1334.
(c) Notify adjacent communities and the Tennessee Department
of Economic and Community Development, Local Planning Assistance
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-35
Office, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notification to FEMA.
(d) For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit
engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to FEMA to ensure
accuracy of community FIRMs through the letter of map revision process.
(e) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(f) Record the elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the
highest adjacent grade, where applicable, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new and substantially improved buildings, in accordance
with § 14-1004(2).
(g) Record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level or
the highest adjacent grade, where applicable, to which the new and
substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance
with § 14-1004(2).
(h) When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential
structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a Tennessee
registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with
§ 14-1004(2).
(i) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal
the interpretation as provided in this ordinance.
(j) When base flood elevation data and floodway data have not
been provided by FEMA, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other
sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations, as
criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development in Zone A on the City of Cleveland, Tennessee
FIRM meet the requirements of this ordinance.
(k) Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this
ordinance in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public
inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be
maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited retrieval within
combined files. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and replaced by
Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1005. Provisions for flood hazard reduction. (1) General
standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are
required:
(a) New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the
structure;
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-36
(b) Manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage. They must be elevated and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable State of Tennessee and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces;
(c) New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage;
(d) New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(e) All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
(f) New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;
(g) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
(h) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding;
(i) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
building that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall
meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this
ordinance;
(j) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
building that is not in compliance with the provision of this ordinance,
shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further extended
or replaced;
(k) All new construction and substantial improvement proposals
shall provide copies of all necessary federal and state permits, including
section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334;
(l) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development proposals shall meet the standards of § 14-1005(2);
(m) When proposed new construction and substantial
improvements are partially located in an area of special flood hazard, the
entire structure shall meet the standards for new construction;
(n) When proposed new construction and substantial
improvements are located in multiple flood hazard risk zones or in a flood
hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the entire structure
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-37
shall meet the standards for the most hazardous flood hazard risk zone
and the highest base flood elevation.
(2) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the
following provisions, in addition to those set forth in § 14-1005(1), are required:
(a) Residential structures. In AE Zones where base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than two
feet (2') above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter
walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate
equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls
shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section:
"Enclosures."
Within approximate A Zones where base flood elevations have not
been established and where alternative data is not available, the
administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated
to a level of at least three feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade (as
defined in § 14-1002). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood
hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in
accordance with the standards of this section: "Enclosures."
(b) Non-residential structures. In AE Zones, where base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building,
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed
to no lower than two feet (2') above the level of the base flood elevation.
Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure,
openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on
both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the
standards of this section: "Enclosures."
In approximate A Zones, where base flood elevations have not been
established and where alternative data is not available, new construction
and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or
non-residential building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated or floodproofed to no lower than three feet (3') above the highest
adjacent grade (as defined in § 14-1002). Should solid foundation
perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to
facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior
walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section:
"Enclosures."
Non-residential buildings located in all A Zones may be
floodproofed, in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the
building below the required elevation are watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and are built with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-38
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A Tennessee registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such
certification to the administrator as set forth in § 14-1004(2).
(c) Enclosures. All new construction and substantial
improvements that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding,
shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow
for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
(i) Designs for complying with this requirement must
either be certified by a Tennessee professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria.
(A) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having
a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one foot (1') above the finished grade;
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they
permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(ii) The enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking of vehicles, storage or building access.
(iii) The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
finished or partitioned into separate rooms in such a way as to
impede the movement of floodwaters and all such partitions shall
comply with the provisions of § 14-1005(2).
(d) Standards for manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles.
(i) All manufactured homes placed, or substantially
improved, on:
(A) Individual lots or parcels;
(B) In expansions to existing manufactured home
parks or subdivisions; or
(C) In new or substantially improved
manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
Must meet all the requirements of new construction.
(ii) All manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
must be elevated so that either:
(A) In AE Zones, with base flood elevations, the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on a
permanent foundation to no lower than two feet (2') above
the level of the base flood elevation; or
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-39
(B) In approximate A Zones, without base flood
elevations, the manufactured home chassis is elevated and
supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements
of at least equivalent strength) that are at least three feet
(3') in height above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in
§ 14-1002).
(iii) Any manufactured home, which has incurred
"substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must meet the
standards of § 14-1005(1) and (2).
(iv) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
(v) All recreational vehicles placed in an identified
special flood hazard area must either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed,
on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached structures or additions); or
(C) The recreational vehicle must meet all the
requirements for new construction.
(e) Standards for subdivisions and other proposed new
development proposals. Subdivisions and other proposed new
developments, including manufactured home parks, shall be reviewed to
determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(i) All subdivision and other proposed new development
proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(ii) All subdivision and other proposed new development
proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(iii) All subdivision and other proposed new development
proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
(iv) In all approximate A Zones require that all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater
than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, include
within such proposals base flood elevation data (see § 14-1005(5)).
(3) Standards for special flood hazard areas with established base flood
elevations and with floodways designated. Located within the special flood
hazard areas established in § 14-1003(2), are areas designated as floodways. A
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-40
floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters,
debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of
encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without
increased flood heights and velocities. Therefore, the following provisions shall
apply:
(a) Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill
material, new construction, substantial improvements or other
development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be
permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed encroachments or
new development shall not result in any increase in the water surface
elevation of the base flood elevation, velocities, or floodway widths during
the occurrence of a base flood discharge at any point within the
community. A Tennessee registered professional engineer must provide
supporting technical data, using the same methodologies as in the
effective flood insurance study for the City of Cleveland, Tennessee and
certification, thereof.
(b) New construction and substantial improvements of
buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of § 14-1005(1) and (2).
(4) Standards for areas of special flood hazard Zones AE with
established base flood elevations but without floodways designated. Located
within the special flood hazard areas established in § 14-1003(2), where streams
exist with base flood data provided but where no floodways have been
designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply:
(a) No encroachments, including fill material, new construction
and substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special
flood hazard, unless certification by a Tennessee registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that
conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
(b) New construction and substantial improvements of
buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of § 14-1005(1) and (2).
(5) Standards for streams without established base flood elevations
and floodways (A Zones). Located within the special flood hazard areas
established in § 14-1003(2), where streams exist, but no base flood data has been
provided and where a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions
shall apply:
(a) The administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from any
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-41
federal, state, or other sources, including data developed as a result of
these regulations (see (b) below), as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development in
approximate A Zones meet the requirements of § 14-1005(1) and (2).
(b) Require that all new subdivision proposals and other
proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home
parks and subdivisions) greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation
data.
(c) Within approximate A Zones, where base flood elevations
have not been established and where such data is not available from
other sources, require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or
floodproofed to a level of at least three feet (3') above the highest adjacent
grade (as defined in § 14-1002). All applicable data including elevations
or floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in
§ 14-1004(2). Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance
with the standards of § 14-1005(2).
(d) Within approximate A Zones, where base flood elevations
have not been established and where such data is not available from
other sources, no encroachments, including structures or fill material,
shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty
feet (20'), whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream
bank, unless certification by a Tennessee registered professional engineer
is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee. The engineering certification should be supported by technical
data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
(e) New construction and substantial improvements of
buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of § 14-1005(1) and (2). Within approximate A Zones,
require that those subsections of § 14-1005(2) dealing with the alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, assuring watercourse carrying capacities
are maintained and manufactured homes provisions are complied with as
required.
(6) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH Zones).
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 14-1003(2), are
areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet (1' to 3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions, in addition
to those set forth in § 14-1005(1) and (2), apply:
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-42
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential and non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to at least two feet (2') above as many feet
as the depth number specified on the FIRMs, in feet, above the highest
adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified on the FIRM, the
lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated to at least three feet
(3') above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate
automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall
be provided in accordance with standards of § 14-1005(2).
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements of
non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The
structure together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be
floodproofed and designed watertight to be completely floodproofed to at
least two feet (2') above the flood depth number specified on the FIRM,
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If no depth number is
specified on the FIRM, the structure shall be floodproofed to at least three
feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade. A Tennessee registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the provisions of this ordinance and shall provide
such certification to the administrator as set forth above and as required
in accordance with § 14-1004(2).
(c) Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(7) Standards for areas protected by flood protection system (A99
Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 14-1003(2), are areas of the 100-year floodplain protected by a flood protection
system but where base flood elevations have not been determined. Within these
areas (A99 Zones) all provisions of §§ 14-1004 and 14-1005 shall apply.
(8) Standards for unmapped streams. Located within the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee, are unmapped streams where areas of special flood
hazard are neither indicated nor identified. Adjacent to such streams, the
following provisions shall apply:
(a) No encroachments including fill material or other
development including structures shall be located within an area of at
least equal to twice the width of the stream, measured from the top of
each stream bank, unless certification by a Tennessee registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the
locality.
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-43
(b) When a new flood hazard risk zone, and base flood elevation
and floodway data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall meet the standards established in accordance with
§§ 14-1004 and 14-1005. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and
replaced by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1006. Variance procedures. (1) Board of floodplain review.
(a) Creation and appointment. A board of floodplain review is
hereby established which shall consist of the five (5) members of the
Cleveland Board of Zoning Appeals appointed by the city council.
(b) Procedure. Meetings of the board of floodplain review shall
be held at such times, as the board shall determine. Meetings may be
held in conjunction with meetings of the Cleveland Board of Zoning
Appeals or separately. All meetings of the board of floodplain review shall
be open to the public. A quorum for the board of floodplain review shall
be three (3) members. The chair and vice-chair of the board of floodplain
review shall be as for the Cleveland Board of Zoning Appeals. The
conduct of the board of floodplain review's business will be generally in
accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. The board of floodplain review
may adopt additional rules of procedure and shall keep records of
applications and actions thereof, which shall be a public record.
Compensation of the members of the board of floodplain review, if any,
shall be set by the City Council of Cleveland, Tennessee.
(c) Appeals: how taken. An appeal to the board of floodplain
review may be taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by
any governmental officer, department, or bureau affected by any decision
of the administrator based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this
ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the board of
floodplain review a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. In all
cases where an appeal is made by a property owner or other interested
party, a fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid by the
appellant. The administrator shall transmit to the board of floodplain
review all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal action
was taken. The board of floodplain review shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice
to parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time which
shall not be more than ninety (90) days from the date of the hearing. At
the hearing, any person or party may appear and be heard in person or
by agent or by attorney.
(d) Powers. The board of floodplain review shall have the
following powers:
(i) Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged by the applicant that there is error in any order,
requirement, permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-44
the administrator or other administrative official in carrying out
or enforcement of any provisions of this ordinance.
(ii) Variance procedures. In the case of a request for a
variance the following shall apply:
(A) The City of Cleveland, Tennessee Board of
Floodplain Review shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this
ordinance.
(B) Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures as defined, herein, upon
a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary deviation from the requirements of this ordinance
to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(C) In passing upon such applications, the board of
floodplain review shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of
this ordinance, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept
onto other property to the injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to
flooding or erosion;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed
facility and its contents to flood damage;
(4) The importance of the services provided
by the proposed facility to the community;
(5) The necessity of the facility to a
waterfront location, in the case of a functionally
dependent use;
(6) The availability of alternative locations,
not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
(7) The relationship of the proposed use to
the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program for that area;
(8) The safety of access to the property in
times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(9) The expected heights, velocity, duration,
rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood
waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
(10) The costs of providing governmental
services during and after flood conditions including
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-45
maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(D) Upon consideration of the factors listed above,
and the purposes of this ordinance, the board of floodplain
review may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances, as it deems necessary to effectuate the purposes
of this ordinance.
(E) Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
(2) Conditions for variances. (a) Variances shall be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary,
considering the flood hazard and the factors listed in § 14-1006(1).
(b) Variances shall only be issued upon: a showing of good and
sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; or a determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
Ordinances.
(c) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance (as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred
dollars ($100.00)) coverage, and that such construction below the base
flood elevation increases risks to life and property. The administrator
shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances
to FEMA upon request. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and
replaced by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1007. Conflicts with other ordinances. All ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent
necessary to implement this ordinance. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007,
and replaced by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1008. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1009. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1010. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
Change 14, October 10, 2011 14-46
14-1011. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1012. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1013. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1014. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1015. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1016. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1017. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
14-1018. [Deleted]. (as added by Ord. #2006-47, Jan. 2007, and deleted
by Ord. #2011-08, June 2011)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-47
CHAPTER 11
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SITING CELLULAR
COMMUNICATION TOWERS
SECTION
14-1101. Purpose.
14-1102. Definition.
14-1103. Permit application requirements.
14-1104. Co-location.
14-1105. Permitted locations, by zoning district.
14-1106. Separation of tower to off-site uses.
14-1107. Security fencing.
14-1108. Landscaping and aesthetics.
14-1109. Tower prohibited in airport approach zone.
14-1110. Abandoned tower policy.
14-1101. Purpose. Establish minimum standards and location
requirements for siting wireless communication (cellular) towers and antennas
within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee in order to
protect the public health and safety. (Ord. of Aug. 1998)
14-1102. Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, the word tower
shall be defined as "any outdoor structure designed and constructed to support
one (1) or more transmitting or receiving devises for telephone, radio or any
similar wireless communication facilities, with the following exceptions":
(1) Any citizens band or amateur radio station antenna;
(2) A ground or building mounted citizens band radio antenna less
than forty (40') feet in height or an amateur radio antenna not more than
seventy-five feet (75') in height, provided there is adequate clearance with
adjacent structures; an antenna in this category that exceeds seventy-five (75')
in height must be reviewed and approved by the Cleveland Municipal Planning
Commission;
(3) Satellite dish type antenna or a conventional type television
antenna for the exclusive use of a residential occupancy;
(4) Mobile news or public information service antennas;
(5) Hand-held communication devices such as walkie-talkies, cell
phones and similar type devices;
(6) Antennas owned by public agency or its members and used for
emergency services, public utilities, operation or maintenance services. (Ord.
of Aug. 1998)
11-1103. Permit application requirements. (1) The applicant for a
permit to locate a tower is responsible for providing the following information
to the chief building official:
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-48
(a) A site plan drawn to scale that shows the property lines of
the site, the location of the tower in relation to the property lines,
adjoining property within 300' feet of the site by owner and use, distances
from the base of the tower to adjoining property lines and the nearest
habitable structure, proposed easement(s) by location and type and, the
location of any accessory buildings proposed to be located on the site
including building setbacks from the property lines.
(b) A grading and drainage plan that indicates the existing and
proposed elevation of the site and methods proposed to manage and
control erosion during construction as well as permanent drainage
methods and/or facilities.
(c) Proof of ownership or legal interest in the property.
(d) Engineering drawings that describe the design and
structural integrity of the tower, its supports and attachments.
(e) A statement describing the general capability of the tower
to serve more than one (1) user and whether space will be available for
lease to additional users.
(2) Permit application review shall be co-ordinated by the planning
director or a designee and conducted in the same procedure as subdivision plat
review. (Ord. of Aug. 1998)
14-1104. Co-location. Towers shall be required to accommodate the
maximum number of transmitting facilities subject to the design capacity of the
tower for the purpose of reducing the number of potential tower locations within
the corporate limits. Applicants for a tower permit are required to provide a
statement that documents their efforts to secure a co-location on an existing
tower. (Ord. of Aug. 1998)
14-1105. Permitted locations, by zoning district. Tower shall be
permitted in a local highway business, professional or manufacturing zoning
district within the corporate limits. A tower, without exception, is not permitted
in a residential (R-1,2,3,4,5 or A) zoning district, the floodway district or in the
central business district (CBD). (Ord. of Aug. 1998)
14-1106. Separation of tower to off-site uses. Tower separation shall
be measured in straight line distance from the base of the tower structure to
nearest zoning district boundary line. The tower location shall, without
exception, maintain a minimum distance of 200 feet or 300% of the height of the
tower; whichever is greater, from any adjoining district where a tower is not a
permitted use. Accessory uses shall maintain building setbacks as prescribed
by the applicable zoning district.
(1) If the adjoining district is a district where a tower is permitted, the
building setbacks applicable to the zoning district wherein the tower is located
shall apply. (Ord. of Aug. 1998)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 14-49
14-1107. Security fencing. The area surrounding the tower location,
but not necessarily the entire lot, shall be enclosed with fencing adequate to
secure the tower under normal circumstances. (Ord. of Aug. 1998)
14-1108. Landscaping and aesthetics. Plant materials suitable to
screen the tower location shall be incorporated into the design of the facility. As
a general criteria, plant species that are native or commonly utilized in the area
shall be considered in order to maintain compatibility with adjoining property.
A general landscape plan shall be submitted concurrent with the site plan and
is subject to the review of the Cleveland Urban Forester. (Ord. of Aug. 1998)
14-1109. Tower prohibited in airport approach zone. No tower
shall be located within the Cleveland Municipal Airport approach surface zone,
the horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or transitional zone as shown
on the airport zoning map, dated October 7, 1959, as amended. (Ord. of Aug.
1998)
14-1110. Abandoned tower policy. In the event a tower becomes
obsolete or is our to service for any reason for six (6) consecutive months, the
owner or record shall cause the tower to be dismantled and removed from site
and disposed of in the manner appropriate for disposal or re-use of the tower
materials. A time period one (1) year shall be provided from the time the tower
is deemed to be out of service for the owner to either activates the tower or
remove it from the site.
(1) Failure to comply with the terms of this section concerning removal
of abandoned tower shall be subject to penalties as provided by the Cleveland
Municipal Code. (Ord. of Aug. 1998)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 14-50
CHAPTER 12
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SECTION
14-1201. Statement of purpose.
14-1202. Historic preservation commission: composition and terms.
14-1203. Powers of the commission.
14-1204. Rules of order (by-laws).
14-1205. Designation of landmarks, landmark sites, and historic district.
14-1206. Certificates of appropriateness.
14-1207. Criteria for issuance of certificates of appropriateness.
14-1208. Procedures for issuance of certificates of appropriateness, review
process, and fees.
14-1209. Economic hardship.
14-1210. Appeals.
14-1211. Minimum maintenance requirements.
14-1212. Public safety exchange.
14-1213. Enforcement and penalties.
14-1214. Appropriations.
14-1215. Disqualification of members by conflict of interest.
14-1201. Statement of purpose. Historic preservation activities will
promote and protect the health, safety, prosperity, education, and general
welfare of the people living in and visiting the City of Cleveland, Tennessee,
hereinafter referred to as "the city".
More specifically, this historic preservation chapter is designed to achieve
the following goals:
(1) Protect, enhance and perpetuate resources which represent
distinctive and significant elements of the city's historical, cultural, social,
economic, political archaeological, and architectural identity;
(2) This § 14-1201 of this chapter shall constitute the rules of order
(by-laws) of the commission which shall govern the conduct of its business,
subject to the approval of the city council. Such rules of order (by-laws) shall be
a matter of public record. The commission may from time to time adopt such
other rules of order (by-laws) as are necessary to its operations, subject to the
approval of the city council. The presence of four (4) members of the commission
shall constitute a quorum. A motion shall have passed upon the affirmative vote
of a majority of the quorum of board members present and voting. Except as
provided in this chapter or in any subsequent amendment, questions arising
concerning rules of order (by-laws) shall be settled by reference to Robert's Rules
of Order.
(3) Strengthen civic pride and cultural stability through neighborhood
conservation;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 14-51
(4) Stabilize the economy of the city through the continued use,
preservation, and revitalization of its resources;
(5) Promote the use of resources for the education, pleasure, and
welfare of the people of the city;
(6) Provide a review process for the preservation and development of
the city's resources. (as added by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004, and amended by
Ord. #2013-31, July 2013)
14-1202. Historic preservation commission: composition and
terms. The city hereby establishes a historic zoning commission, the Cleveland
Historic Preservation Commission, hereinafter referred to as "the commission,"
pursuant to the authority granted in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-7-403.
The commission is to work to preserve, promote, and develop the city's historical
resources and to advise the city on the designation of preservation districts,
landmarks, and landmark sites and to perform such other functions as may be
provided by law.
The commission shall consist of seven (7) members. The commission's
membership shall include a representative of a local patriotic or historical
organization; an architect or engineer, if available; and a person who is a
member of the Cleveland Municipal Planning Commission at the time of his/her
appointment. The commission's membership shall include members from the
community in general but, if possible, it shall include professionals in primary
or secondary historic preservation-related disciplines regardless of their place
of residence. Efforts to include commission members from primary historic
preservation-related disciplines (architecture, history, architectural history,
archaeology) and secondary historic preservation-related disciplines (urban
planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography, cultural
anthropology, interior design, law, and related fields) shall be documented.
Concerning the composition of the commission, diversity in terms of gender and
ethnicity is desirable. All commission members shall have demonstrated
knowledge of or interest, competence, or expertise in historic preservation.
All members of the commission are appointed by the city council and shall
serve for designated terms and may be re-appointed. Initial appointments to the
commission shall be made so as to provide staggered terms for membership.
Three of the initial appointments shall be for four years; two initial
appointments shall be for three years; and two initial appointments shall be for
two years. Subsequent appointments shall be for terms of four years.
Appointments are to be confirmed by the majority vote of the city council.
Commission members may be removed at any time by the majority vote of city
council. Reasons for removal of a commission member could include a pattern
of poor attendance at meetings, refusal to follow applicable laws and ordinances
in carrying out commission business, failure to comply with conflict of interest
provisions, unprofessional conduct at commission meetings, etc. In the event of
commission vacancies due to death, resignation, involuntary removal, etc., the
Change 16, December 14, 2015 14-52
city council shall appoint replacement members to serve the remainder of the
unexpired term.
One (1) alternate member shall be appointed to the commission who is
either an architect or an engineer. This alternate member shall be appointed by
the city council for a four (4) year term. The purpose of this alternate member
is to assure that the commission has at least one (1) architect or engineer
available to serve on the commission at each meeting, particularly when the
regular commission member who is an architect or engineer is unable to attend
a meeting, or is otherwise unable to participate in a matter that may come
before the commission.
In addition to the alternate member who is an architect or engineer, two
(2) other alternate members may also be appointed to the commission by the city
council. These two (2) additional alternate members shall also be appointed for
a four (4) year term, and may serve on the commission at any meeting where a
regular member of the commission is unable to attend, or is otherwise unable
to participate in a matter that may come before the commission.
If and when these two (2) additional alternates are appointed, the city
council shall decide which alternate is the first alternate, and which alternate
is the second alternate. In any meeting of the commission in which both are
present, but only one of these two alternates is necessary to constitute a seven
(7) member commission, the alternate designated as the first alternate shall
exercise a vote, while the second alternate will not. (as added by Ord. #2004-07,
April 2004, and amended by Ord. #2015-08, April 2015)
14-1203. Powers of the commission. (1) The commission shall
conduct or cause to be conducted a continuing study and survey of resources
within the city; however, the commission is not authorized to incur any financial
obligation without the express authorization of the city council.
(2) The commission shall recommend to the city the adoption of
ordinances designating preservation districts, landmarks, and landmark sites
where appropriate.
(3) The commission may recommend that the city recognize subdistricts
within any preservation district, in order that the commission may
adopt specific guidelines for the regulation of properties within such a subdistrict.
(4) The commission shall review applications proposing construction,
alteration, demolition, or relocation of any resource within the preservation
districts, landmarks, and landmarks sites.
(5) The commission shall grant or deny certificates of appropriateness,
and may grant certificates of appropriateness contingent upon the acceptance
by the applicant of specified conditions.
(6) The commission does not have jurisdiction over interior
arrangements of buildings and structures, except where such change will affect
the exterior of the building and structures.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 14-53
(7) Subject to the express approval of the city council and subject to the
requirements of the city, the commission may apply for, receive, hold, and spend
funds from private and public sources, in addition to any appropriations made
by the city for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
(8) Within the limits of any appropriations or grant in a budget
approved by the city council and subject to the approval of the city manager, the
commission is authorized to utilize such staff, technical experts or other persons
as may be required for the performance of its duties and to request the
equipment, supplies, and other materials necessary for its effective operation.
(9) The commission is authorized, solely in the performance of its
official duties and only at reasonable times, to enter upon private land or water
for the examination or survey thereof. No member or agent of the commission
shall enter any private dwelling or structure without the express consent of the
owner of record or occupant thereof. (as added by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004)
14-1204. Rules of order (by-laws). To fulfill the purposes of this
chapter and carry out the provisions contained therein:
(1) The commission annually shall elect from its membership a
chairman and vice-chairman. It shall select a secretary from its membership or
its staff. If neither the chairman nor the vice-chairman attends a particular
meeting, the remaining members shall select an acting chairman from the
members in attendance at such meeting.
(2) This § 14-1204 of this chapter shall constitute the rules of order
(by-laws) of the commission which shall govern the conduct of its business,
subject to the approval of the city council. Such rules of order (by-laws) shall be
a matter of public record. The commission may from time to time adopt such
other rules of order (by-laws) as are necessary to its operation, subject to the
approval of the city council. A quorum for voting on any item of business shall
be any four members who are not disqualified from voting due to a conflict of
interest. Except as provided in this chapter or in any subsequent amendment,
questions arising concerning rules of order (by-laws) shall be settled by
reference to Robert's Rules of Order.
(3) The commission shall develop design review guidelines for
determining appropriateness as generally set forth in § 14-1207 of this chapter.
Such criteria shall insofar as possible be consistent with local, state, and federal
guidelines and regulations including, but not limited to, building safety and fire
codes and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards For Rehabilitation.
(4) The commission shall keep minutes and records of all meetings and
proceedings including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings,
determinations, and decisions. All such material shall be a matter of public
record. City staff designated by the city manager shall keep the aforementioned
minutes and records, shall provide descriptions of the issues before the
commission, shall provide notice of meetings, and other support services
reasonably necessary to the operation of the commission.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 14-54
(5) The commission shall establish its own regular meeting time;
however, the first meeting shall be held after the adoption of this chapter and
within thirty (30) days after the initial appointment of commission members.
Regular meetings shall be scheduled at least once every three (3) months. The
chairman, vicechairman, or any two (2) members may call a special meeting to
consider an urgent matter. (as added by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004)
14-1205. Designation of landmarks, landmark sites, and historic
districts. By ordinance, the city may establish landmarks, landmark sites, and
preservation districts within the area of its jurisdiction. Such landmarks,
landmark sites, or preservation districts shall be designated following the
criteria contained in this chapter.
(1) The commission shall initiate a continuing and thorough
investigation of the archaeological, architectural, cultural, and historic
significance of the city's resources. The findings shall be collected in a cohesive
format, made a matter of public record, and made available for public inspection.
The commission shall work toward providing complete documentation for
previously designated preservation districts which would include:
(a) A survey of all property within the boundary of the district,
with photographs of each building.
(b) A survey which would be in a format consistent with the
statewide inventory format of the Historic Preservation Division of the
(SHPO).
(2) The commission shall advise the city on the designation of
preservation districts, landmarks, or landmark sites and submit or cause to be
prepared ordinances to make such designation.
(3) A resource or resources may be nominated for designation upon
motion of three members of the commission or by an organization interested in
historic preservation or by an owner of the property being nominated. A
nomination shall contain information as specified by the commission. The
commission must reach a decision on whether to recommend a proposed
nomination to the city council within six months in the case of a preservation
district and two months in the case of either a landmark or landmark site. After
six months for a district and two months for a landmark or landmark site if no
action has been taken by the commission the nomination proceeds to the
Cleveland Municipal Planning Commission for their recommendation to the city
council.
(4) The commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
preservation district, landmark, or landmark site. If the commission votes to
recommend to the city the designation of a proposed resource, it shall promptly
forward to the Cleveland Municipal Planning Commission its recommendation,
in writing, together with an accompanying file.
(5) The commission's recommendations to the city council for
designation of a preservation district shall be accompanied by:
Change 16, December 14, 2015 14-55
(a) A map of the preservation district that clearly delineates the
boundaries
(b) A verbal boundary description and justification
(c) A written statement of significance for the proposed
preservation district
(6) The city council shall conduct a public hearing, after notice, to
discuss the proposed designation and boundaries thereof. A notice of the hearing
shall be published in the newspaper generally used by the city for such notices.
(7) Within sixty (60) calendar days after the public hearing held in
connection herewith, the city shall consider the adoption of the ordinance with
such modifications as may be necessary.
(8) Furthermore, the commission shall notify, as soon as is reasonably
possible, the appropriate state, county, and municipal agencies of the official
designation of all landmarks, landmark sites and preservation districts. An
updated list and map shall be maintained by such agencies and made available
to the public. (as added by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004)
14-1206. Certificates of appropriateness. No exterior feature of any
resource which is a designated landmark or landmark site or which is within a
designated preservation district, shall be altered, added to, relocated, or
demolished until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness of such
work has been approved by the commission. Likewise, no construction which
affects a resource shall be undertaken without a certificate of appropriateness.
(1) The commission shall serve as a review body with the power to
approve and deny applications for certificates of appropriateness.
(2) In approving and denying applications for certificates of
appropriateness, the commission shall accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
(3) A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for work
deemed by the commission to be ordinary maintenance or repair of any resource.
(4) All decisions of the commission shall be in writing and shall state
the findings of the commission, its recommendations, and the reasons therefore.
(5) Expiration of a certificate of appropriateness: a certificate of
appropriateness shall expire eighteen (18) months after its issuance EXCEPT
THAT a certificate shall expire if work has not begun within six (6) months of
its issuance. When a certificate has expired, an applicant may seek a new
certificate.
(6) Resubmitting of applications: twelve months after denial of an
application for a certificate of appropriateness, the application may be
resubmitted without change. A changed application may be resubmitted at any
time. (as added by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004)
14-1207. Criteria for issuance of certificates of appropriateness.
The commission shall use the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation, as the basics for design guidelines created for each district or
Change 16, December 14, 2015 14-56
landmark and the following criteria in granting or denying certificates of
appropriateness:
(1) General factors:
(a) Architectural design of existing building, structure, or
appurtenance and proposed alteration
(b) Historical significance of the resource
(c) Materials composing the resource
(d) Size of the resource
(e) The relationship of the above factors to, and their effect upon
the immediate surroundings and, if within a preservation district, upon
the district as a whole and its architectural and historical character and
integrity
(2) New construction:
(a) The following aspects of new construction shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and environment with which the new
construction is visually related, including but not limited to: the height,
the gross volume, the proportion between width and height of the
facade(s), the proportions and relationship between doors and windows,
the rhythm of solids to voids created by openings in the facade, the
materials, the textures, the patterns, the trims, and the design of the
roof.
(b) Existing rhythm created by existing building masses and
spaces between them shall be preserved.
(c) The landscape plan shall be compatible with the resource,
and it shall be visually compatible with the environment with which it is
visually related. Landscaping shall also not prove detrimental to the
fabric of a resource, or adjacent public or private improvements like
sidewalks and walls.
(d) No specific architectural style shall be required.
(3) Exterior alteration:
(a) All exterior alterations to a building, structure, object, site,
or landscape feature shall be compatible with the resource itself and
other resources with which it is related, as is provided in § 14-1207(1) and
(2), and the design, over time, of a building, structure, object, or
landscape feature shall be considered in applying these standards.
(b) Exterior alterations shall not adversely affect the
architectural character or historic quality of a landmark and shall not
destroy the significance of landmark sites.
(4) In considering an application for the demolition of a landmark or
a resource within a preservation district; the following shall be considered:
(a) The commission shall consider the individual architectural,
cultural, and/or historical significance of the resource.
(b) The commission shall consider the importance or
contribution of the resource to the architectural character of the district.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 14-57
(c) The commission shall consider the importance or
contribution of the resource to neighboring property values.
(d) The commission shall consider the difficulty or impossibility
of reproducing such a resource because of its texture, design, material, or
detail.
(e) Following recommendation for approval of demolition, the
applicant must seek approval of replacement plans, if any, as set forth in
§ 14-1207(2), prior to receiving a demolition permit and other permits.
Replacement plans for this purpose shall include, but shall not be
restricted to project concept, preliminary elevations and site plans, and
completed working drawings for at least the foundation plan which will
enable the applicant to receive a permit for foundation construction.
(f) Applicants that have received a recommendation for
demolition shall be required to have a demolition permit as well as
certificate of appropriateness for the new construction. Permits for
demolition and construction shall not be issued simultaneously.
(g) When the commission recommends approval of demolition
of a resource, a permit shall not be issued until all plans for the site have
received approval from all appropriate city boards, commissions,
departments, and agencies. (as added by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004)
14-1208. Procedures for issuance of certificates of
appropriateness, review process, and fees. Anyone desiring to take action
requiring a certificate of appropriateness concerning a resource for which a
permit, variance, or other authorization from the city building official is also
required, shall make application therefore in the form and manner required by
the applicable code section or ordinance. Anyone desiring to take any action
requiring a certificate of appropriateness shall submit an application for such
certificate of appropriateness with the city building official. Applications for
certificates of appropriateness shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty (50) dollars
payable to the City of Cleveland, Tennessee. After receipt of any such
application, the city building official shall be assured that the application is
proper and complete. No building permit shall be issued by the city building
official which affects a resource without a certificate of appropriateness. In the
event that a building permit need not be obtained for construction, alteration,
demolition, or relocation of any resource, a certificate of appropriateness is still
required before such work can be undertaken. Such application shall be
reviewed in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) When any such application is filed, the city building official shall
immediately notify the commission chairman, vice-chairman, or staff of the
application having been filed.
(2) The chairman or vice-chairman shall set the agenda for the regular
meeting date or set a time and date, which shall be not later than thirty (30)
days after the filing of the application for a hearing by the commission, and the
city building official shall be so informed.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 14-58
(3) The applicant shall, upon request, have the right to a preliminary
hearing by the commission for the purpose of making any changes or
adjustments which might be more consistent with the commission's standards.
(4) Not later than three (3) days before the date set for the said
hearing, the city official designated by the city manager shall provide written
or verbal notice thereof to the applicant and to all members of the commission.
(5) Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall be given by
publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least three
(3) days before such hearing and by posting such notice on the bulletin board in
the lobby of city hall.
(6) At such hearing, the applicant for a certificate of appropriateness
shall have the right to present any relevant evidence in support of the
application. Likewise, the city shall have the right to present any additional
relevant evidence in support of the application.
(7) The commission shall have the right to conditional approval.
(8) Either at the meeting or within not more than fifteen (15) days
after the hearing on an application, the commission shall act upon it, either
approving, denying, on deferring action until the next meeting of the
commission, giving consideration to the factors set forth in § 14-1207 hereof.
Evidence of approval of the application shall be by certificate of appropriateness
issued by the commission and, whatever its decision, notice in writing shall be
given to the applicant and the city building official.
(9) The issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not relieve an
applicant for a building permit, special use permit, variance, or other
authorization from compliance with any other requirement or provision of the
laws of the city concerning zoning, construction repair, or demolition. (as added
by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004)
14-1209. Economic hardship. No decision of the commission shall
cause undue economic hardship. If an applicant requests, a hearing on economic
hardship shall be conducted after a certificate of appropriateness has been
denied. (as added by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004)
14-1210. Appeals. The applicant who desires to appeal a decision by the
commission shall file an appeal with the circuit court (after the determination
of the issue by the commission) in the manner provided by law.(as added by Ord.
#2004-07, April 2004)
14-1211. Minimum maintenance requirements. In order to insure
the protective maintenance of resources, the exterior features of such properties
shall be maintained to meet the requirements of the city's minimum housing
code and the city's building code. (as added by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004)
14-1212. Public safety exclusion. None of the provisions of this
chapter shall be construed to prevent any action of construction, alteration, or
Change 16, December 14, 2015 14-59
demolition necessary to correct or abate the unsafe or dangerous condition of
any resource, or part thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or
dangerous by the city building official or the fire department and where the
proposed actions have been declared necessary by such authorities to correct the
said condition provided, however, that only such work as is necessary to correct
the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this section.
In the event any resource designated as a landmark or located within a
preservation district shall be damaged by fire or other calamity to such an
extent that it cannot be repaired and restored, it may be removed in conformity
with normal permit procedures and applicable laws, provided that:
(1) The city building official concurs with the property owner that the
resource cannot be repaired and restored and so notifies the commission in
writing.
(2) The commission, if in doubt after receiving such notification from
the city building official, shall be allowed time to seek outside professional
expertise from the state historic preservation office and/or an independent
structural engineer before issuing a certificate of appropriateness for the
demolition. The commission may indicate in writing by letter to the city building
official that it will require a time period of up to thirty days for this purpose,
and, upon such notification to the city building official, this section shall be
suspended until the expiration of such a delay period. (as added by Ord.
#2004-07, April 2004)
14-1213. Enforcement and penalties. The historic preservation
commission shall be enforced by the city building official, who shall have the
right to enter upon any premises necessary to carry out his duties in this
enforcement. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not less than two ($2.00)
nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day such violation
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (as added by Ord. #2004-07,
April 2004)
14-1214. Appropriations. The city council may make appropriations
on behalf of the commission as necessary for the expenses of the operation of the
commission and may make additional amounts available as necessary for the
acquisition, restoration, preservation, operation, and management of historic
properties. (as added by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004)
14-1215. Disqualification of members by conflict of interest.
Because the city may possess relatively few residents with experience in the
individual fields of history, architecture, architectural history, archaeology,
urban planning, law, or real estate, and in order not to impair such residents
from practicing their trade for hire, members of the commission are allowed to
contract their services to an applicant for a certificate of appropriateness, and,
when doing so must expressly disqualify themselves from the commission during
Change 16, December 14, 2015 14-60
all discussions and voting for that application. In such cases, the city shall, upon
the request of the chairman of the commission or the vice-chairman in his stead,
appoint a substitute member who is qualified in the same field as the
disqualified member and who will serve for that particular case only. If no
qualified resident of the city is able to substitute for the disqualified member,
the city may appoint, in this case only, a qualified substitute who is a resident.
If any member of the commission must be disqualified due to a conflict of
interest on a regular and continuing basis, the chairman or the vice-chairman,
in his stead, shall encourage the member to resign his commission seat. Failing
this resignation, and if the commission member continues to enter into conflict
of interest situations with the commission the chairman or vice-chairman of the
commission shall encourage the city to replace the member. Likewise, any
member of the commission who has an interest in the property in question or in
property within three hundred feet of such a property, or who is employed with
a firm that has been hired to aid the applicant in any matter whatsoever, or who
has any proprietary, tenancy, or personal interest in a matter to be considered
by the commission shall be disqualified from participating in the consideration
of any request for a certificate of appropriateness involving such a property. In
such cases, a qualified substitute shall be appointed as provided above. (as
added by Ord. #2004-07, April 2004)
Change 12, September 8, 2008 15-1
TITLE 15
MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
3. SPEED LIMITS.
4. TURNING MOVEMENTS.
5. STOPPING AND YIELDING.
6. PARKING.
7. ENFORCEMENT.
8. AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SIGNAL ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS.
9. RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF CERTAIN STREETS BY CERTAIN TRUCKS;
TRUCK ROUTES.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS2
SECTION
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements.
15-102. Driving on streets closed for repairs, etc.
15-103. [Deleted.]
15-104. One-way streets.
15-105. Unlaned streets.
15-106. Laned streets.
15-107. Yellow lines.
15-108. Miscellaneous traffic control signs, etc.
15-109. Detour or road closed signs; driver obedience required.
15-110. General requirements for traffic control signs, etc.
1Municipal code reference
Excavations and obstructions in streets, etc.: title 16.
2State law references
Under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-307, the following offenses
are exclusively state offenses and must be tried in a state court or a
court having state jurisdiction: driving while intoxicated or drugged,
as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-401; failing to
stop after a traffic accident, as prohibited by Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 55-10-101, et seq.; driving while license is suspended or
revoked, as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-7-116; and
drag racing, as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-501.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 15-2
15-111. Unauthorized traffic control signs, etc.
15-112. Presumption with respect to traffic control signs, etc.
15-113. School safety patrols.
15-114. Driving through funerals or other processions.
15-115. Clinging to vehicles in motion.
15-116. Riding on outside of vehicles.
15-117. Backing vehicles.
15-118. Projections from the rear of vehicles.
15-119. Causing unnecessary noise.
15-120. Vehicles and operators to be licensed.
15-121. Passing.
15-122. Motorcycles, motor driven cycles, motorized bicycles, bicycles, etc.
15-123. Delivery of vehicle to unlicensed driver, etc.
15-124. Use of roller skates, coasters, etc. restricted; exception.
15-125. Driving on sidewalk.
15-126. Driving on controlled-access roadways.
15-127. Load restrictions upon vehicles using certain highways.
15-128. Commercial vehicles using certain streets.
15-129. Opening and closing vehicle doors.
15-130. Following too closely.
15-131. Overtaking and passing school bus; markings; discharging passengers.
15-132. Unattended motor vehicles.
15-133. Lights on motor vehicles.
15-134. Wearing of seat belts.
15-135. Trespass by motor vehicles.
15-136. [Repealed.]
15-137. Financial responsibility.
15-138. Child restraint systems.
15-139. Transporting child in truck bed.
15-140. Window tinting on motor vehicles.
15-141. Texting while operating motor vehicles.
15-142. Engine compression braking devices.
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any motor vehicle within the corporate limits unless such
vehicle is equipped with properly operating muffler, lights, brakes, horn, and
such other equipment as is prescribed and required by Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 55, chapter 9. (1981 Code, §§ 14-172, 14-566, 14-567, 14-568,
14-569, 14-570, and 14-571, modified)
15-102. Driving on streets closed for repairs, etc. Except for
necessary access to property abutting thereon, no motor vehicle shall be driven
upon any street that is barricaded or closed for repairs or other lawful purpose.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 15-3
15-103. [Deleted.] (1981 Code, § 14-185, as deleted by Ord. #2005-11,
March 2005)
15-104. One-way streets. On any street for one-way traffic with posted
signs indicating the authorized direction of travel at all intersections offering
access thereto, no person shall operate any vehicle except in the indicated
direction. (1981 Code, §§ 14-217, 14-218, 14-219, and 14-220, modified)
15-105. Unlaned streets. (1) Upon all unlaned streets of sufficient
width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the street except:
(a) When lawfully overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction.
(b) When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while
under construction or repair.
(c) Upon a roadway designated and signposted by the city for
one-way traffic.
(2) All vehicles proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at
the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven as
close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or
when preparing for a left turn.
15-106. Laned streets. On streets marked with traffic lanes, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep his vehicle
within the boundaries of the proper lane for his direction of travel except when
lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning
movement.
On two (2) lane and three (3) lane streets, the proper lane for travel shall
be the right hand lane unless otherwise clearly marked. On streets with four
(4) or more lanes, either of the right hand lanes shall be available for use except
that traffic moving at less than the normal rate of speed shall use the extreme
right hand lane. On one-way streets either lane may be lawfully used in the
absence of markings to the contrary. (1981 Code, § 14-190, modified)
15-107. Yellow lines. On streets with a yellow line placed to the right
of any lane line or center line, such yellow line shall designate a no-passing
zone, and no operator shall drive his vehicle or any part thereof across or to the
left of such yellow line except when necessary to make a lawful left turn from
such street.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 15-4
15-108. Miscellaneous traffic control signs, etc.1 It shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle to violate or fail to comply with
any traffic control sign, signal, marking, or device placed or erected by the state
or the city unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle
willfully to violate or fail to comply with the reasonable directions of any police
officer. (1981 Code, §§ 14-236 and 14-543, modified)
15-109. Detour or road closed signs; driver obedience required.
It shall be unlawful to tear down or deface any detour sign or to break down or
drive around any barricade erected for the purpose of closing any section of a
street to traffic during construction, repair, or for any purpose incident to the
needs of public safety or convenience, or to drive over such section of the street
until again thrown open to public traffic; however, such restriction shall not
apply to the persons in charge of such construction or repair or project for public
safety or convenience.
At any time that a street or alley is closed for any purpose the signs
placed on said street or alley shall clearly designate that said street or alley is
closed. (Ord. of May 1994)
15-110. General requirements for traffic control signs, etc. All
traffic control signs, signals, markings, and devices shall conform to the latest
revision of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways,2 published by the U. S. Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration, and shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type
and location throughout the city. (1981 Code, § 14-542, modified)
15-111. Unauthorized traffic control signs, etc. No person shall
place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any street, any unauthorized sign,
signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles
an official traffic control sign, signal, marking, or device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to control the movement of traffic or parking of
vehicles, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic control sign, signal, marking, or device or any railroad sign or
signal. (1981 Code, § 14-548, modified)
1Municipal code references
Stop signs, yield signs, flashing signals, pedestrian control signs,
traffic control signals generally: §§ 15-505--15-509.
2This manual may be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents,
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 15-5
15-112. Presumption with respect to traffic control signs, etc.
When a traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device has been placed, the
presumption shall be that it is official and that it has been lawfully placed by
the proper city authority.
15-113. School safety patrols. All motorists and pedestrians shall obey
the directions or signals of school safety patrols when such patrols are assigned
under the authority of the chief of police and are acting in accordance with
instructions; provided, that such persons giving any order, signal, or direction
shall at the time be wearing some insignia and/or using authorized flags for
giving signals.
15-114. Driving through funerals or other processions. Except
when otherwise directed by a police officer, no driver of a vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while
they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated.
Oncoming traffic is hereby instructed to proceed as normal when meeting
a funeral procession. (1981 Code, § 14-178(5), modified)
15-115. Clinging to vehicles in motion. It shall be unlawful for any
person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any
other vehicle to cling to, or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving
vehicle upon any street, alley, or other public way or place. (1981 Code, § 14-14,
modified)
15-116. Riding on outside of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to ride, or for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle being operated
on a street, alley, or other public way or place, to permit any person to ride on
any portion of such vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers.
This section shall not apply to persons engaged in the necessary discharge of
lawful duties nor to persons riding in the load-carrying space of trucks. (1981
Code, § 14-10, modified)
15-117. Backing vehicles. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the
same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without
interfering with other traffic. (1981 Code, § 14-180, modified)
15-118. Projections from the rear of vehicles. Whenever the load or
any projecting portion of any vehicle shall extend beyond the rear of the bed or
body thereof, the operator shall display at the end of such load or projection, in
such position as to be clearly visible from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag
being not less than twelve (12) inches square. Between one-half (½) hour after
sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed in place of
the flag a red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least
two hundred (200) feet from the rear of such vehicle.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 15-6
15-119. Causing unnecessary noise. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cause unnecessary noise by unnecessarily sounding the horn, "racing"
the motor, or causing the "screeching" or "squealing" of the tires on any motor
vehicle.
15-120. Vehicles and operators to be licensed. (1) It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle within the corporate limits
of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee, unless such vehicle complies with the
requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, title 55, chapter 4, entitled
"Registration and Licensing of Motor Vehicles."
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle
within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland unless such person complies
with the requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, title 55, chapter 50,
entitled the "Uniform Classified and Commercial Drive License Act of 1988."
(1981 Code, §§ 14-170 and 14-172, as replaced by Ord. #2004-31, Aug. 2004)
15-121. Passing. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the driver of a vehicle passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
The driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
When the street is wide enough, the driver of a vehicle may overtake and
pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left
turn.
The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a street of
sufficient width for four (4) or more lanes of moving traffic when such movement
can be made in safety.
No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the street
in overtaking or passing on the right.
When any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an intersection
to permit a pedestrian to cross the street, no operator of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
No vehicle operator shall attempt to pass another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction unless he can see that the way ahead is sufficiently clear and
unobstructed to enable him to make the movement in safety. (1981 Code,
§§ 14-186, 14-187, 14-188, and 14-189, modified)
15-122. Motorcycles, motor driven cycles, motorized bicycles,
bicycles, etc.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 15-7
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of the application of this section, the
following words shall have the definitions indicated:
(a) "Motorcycle." Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle
for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3)
wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor or motorized
bicycle.
(b) "Motor-driven cycle." Every motorcycle, including every
motor scooter, with a motor capacity that does not exceed five (5) brake
horsepower, or with a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding one
hundred and twenty-five cubic centimeters (125cc);
(c) "Motorized bicycle." A vehicle with two (2) or three (3)
wheels, an automatic transmission, and a motor with a cylinder capacity
not exceeding fifty (50) cubic centimeters which produces no more than
two (2) brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a
maximum design speed of no more than thirty (30) miles per hour on
level ground.
(2) Every person riding or operating a bicycle, motor cycle, motor
driven cycle or motorized bicycle shall be subject to the provisions of all traffic
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city applicable to the driver or operator
of other vehicles except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application to bicycles, motorcycles, motor driven cycles, or motorized bicycles.
(3) No person operating or riding a bicycle, motorcycle, motor driven
cycle or motorized bicycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall the operator carry any other person
upon such vehicle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon.
(4) No bicycle, motorcycle, motor driven cycle or motorized bicycle shall
be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped.
(5) No person operating a bicycle, motorcycle, motor driven cycle or
motorized bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the
rider from keeping both hands upon the handlebars.
(6) No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall operate any
motorcycle, motor driven cycle or motorized bicycle while any other person is a
passenger upon said motor vehicle.
(7) Each driver of a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or motorized
bicycle and any passenger thereon shall be required to wear on his head a crash
helmet of a type approved by the state's commissioner of safety.
(8) Every motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or motorized bicycle operated
upon any public way within the corporate limits shall be equipped with a
windshield or, in the alternative, the operator and any passenger on any such
motorcycle, motor driven cycle or motorized bicycle shall be required to wear
safety goggles, faceshield or glasses containing impact resistant lens for the
purpose of preventing any flying object from striking the operator or any
passenger in the eyes.
Change 9, March 28, 2005 15-8
(9) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride on any vehicle
in violation of this section, and it shall also be unlawful for any parent or
guardian knowingly to permit any minor to operate a motorcycle, motor driven
cycle or motorized bicycle in violation of this section. (1981 Code, §§ 14-13,
14-181, 14-391, 14-392, 14-393, 14-394, 14-395, 14-396, 14-397, 14-398, 14-399,
14-400, and 14-401, modified)
15-123. Delivery of vehicle to unlicensed driver, etc.
(1) Definitions. (a) "Adult" shall mean any person eighteen years of
age or older.
(b) "Automobile" shall mean any motor driven automobile, car,
truck, tractor, motorcycle, motor driven cycle, motorized bicycle, or
vehicle driven by mechanical power.
(c) "Custody" means the control of the actual, physical care of
the juvenile, and includes the right and responsibility to provide for the
physical, mental, moral and emotional well being of the juvenile.
"Custody" as herein defined, relates to those rights and responsibilities
as exercised either by the juvenile's parent or parents or a person granted
custody by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(d) "Drivers license" shall mean a motor vehicle operators
license or chauffeurs license issued by the State of Tennessee.
(e) "Juvenile" as used in this chapter shall mean a person less
than eighteen years of age, and no exception shall be made for a juvenile
who has been emancipated by marriage or otherwise.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any parent or person having custody of a
juvenile to permit any such juvenile to drive a motor vehicle upon the streets,
highways, roads, parkways, avenues or public ways in the city in a reckless,
careless, or unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to violate the ordinances
of the city. (1981 Code, §§ 14-170 and 14-171, modified)
15-124. Use of roller skates, coasters, etc., restricted; exception.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk. When so crossing such person shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. (1981
Code, § 14-9, modified)
15-125. Driving on sidewalk. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive
within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. (1981
Code, § 14-179)
15-126. Driving on controlled-access roadways. No person shall
drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such
Change 9, March 28, 2005 15-9
entrances and exits as are established by public authority. (1981 Code, § 14-182)
15-127. Load restrictions upon vehicles using certain highways.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle
with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified at any time upon any of
the streets or parts of streets so posted. (1981 Code, § 14-193)
15-128. Commercial vehicles using certain streets. (1) Definitions.
As used in this section, a "commercial vehicle" shall mean any "tractor/trailer
truck" or any category of truck or other motor-driven vehicle with a gross weight
in excess of 8,999 pounds.
(2) Commercial vehicles prohibited on certain city streets. When signs
are erected on a city street stating "Commercial vehicles prohibited," no person
shall operate any commercial vehicle at any time upon any of the city streets or
parts of city streets so marked, except that commercial vehicles may be operated
thereon for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and
then only by entering such city street at the intersection nearest the destination
of the commercial vehicle and proceeding thereon no further than the nearest
intersection thereafter.
(3) Further exceptions. The foregoing provisions prohibiting
commercial vehicle traffic shall not apply to any emergency vehicle, school bus,
or any road construction equipment being operated by or for the City of
Cleveland in connection with repairs on city property or a right of way owned
by the City of Cleveland.
(4) Designated streets for commercial vehicle traffic. When signs are
erected stating "truck routes," the following city streets are hereby designated
as "truck routes." Commercial vehicle traffic is not prohibited on these streets.
(a) Cherry Street, NE between 20th Street and 16th Street;
(b) 16th Street, NE between Cherry Street and Carolina Avenue;
(c) 15th Street, NE between Carolina Avenue and Parker Street;
(d) 6th Street, SE between Wildwood Avenue and Linden
Avenue;
(e) 3rd Street, SE between Linden Avenue and Ocoee Street;
(f) Linden Avenue, SE between Inman Street and 3rd/6th
Street;
(g) Euclid Avenue, SE between 3rd Street and 14th Street;
(h) 14th Street, SE between Euclid Avenue and Church Street;
(i) Church Street, SE between 14th Street and 19th Street.
(5) Enforcement. A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $50.00. (1981 Code, § 14-194, as replaced by Ord. #2003-19, June
2003)
15-129. Opening and closing vehicle doors. No person shall open the
door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until
Change 9, March 28, 2005 15-10
it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side
of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than
necessary to load or unload passengers. (1981 Code, § 14-15)
15-130. Following too closely. (1) The driver of a motor vehicle shall
not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having
due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition
of the highway.
(2) The driver of any motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another
vehicle when traveling upon a roadway which is following another motor truck
or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, shall, whenever conditions permit,
leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such
space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a motor truck or motor
vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing any like vehicle or
other vehicle. (1981 Code, § 14-191)
15-131. Overtaking and passing school bus; markings; discharging
passengers. (1) The driver of a vehicle upon a highway or street upon meeting
or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the
highway or street for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children
shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and such driver shall not
proceed until such school bus resumes motion or is signaled by the school bus
driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated.
(2) All motor vehicles used in transporting school children to and from
school in this city are required to be distinctly marked "School Bus" on the front
and rear thereof in letters of not less than six (6) inches in height, and so plainly
written or printed and so arranged as to be legible to persons approaching such
school bus, whether traveling in the same or the opposite direction.
(3) The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways
need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different
roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is
stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and
where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. For the purpose of
this paragraph, separate roadways shall mean roadways divided by an
intervening space which is not suitable to vehicular traffic.
(4) Except as otherwise provided by this section, the school bus driver
is required to stop such school bus on the right-hand side of such street or
highway, and such driver shall cause the bus to remain stationary and the
visual stop signs on the bus actuated until all school children who should be
discharged from the bus have been so discharged and until all children whose
destination causes them to cross the road or highway at that place have
negotiated such crossing. (1981 Code, § 14-192)
Change 10, July 10, 2006 15-11
15-132. Unattended motor vehicles. (1) No person driving or in
charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended in any public place
without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the ignition key
from the vehicle, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon
any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
(2) Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing
unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of this section, such
police officer is authorized to remove such key from such vehicle and to deliver
such key to the police station.
(3) The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this section
shall be held prima facie responsible for any such violation. (1981 Code,
§ 14-195)
15-133. Lights on motor vehicles. (1) (a) Every motor vehicle other
than a motorcycle, road roller, road machinery or farm tractor operated
on any street, road or highway within the corporate limits of the City of
Cleveland shall be equipped with at least two (2) and not more that four
(4) headlights, with at least one (1) on each side of the front of the motor
vehicle.
(b) The headlights of every motor vehicle shall be so
constructed, equipped, arranged, focused, aimed, and adjusted, that they
will at all times mentioned in the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-9-401,
and under normal atmospheric conditions and on a level road produce a
driving light sufficient to render clearly discernible a person two hundred
feet (200') ahead, but shall not project a glaring or dazzling light to
persons in front of such headlights.
(c) Such headlights shall be displayed during the period from
one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½) before sunrise, during fog,
smoke, or rain and at all other times when there is not sufficient light to
render clearly discernable any person on the road at a distance of two
hundred feet (200') ahead of such vehicle.
(d) Operation of headlights during periods of rain, as required
in this section, shall be made during any time when rain, mist, or other
precipitation, including snow, necessitates the constant use of windshield
wipers by motorists.
(2) (a) Whenever the road lighting equipment on a motor vehicle is
so arranged that the driver may select at will between two (2) or more
distributions of light from headlights or lamps or auxiliary road lighting
lamps or lights, or combinations thereof, directed to different elevations,
the following requirements shall apply while driving during the times
when lights are required:
(i) When there is no oncoming vehicle within five
hundred feet (500'), the driver shall use an upper distribution of
light; provided, that a lower distribution of light may be used when
Change 10, July 10, 2006 15-12
fog, dust, or other atmospheric conditions make it desirable for
reasons of safety, and when within the corporate limits of the City
of Cleveland, there is sufficient light to render clearly discernable
persons and vehicles on the street, highway, or road at a distance
of five hundred feet (500') ahead and when following another
vehicle within five hundred feet (500'); and
(ii) When within five hundred feet (500') of an oncoming
vehicle, a driver shall use a distribution of light so aimed that the
glaring rays therefrom are not directed into the eyes of the
oncoming driver.
(b) Headlights shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-9-406, prohibiting glaring and dazzling
lights, if the headlights are of a type customarily employed by
manufacturers of automobiles and in addition are equipped with some
anti-glare device approved by the Tennessee Department of Safety.
(c) No non-emergency vehicle shall operate or install emergency
flashing light systems, such as strobe, wig-wag, or other flashing lights
within the headlight assembly or grill area of the vehicle; provided,
however, that a school bus may operate a flashing, wig-wag lighting
system within the headlight assembly of the vehicle when the vehicle's
visual stop signs are actuated for receiving or discharging school children.
(d) Auxiliary road lighting lamps may be used, but not more
than two (2) of such lamps shall be lighted at any one (1) time in addition
to the two (2) required headlights.
(e) No spotlight or auxiliary lamp shall be so aimed upon
approaching another vehicle that any part of the high intensity portion
of the beam therefrom is directed beyond the left side of the motor vehicle
upon which the spotlight or auxiliary lamp is mounted, nor more than one
hundred feet (100') ahead of such motor vehicle.
(f) Each lamp and headlight required under this section shall
be in good condition and operational.
(3) (a) Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with two (2) red tail
lamps and two (2) red stoplights on the rear of such vehicle, and one (1)
tail lamp and one (1) stoplight shall be on each side, except that
passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1939,
trucks manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1968, trucks
manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1968, and motorcycles
and motor-driven cycles shall have at least one (1) red tail lamp and one
(1) red stoplight.
(b) No non-emergency vehicle shall operate or install emergency
flashing light systems such as strobe, wig-wag, or other flashing lights in
tail light lamp, stoplight area, or factory installed emergency flasher and
backup light area; provided, however, that the foregoing prohibition shall
not apply to the utilization of a continuously flashing light system on a
Change 10, July 10, 2006 15-13
motorcycle. For the purposes of this part, "continuously flashing light
system" means a brake light system on a motorcycle in which the brake
lamp pulses rapidly for no more than five (5) seconds when the brake is
applied, and then converts to a continuous light as a normal brake lamp
until such time as the brake is released.
(c) The stoplight shall be so arranged as to be actuated by the
application of the service or foot brake and shall be capable of being seen
and distinguished from a distance of one hundred feet (100') to the rear
of a motor vehicle in normal daylight, but shall not project a glaring or
dazzling light.
(d) The stoplight may be incorporated with the tail lamp.
(e) Each lamp and stoplight required under this section shall be
in good condition and operational.
(4) (a) No vehicle operated on any street, highway or road within
the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland shall be equipped with any
flashing red or white light or any combination of red or white lights which
displays to the front of such vehicle except school buses, a passenger
motor vehicle operated by a rural mail carrier of the United States postal
service while performing the duties of a rural mail carrier, authorized law
enforcement vehicles only when used in combination with a flashing blue
light, and emergency vehicles used in firefighting, including ambulances,
emergency vehicles used in firefighting which are owned or operated by
the division of forestry, firefighting vehicles, rescue vehicles, privately
owned vehicles of regular or volunteer firefighters certified in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 55-9-201(c), or other emergency vehicles used in
firefighting owned, operated, or subsidized by the governing body of any
county or municipality.
(b) Any emergency rescue vehicle owned, titled and operated by
a state chartered rescue squad, a member of the Tennessee Association
of Rescue Squads, privately owned vehicles of regular or volunteer
firefighters certified in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-9-201(c), and
marked with lettering at least three inches (3") in size and displayed on
the left and right sides of the vehicle designating it an "Emergency
Rescue Vehicle," any authorized civil defense emergency vehicle
displaying the appropriate civil defense agency markings of at least three
inches (3"), and any ambulance or vehicle equipped to provide emergency
medical services properly licensed as required in the State of Tennessee
and displaying the proper markings, shall also be authorized to be lighted
in one (1) or more of the following manners:
(i) A red or red/white visibar type with public address
system;
(ii) A red or red/white oscillating type light; and
(iii) Blinking red or red/white lights, front and rear.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 15-14
(c) Any vehicle, other than a school bus, a passenger motor
vehicle operated by a rural mail carrier of the United States postal
service while performing the duties of a rural mail carrier or an
emergency vehicle authorized by this section to display flashing red or
red/white lights, or authorized law enforcement vehicles using red, white,
and blue lights in combination, that displays any such lights shall be
considered in violation of this subsection.
(d) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary,
nothing in this section shall prohibit a highway maintenance or utility
vehicle, or any other type vehicle or equipment participating, in any
fashion, with highway or utility construction, maintenance, or inspection,
from operating a white, amber, or white and amber light system on any
location on such vehicle or equipment, other than in the tailgate lamp,
stoplight area, or factory installed emergency flasher and backup light
area, if such light system is a strobe, flashing, oscillating, or revolving
system, while the vehicle or equipment is parked upon, or entering or
leaving any highway or utility construction, maintenance, repair or
inspection site. A vehicle described in this subsection may display either:
(i) A white light system within the headlight assembly
or grill area or that displays to the front of the vehicle; or
(ii) An amber light system on any location on such vehicle
other that in the taillight lamp, stoplight area, or factory installed
emergency flasher and backup light area, if such light system is
flashing, oscillating, or revolving, while the vehicle is engaged in
repair or maintenance work on or near any public highway.
(e) As used in subsection (4)(d), "utility" means any person,
municipality, county, metropolitan government, cooperative, board,
commission, district, or any entity created or authorized by public act,
private act, or general law to provide electricity, natural gas, water, waste
water services, telephone service, or any combination thereof, for sale to
consumers in any particular service area. As used herein, "cooperative"
means any cooperative providing utility services including, but not
limited to, electric or telephone services, or both.
(f) Nothing in this subsection imposes any duty or obligation to
install or utilize the lighting systems allowed in this section.
(5) A violation of any of the provisions of this section is punishable by
a fine of not more that $50.00 plus court costs and litigation tax, if applicable.
(1981 Code, § 14-569, as replaced by Ord. #2006-19, June 2006)
15-134. Wearing of seat belts. (1) As used in this section, the term
"passenger motor vehicle" shall mean a passenger motor vehicle as that term is
defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-9-603.
(2) No person shall operate a passenger motor vehicle on any street or
highway within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland, unless the person
Change 17, July 23, 2018 15-15
operating the vehicle and all front seat passengers four (4) years of age or older
are properly restrained by a safety belt at all times the vehicle is in forward
motion.
(3) No person age four (4) years or older shall ride as a front seat
passenger in a passenger motor vehicle which is operated on any street or
highway within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland, unless said front
seat passenger is properly restrained by a safety belt at all times the vehicle is
in forward motion.
(4) No person between sixteen (16) years of age and up to and through
the age of seventeen (17) years of age shall operate a passenger motor vehicle,
or ride as a passenger in a passenger motor vehicle, on any street or highway
within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland, unless such operator or
passenger is properly restrained by a safety belt at all times the vehicle is in
forward motion. Operators and passengers who are between the ages of sixteen
(16) and up through the age of seventeen (17) must wear a safety belt while
occupying any seat in such a passenger motor vehicle.
(5) No person with a learner's permit or intermediate driver license
shall operate a passenger motor vehicle on any street or highway within the
corporate limits of the City of Cleveland, unless the operator and all passengers
between the ages of four (4) and seventeen (17) are properly restrained by a
safety belt at all times the vehicle is in forward motion. All passengers who are
between the ages of four (4) and seventeen (17) must wear a safety belt while
occupying any seat in such a passenger motor vehicle.
(6) The requirements of this section shall not apply to:
(a) A passenger or operator with a physical disability which
prevents appropriate restraint in a safety seat or a safety belt; provided,
that the condition is duly certified in writing by a physician who shall
state the nature of the disability, as well as the reason a restraint is
inappropriate.
(b) A passenger motor vehicle operated by a rural letter carrier
of the United States Postal Service while performing the duties of a rural
letter carrier.
(c) Salespersons or mechanics employed by an automobile
dealer who, in the course of their employment, test-drive a motor vehicle,
if the dealership customarily test-drives fifty (50) or more motor vehicles
a day, and if the test-drives occur within one (1) mile of the location of the
dealership;
(d) Water, gas, and electric meter readers, and utility workers,
while the meter reader or utility worker is:
(i) Emerging from and reentering a vehicle at frequent
intervals; and
(ii) Operating the vehicle at speeds not exceeding forty
miles per hour (40 mph);
Change 17, July 23, 2018 15-16
(e) A newspaper delivery motor carrier service while performing
the duties of a newspaper delivery motor carrier service; provided, that
this exemption shall only apply from the time of the actual first delivery
to the customer until the last actual delivery to the customer;
(f) A vehicle in use in a parade if operated at less than fifteen
miles per hour (15 mph);
(g) A vehicle in use in a hayride if operated at less than fifteen
miles per hour (15 mph);
(h) A vehicle crossing a highway from one field to another if
operated at less than fifteen miles per hour (15 mph).
(7) A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of thirty
dollars ($30.00) for a first offense. A second or subsequent violation of this
section shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
For any offense committed on or after January 1, 2016, a violation of this
section shall be punishable by a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a first
offense. A second or subsequent violation of this section shall be punishable by
a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (as amended by Ord. of 8/26/96, replaced by Ord.
#2015-32, Nov. 2015, and amended by Ord. #2017-51, Oct. 2017)
15-135. Trespass by motor vehicles. (1) Any person who drives,
parks, stands, or otherwise operates a motor vehicle on, through or within a
parking area, driving area or roadway located on privately owned property
which is provided for use by patrons, customers or employees of business
establishments upon such property, or adjoining property or for use otherwise
in connection with activities conducted upon such property, or adjoining
property, after such person has been requested or ordered to leave the property
or to cease doing any of the foregoing actions shall be guilty of a civil offense.
A request or order under this section may be given by a law enforcement officer
or by the owner, lessee, or other person having the right to use or control of the
property, or any authorized agent or representative thereof, including, but not
limited to, private security guards hired to parol the property.
(2) As used in this section, "motor vehicle" includes an automobile,
truck, van, bus, recreational vehicle, camper, motorcycle, motor bike, mo-ped,
go-cart, all terrain vehicle, dune buggy, and any other vehicle propelled by
motor.
(3) A property owner, lessee or other person having the right to the use
or control of property may post signs or other notices upon a parking area,
driving area or roadway giving notice of this section and warning that violators
will be prosecuted; provided, however, that the posting of signs or notices shall
not be a requirement to prosecution under this section and failure to post signs
or notices shall not be defense to prosecution hereunder. (1981 Code, § 15-130,
modified)
Change 16, December 14, 2018 15-17
15-136. [Repealed.] This section was repealed by Ord. dated 3/24/97.
(Ord. of June 1995, as amended by Ord. of 7/22/96 and repealed by Ord. of
3/24/97)
15-137. Financial responsibility. (1) Effective January 1, 2002, every
vehicle driven on city streets and the public roads of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee, must be in compliance with the Tennessee Financial Responsibility
law.
(2) At the time a driver of a motor vehicle is charged with any moving
violation under title 55 of the Tennessee Code Annotated, chapters 8 and 10,
parts 1 through 5, or chapter 50; or any city ordinance regulating the operation
of motor vehicles within the city under this code of ordinances; or the time of an
accident for which notice is required under Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-10-106, the officer shall request evidence of financial responsibility as
required by this section. In case of an accident for which notice is required
under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-106, the officer shall request such
evidence from all drivers involved in the accident, without regard to apparent
or actual fault.
For purposes of section 15-137, "Proof of financial responsibility" means:
(a) Documentation, such as the declaration page of an insurance
policy, an insurance binder, or an insurance card from an insurance
company authorized to do business in Tennessee, stating that a policy of
insurance meeting the requirements of the Tennessee Financial
Responsibility law of 1997 has been issued; or
(b) A certificate, valid for one (1) year, issued by the
Commission of the Department of Safety, stating that a cash deposit or
bond of the amount required by the Tennessee Financial Responsibility
law of 1997 has been paid or filed with the commissioner, or has qualified
as a self-insurer under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-12-111; or
(c) The motor vehicle being operated at the time of the violation
was owned by a carrier subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of
Safety or the Interstate Commerce Commission, or was owned by the
United States, the State of Tennessee, or any political subdivision
thereof, and that such motor vehicle was being operated with the owner's
consent.
(3) It is an offense to fail to provide evidence of financial responsibility
pursuant to this section. Any violation of this section is punishable by a fine of
not more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
(4) The fine imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other
fine imposed for any other violations of state law or any other ordinance under
the city code.
(5) On or before the court date for the hearing on the citation for
failure to provide financial responsibility as required by this section, the person
so charged may submit evidence of compliance with this section at the time of
Change 16, December 14, 2018 15-18
the violation. If the city judge is satisfied that in compliance was in effect at the
time of the violation, the charge of failure to provide evidence of financial
responsibility may be dismissed. (as added by Ord. of 11/13/2001)
15-138. Child restraint systems. (1) Any person transporting a child,
under one (1) year of age, or any child weighing twenty (20) pounds or less, in
a motor vehicle upon a road, street or highway within the corporate limits of the
City of Cleveland, Tennessee, is responsible for the protection of the child and
properly using a child passenger restraint system in a rear-facing position,
meeting federal motor safety standards in the rear seat if available or according
to the child safety restraint system or vehicle manufacturer's instructions.
(2) Any person transporting any child, one (1) through three (3) years
of age weighing greater than twenty (20) pounds, in a motor vehicle upon a road,
street or highway within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee, is responsible for the protection of the child and properly using a
child passenger restraint system in a forward-facing position, meeting federal
motor vehicle safety standards in the rear seat if available or according to the
child safety restraint system or vehicle manufacturer's instructions.
(3) (a) Any person transporting any child, four (4) through eight (8)
years of age and measuring less than four feet, nine inches (4'9") in
height, in a passenger motor vehicle upon a road, street or highway
within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee, is
responsible for the protection of the child and properly using a belt
positioning booster seat system, meeting federal motor vehicle safety
standards in the rear seat, if available, or according to the child safety
restraint system or vehicle manufacturer's instructions.
(b) If a child is not capable of being safely transported in a
conventional child passenger restraint system as provided for in this
subsection, a specially modified, professionally manufactured restraint
system meeting the intent of this subsection shall be in use; provided that
the provisions of this subsection shall not be satisfied by use of the
vehicle's standard lap or shoulder safety belts independent of any other
child passenger restraint system. A motor vehicle operator who is
transporting a child in a specially modified, professionally manufactured
child passenger restraint system shall possess a copy of the physician's
signed prescription that authorizes the professional manufacture of the
specially modified child passenger restraint system.
(c) A person shall not be charged with a violation of this
subsection if such person presents a copy of the physician's prescription
in compliance with the provisions of this subdivision to the arresting
officer at the time of the alleged violation.
(d) A person charged with a violation of this section may, on or
before the court date, submit a copy of the physician's prescription and
evidence of possession of a specially modified, professionally
Change 16, December 14, 2018 15-19
manufactured child passenger restraint system to the court. If the court
is satisfied that compliance was in effect at the time of the violation, the
charge for violating the provisions of this section may be dismissed.
(4) Any person transporting any child, nine (9) through twelve (12)
years of age, or any child through twelve (12) years of age, measuring four feet,
nine inches (4'9") or more in height, in a passenger motor vehicle upon a road,
street or highway within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee, is responsible for the protection of the child and properly using a
seatbelt system meeting federal motor vehicle safety standards. It is
recommended that any such child be placed in the rear seat if available.
(5) Any person transporting any child, thirteen (13) through fifteen
(15) years of age, in a passenger motor vehicle upon a road, street or highway
within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee, is responsible
for the protection of the child and properly using a passenger restraint system,
including safety belts, meeting federal motor vehicle safety standards.
(6) No more than one citation per vehicle per occasion may be issued
for a violation of any of the foregoing subsections.
(7) If the driver of a vehicle who violates any of the foregoing
subsections is neither a parent or legal guardian of the child and the child's
parent or legal guardian is present in the vehicle, the parent or legal guardian
is responsible for insuring that the provisions of the foregoing subsections are
complied with. If no parent or legal guardian is present in the vehicle at the
time of the violation, then the driver of the vehicle is solely responsible for
compliance with the foregoing subsections.
(8) As used in this section, the term "passenger motor vehicle" means
any motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten
thousand pounds (10,000 lbs.) or less, that is not used as a public or livery
conveyance for passengers. A "passenger motor vehicle"as used in this section
does not apply to motor vehicles which are not required by federal law to be
equipped with safety belts.
(9) A violation of 15-138(1), 15-138(2), or 15-138(3) will subject the
offender to a fine in an amount not to exceed $50, plus court costs and litigation
tax, if applicable. A violation of 15-138(4) or 15-138(5) will subject the offender
to a fine in the amount not to exceed $50. However, a violation of 15-138(4) or
15-138(5) will not result in the imposition of any court costs or litigation tax. (as
added by Ord. of 4/8/2002, replaced by Ord. #2004-29, Aug. 2004, and amended
by Ord. #2004-37, Oct. 2004, and Ord. #2005-49, Jan. 2006)
15-139. Transporting child in truck bed. (1) No person shall
transport a child between six (6) years of age and under twelve (12) years of age
in the bed of a truck with a manufacturer's ton rating not exceeding threequarter
(3/4) ton and having a pickup body style.
(2) The provisions of this section do not apply to a person transporting
such child in the bed of such vehicle when such vehicle is being used as part of
Change 16, December 14, 2018 15-20
an organized parade, procession, or other ceremonial event, and when such
vehicle is not exceeding the speed of twenty miles per hour (20 m.p.h.).
(3) The provisions of this section do not apply when the child being
transported is involved in agricultural activities.
(4) A violation of this section will subject the offender to a fine in an
amount not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), which does not include applicable
court costs. (as added by Ord. #2004-15, May 2004)
15-140. Window tinting on motor vehicles. (1) (a) It is unlawful for
any person to operate upon a public highway, street, or road within the
corporate limits of the City of Cleveland any motor vehicle registered in
this state, in which any window, which has a visible light transmittance
equal to, but not less than, that specified in the Federal Motor Vehicle
Safety Standard No. 205, has been altered, treated or replaced by the
affixing, application or installation of any material which:
(i) Has a visible light transmittance of less that thirtyfive
percent (35%); or
(ii) With the exception of the manufacturer's standard
installed shade band, reduces the visible light transmittance in the
windshield below seventy percent (70%).
(b) Any vehicle model permitted by federal regulations to be
equipped with certain windows tinted so as to not conform to the
specifications of § 15-140(1)(a) is exempt from § 15-140(1)(a) with respect
to those certain windows. Likewise, vehicles bearing commercial license
plates shall be exempt from the specifications of § 15-140(1)(a) for those
windows rearward of the front doors. Section 15-140(1)(a) shall not be
construed in any way to exempt the front door windows of any vehicle of
any kind from the specifications set forth in § 15-140(1)(a).
(2) (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 15-140(1)(a) to the
contrary, any person with a medical condition that is adversely affected
by ultraviolet light may submit a statement to the Tennessee Department
of Safety from that person's physician certifying that the person has a
medical condition which requires reduction of light transmission in the
windows of such person's vehicle in excess of the standards established
in § 15-140(1)(a). If an exemption is ultimately granted by the Tennessee
Department of Safety, then the Commissioner of the Tennessee
Department of Safety will supply a certificate or decal, indicating the
degree of exemption, to the applicant. The applicant shall then display
the certificate or decal in the motor vehicle at all times. If the exemption
certificate or decal is displayed in the vehicle, then the operator of the
vehicle with tinted windows shall be exempt from the provisions of
§ 15-140(1)(a) to the extent set forth on the exemption certificate or decal.
(3) It is probable cause for a full-time police officer of this city to detain
a motor vehicle being operated on the public streets, highways or roads of this
Change 16, December 14, 2018 15-21
city when such officer has a reasonable belief that the motor vehicle is in
violation of § 15-140(1)(a) for the purpose of conducting a field comparison test.
(4) It is a civil offense for the operator of a motor vehicle to refuse to
submit to the field comparison test when directed to do so by a full time, salaried
police officer, or for any person to otherwise violate any provisions of this
section.
(5) A violation of this section is punishable by a fine of not more that
$50.00 plus court costs and litigation tax, if applicable. (as added by
Ord. #2006-20, June 2006)
15-141. Texting while operating motor vehicles. (1) For the
purpose of this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Mobile telephone" means a cellular, analog, wireless or
digital device that provides for voice communication and for data
communication other than by voice; and
(b) "Personal digital assistant" means a wireless electronic
communication device that provides for data communication other than
by voice.
(2) No person while driving a motor vehicle on any public road or
highway within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland shall use a
hand-held mobile telephone or a hand-held personal digital assistant to transmit
or read a written message; provided, that a driver does not transmit or read a
written message for the purpose of this subsection if such driver reads, selects
or enters a telephone number or name in a hand-held mobile telephone or a
personal digital assistant for the purpose of making or receiving a telephone
call.
(3) The provisions of this section shall only apply to a person driving
a motor vehicle that is in motion at the time a written message from a mobile
telephone or hand-held personal digital assistant is transmitted or read by such
person.
(4) A violation of any provision of this section is a municipal ordinance
violation, subject only to imposition of a civil penalty, not to exceed fifty dollars
($50.00), and court costs, not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00), including, but not
limited to, any statutory fees of officers. No state or local litigation taxes shall
be applicable to a case prosecuted under this section.
(5) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following
persons:
(a) Officers of the state, or of any county, city or town, charged
with the enforcement of the laws of the state, when in the actual
discharge of their official duties;
(b) Campus police officers and public safety officers, as defined
by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 49-7-118, when in the actual discharge
of their official duties;
Change 17, July 23, 2018 15-22
(c) Emergency medical technicians, emergency medical
technician-paramedics, and firefighters, both volunteer and career, when
in the actual discharge of their official duties; and
(d) Emergency management agency officers of the state, or of
any county, city or town, when in the actual discharge of their official
duties.
(6) A traffic citation that is based solely upon a violation of this section
shall be considered a nonmoving traffic violation and no points shall be added
to a driver record for such violation. (as added by Ord. #2009-61, July 2009)
15-142. Engine compression braking devices. (1) All truck tractor
and semi-trailers operating within the City of Cleveland shall conform to the
visual exhaust system inspection requirements, 40 CFR 202.22, of the Interstate
Motor Carriers Noise Emission Standards.
(2) A motor vehicle does not conform to the visual exhaust system
inspection requirements referenced in subsection (1) if inspection of the exhaust
system of the motor carrier vehicle discloses that the system:
(a) Has a defect that adversely affects sound reduction, such as
exhaust gas leaks or alteration or deterioration of muffler elements.
(Small traces of soot on flexible exhaust pipe sections shall not constitute
a violation.); or
(b) Is not equipped with either a muffler or other noise
dissipative device, such as a turbocharger (supercharger driven by
exhaust by gases); or
(c) Is equipped with a cut out, bypass, or similar device, unless
such device is designed as an exhaust gas driven cargo unloading system.
(3) Violations of this section shall subject the offender to a civil penalty
of fifty dollars ($50.00) per offense, plus applicable litigation taxes and court
costs. (as added by Ord. #2017-10, April 2017)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-23
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
SECTION
15-201. Authorized emergency vehicles defined.
15-202. Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-203. Operation of other vehicles upon approach.
15-204. Following emergency vehicles.
15-205. Running over fire hoses, etc.
15-201. Authorized emergency vehicles defined. Authorized
emergency vehicles shall be fire department vehicles, police vehicles, and such
ambulances and other emergency vehicles as are designated by the chief of
police.
15-202. Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.1 (1) The
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency
call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when
responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the
privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated.
(2) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(a) Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
(c) Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not
endanger life or property.
(d) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
(3) The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of audible and visible signals
meeting the requirements of such applicable laws of this sate, except that an
authorized emergency vehicle operating as a police vehicle may be equipped
with or display a red light only in combination with a blue light visible from in
front of the vehicle.
(4) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
1Municipal code reference
Operation of other vehicle upon the approach of emergency vehicles:
§ 15-501.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-24
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1981 Code,
§ 14-11, modified)
15-203. Operation of other vehicles upon approach. (1) Upon the
immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible
and visual signals required by § 15-202, or of a police vehicle properly and
lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle
shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel
to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear
of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
(2) This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway. (1981 Code, § 14-12)
15-204. Following emergency vehicles. No driver of any vehicle shall
follow any authorized emergency vehicle apparently traveling in response to an
emergency call closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive or park such vehicle
within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1981 Code, § 14-173, modified)
15-205. Running over fire hoses, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive over any hose lines or other equipment of the fire department
except in obedience to the direction of a fireman or policeman. (1981 Code,
§ 14-174, modified)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-25
CHAPTER 3
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION
15-301. In general.
15-302. At intersections.
15-303. In school zones.
15-301. In general. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
drive a motor vehicle upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of
thirty (30) miles per hour except where official signs have been posted indicating
other speed limits as established by the transportation director in accordance
with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, in which cases the posted
speed limit shall apply. (1981 Code, § 14-232, modified)
15-302. At intersections. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or drive a motor vehicle through any intersection at a rate of speed in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour unless such person is driving on a street regulated by
traffic control signals or signs which require traffic to stop or yield on the
intersecting streets. (1981 Code, § 14-233, modified)
15-303. In school zones. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-8-152, the city shall have the authority to enact special speed limits in
school zones. Such special speed limits shall be enacted based on an engineering
investigation; shall not be less than fifteen (15) miles per hour; and shall be in
effect only when proper signs are posted with a warning flasher or flashers in
operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such special speed
limit enacted and in effect in accordance with this paragraph.
In school zones where the city council has not established special speed
limits as provided for above, any person who shall drive at a speed exceeding
twenty (20) miles per hour when passing a school during a recess period when
a warning flasher or flashers are in operation, or during a period of forty (40)
minutes before the opening hour of a school, or a period of forty (40) minutes
after the closing hour of a school, while children are actually going to or leaving
school, shall be prima facie guilty of reckless driving. (1981 Code, § 14-234,
modified)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-26
CHAPTER 4
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION
15-401. Signals for turns.
15-402. Right turns.
15-403. Left turns on two-way roadways.
15-404. Left turns on other than two-way roadways.
15-405. Restricted turn signs.
15-406. Limitations on "U" turns.
15-401. Signals for turns. (1) Every driver who intends to start, stop
or turn, or partly turn from a direct line, shall first see that such movement can
be made in safety, and whenever the operation of any other vehicle may be
affected by such movement, shall give a signal required in this section, plainly
visible to the driver of such other vehicle of the intention to make such
movement.
(2) The signal herein required shall be given by means of the hand and
arm, or by some mechanical or electrical device approved by the department of
safety, in the manner herein specified. Whenever the signal is given by means
of the hand and arm, the driver shall indicate the intention to start, stop, or
turn, or partly turn by extending the hand and arm from and beyond the left
side of the vehicle, in the following manner:
(a) For left turn, or to pull to the left, the arm shall be extended
in a horizontal position straight from and level with the shoulder;
(b) For right turn, or pull to the right, the arm shall be extended
upward; and
(c) For slowing down or to stop, the arm shall be extended
downward.
(3) Such signals shall be given continuously for a distance of a least
fifty feet (50') before stopping, turning, partly turning, or materially altering the
course of the vehicle.
(4) Drivers having once given a hand, electrical or mechanical device
signal, must continue the course thus indicated, unless they alter the original
signal and take care that drivers of vehicles and pedestrians have seen and are
aware of the change.
(5) Drivers receiving a signal from another driver shall keep their
vehicles under complete control and shall be able to avoid an accident resulting
from a misunderstanding of such signal.
(6) Drivers of vehicles, standing or stopped at the curb or edge before
moving such vehicles, shall give signals of their intention to move into traffic,
as hereinbefore provided, before turning in the direction the vehicle shall
proceed from the curb.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-27
15-402. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right
turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
roadway. (1981 Code, § 14-271, modified)
15-403. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the
right of the intersection of the center lines of the two roadways. (1981 Code,
§ 14-271, modified)
15-404. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any
intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the
roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection
shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available
to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly
as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such
direction upon the roadway being entered. (1981 Code, § 14-271, modified)
15-405. Restricted turn signs. All persons operating vehicles on the
streets of the city shall obey all authorized signs prohibiting right, left or "U"
turns. (1981 Code, § 14-273, modified)
15-406. Limitations on "U" turns. No person operating a vehicle in the
city shall turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
street in a business district or upon any other street unless such movement can
be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. (1981 Code,
§ 14-274, modified)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-28
CHAPTER 5
STOPPING AND YIELDING
SECTION
15-501. Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-502. Vehicle entering highway from private road, parking lot, driveway or
alley.
15-503. To prevent obstructing an intersection.
15-504. At railroad crossings.
15-505. Vehicle entering through highway or stop intersection.
15-506. At "yield" signs.
15-507. At traffic control signals generally.
15-508. At flashing traffic control signals.
15-509. At pedestrian control signals.
15-510. Stops to be signaled.
15-501. Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles.1 Upon
the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and/or visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state,
the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive to a position parallel
to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear
of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
15-502. Vehicle entering highway from private road, parking lot,
driveway or alley. The driver of a vehicle emerging from private road, parking
lot, driveway or alley shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto
any sidewalk, street or highway and shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
approaching on the street or highway. Such vehicles shall not drive on the
sidewalk, street or highway until they have yielded and they can safely proceed
without colliding or interfering with pedestrians or vehicles. (1981 Code,
§ 14-256, modified, as amended by Ord. of 12/13/99)
15-503. To prevent obstructing an intersection. No driver shall
enter any intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of such intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he
is operating without obstructing the passage of traffic in or on the intersecting
1Municipal code reference
Special privileges of emergency vehicles: title 15, chapter 2.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-29
street or crosswalk. This provision shall be effective notwithstanding any traffic
control signal indication to proceed. (1981 Code, § 14-257, modified)
15-504. At railroad crossings. Any driver of a vehicle approaching a
railroad grade crossing shall stop within not less than fifteen (15) feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed further while any of the
following conditions exist:
(1) A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the approach of a railroad train.
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman signals the
approach of a railroad train.
(3) A railroad train is approaching within approximately fifteen
hundred (1500) feet of the highway crossing and is emitting an audible signal
indicating its approach.
(4) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to the crossing. (1981 Code, § 14-258, modified)
15-505. Vehicle entering through highway or stop intersection.
(1) The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop
completely before entering a crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or
if there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver or operator
has a view of the approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering
the intersection. The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop as
required herein at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right
of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through
highway or which are approaching so closely on the through highway as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
(2) The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop in
obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or
more entrances thereto although not part of the through highway. The driver
shall yield the right of way to vehicles not obliged to stop which are within the
intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(1981 Code, §§ 14-253 and 14-254, modified, as amended by Ord. of 12/13/99)
15-506. At "yield" signs. The drivers of all vehicles shall yield the right
of way to approaching vehicles before proceeding at all places where "yield"
signs have been posted. (1981 Code, §§ 14-253 and 14-255, modified)
15-507. At traffic control signals generally. Traffic control signals
exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored
lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, shall show the following colors
only and shall apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green alone, or "Go":
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-30
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits such
turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Steady yellow alone, or "Caution":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the
red or "Stop" signal is exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(3) Steady red alone, or "Stop":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go"
is shown alone. Provided, however, that generally a right turn on a red
signal shall be permitted at all intersections within the city, provided
that the prospective turning car comes to a full and complete stop before
turning and that the turning car yields the right of way to pedestrians
and cross traffic traveling in accordance with their traffic signal.
However, said turn shall not endanger other traffic lawfully using said
intersection. A right turn on red shall be permitted at all intersections
except those clearly marked by a "No Turns On Red" sign, which may be
erected by the city at intersections which the city decides require no right
turns on red in the interest of traffic safety.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(4) Steady red with green arrow:
(a) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk
and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(5) In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section
shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have
no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-31
such sign or marking the stop shall be made a vehicle length short of the signal.
(1981 Code, § 14-545, modified)
15-508. At flashing traffic control signals. (1) Whenever an
illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal placed
or erected in the city it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(a) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated
with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked,
or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed
shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(b) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(2) This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct
of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
the rules set forth in § 15-504 of this code. (1981 Code, § 14-547, modified)
15-509. At pedestrian control signals. Wherever special pedestrian
control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't Walk" have been
placed or erected by the city, such signals shall apply as follows:
(1) Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
(2) Wait or Don't Walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway
in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety
zone while the wait signal is showing. (1981 Code, § 14-546)
15-510. Stops to be signaled. No person operating a motor vehicle
shall stop such vehicle, whether in obedience to a traffic sign or signal or
otherwise, without first signaling his intention in accordance with the
requirements of the state law,1 except in an emergency.
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-143.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 15-32
CHAPTER 6
PARKING
SECTION
15-601. Generally.
15-602. Angle parking.
15-603. Occupancy of more than one space.
15-604. Designation of spaces.
15-605. Where prohibited.
15-606. Loading and unloading zones.
15-607. Presumption with respect to illegal parking.
15-608. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
15-609. Parking in alleys.
15-610. Parking for display of vehicle for sale or repair.
15-611. Lamps on parked vehicles.
15-612. Buses; loading and unloading on streets, etc.
15-613. Use of bus, taxicab stands by other vehicles restricted.
15-614. Large vehicle and trailer parking restrictions in residential areas.
15-601. Generally. No person shall leave any motor vehicle unattended
on any street without first setting the brakes thereon, stopping the motor,
removing the ignition key, and turning the front wheels of such vehicle toward
the nearest curb or gutter of the street.
Except as hereinafter provided, every vehicle parked upon a street within
this city shall be so parked that its right wheels are approximately parallel to
and within eighteen (18) inches of the right edge or curb of the street. On
one-way streets where the city has not placed signs prohibiting the same,
vehicles may be permitted to park on the left side of the street, and in such cases
the left wheels shall be required to be within eighteen (18) inches of the left edge
or curb of the street.
Notwithstanding anything else in this code to the contrary, no person,
unless residing within the fire limits, shall park or leave a vehicle parked on any
public street or alley within the fire limits between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and
5:00 A.M. or on any other public street or alley for more than seventy-two (72)
consecutive hours without the prior approval of the chief of police.
Furthermore, no person shall wash, grease, or work on any vehicle, except
to make repairs necessitated by an emergency, while such vehicle is parked on
a public street. (1981 Code, § 14-291, modified)
15-602. Angle parking. On those streets which have been signed or
marked by the city for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
other than at the angle indicated by such signs or markings. No person shall
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-33
angle park any vehicle which has a trailer attached thereto or which has a
length in excess of twenty-four (24) feet. (1981 Code, § 14-292, modified)
15-603. Occupancy of more than one space. No person shall park a
vehicle in any designated parking space during the restricted or regulated time
applicable to the parking zone in which such space is located so that any part
of such vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space, except that a vehicle which is of a size too
large to be parked within a single designated space shall be permitted to occupy
two (2) adjoining parking spaces. (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
15-604. Designation of spaces. The city traffic engineer shall be
responsible for having the parking space to be used designated by appropriate
markings upon the curb and/or the pavement of the street. Parking spaces so
designated shall be of appropriate length and width so as to be accessible from
the traffic lanes of such street. (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
15-605. Where prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle in violation
of any sign placed or erected by the state or city, nor:
(1) On a sidewalk; provided, however, a bicycle may be parked on a
sidewalk if it does not impede the normal and reasonable movement of
pedestrian or other traffic. Notwithstanding the prohibition against parking a
motor vehicle on a sidewalk, a vehicle may be parked on a sidewalk if the city
has posted a sign specifically allowing vehicles to park on a sidewalk on a
specific street, or a portion thereof. Before posting a sign allowing parking on
a sidewalk, the public works department shall determine that parking on a
sidewalk on a specific street or a portion thereof is necessary due to specific
traffic considerations which make it necessary to allow such parking.
Before the posting of any sign allowing parking on any sidewalk, the
public works department shall also make reasonable efforts to notify nearby
residents and give them opportunity to comment before any signs are posted.
(2) In front of a public or private driveway;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
(5) Within a pedestrian crosswalk;
(6) Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(7) Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach of any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(8) Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(9) Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy-five feet (75') of such entrance when properly signposted;
(10) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-34
(11) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
(12) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
(13) In a parking space clearly identified by an official sign as being
reserved for the physically handicapped, unless, however, the person driving the
vehicle is (a) physically handicapped, or (b) parking such vehicle for the benefit
of a physically handicapped person. A vehicle parking in such a space shall
display a certificate of identification or a disabled veteran's license plate issued
under Tennessee Code Annotated, title 55, chapter 21.
(14) Fire lanes. (1981 Code, § 14-308, modified, as amended by Ord. of
11/13/2001, and Ord. #2009-68, Aug. 2009)
15-606. Loading and unloading zones. No person shall park a vehicle
for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers or merchandise in any place marked by the city as a
loading and unloading zone. (1981 Code, §§ 14-346 and 14-347, modified)
15-607. Presumption with respect to illegal parking. When any
unoccupied vehicle is found parked in violation of any provision of this chapter,
there shall be a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle
is responsible for such illegal parking. (1981 Code, § 14-295, modified)
15-608. Removal of illegally parked vehicles. (1) Members of the
police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or
highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated
or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by the city
under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated.
(a) When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge,
viaduct, or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
(b) When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of
the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an
extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(c) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so
parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(d) Whenever a vehicle is found to be illegally parked in a
controlled area and the records at the police department indicate that
such vehicle has more than five (5) delinquent parking tickets the same
shall be subject to impoundment as provided for herein.
(e) Whenever a vehicle is found to be parked or abandoned on
a street that has been designated as a snow or ice emergency route and
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-35
said vehicle is impeding the safe and orderly flow of traffic after the
mayor has officially proclaimed that a snow or ice emergency exists in the
city.
(2) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized
in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration
records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, the officer
shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the
fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such
vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public
garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage.
(3) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this
section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner,
or for any other reason is unable to give the notice as hereinabove provided, and
in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three (3)
days, the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of
such removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register motor
vehicles and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public
garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete
description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the
reasons for such removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle
is stored. (1981 Code, § 14-296, modified)
15-609. Parking in alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an
alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such
position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1981 Code,
§ 14-310)
15-610. Parking for display of vehicle for sale or repair. No person
shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (1981 Code, 14-311)
15-611. Lamps on parked vehicles. Any lighted head lamps upon a
parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. (1981 Code, § 14-294, modified)
15-612. Buses; loading and unloading on streets, etc. It shall be
unlawful for any owner and/or operator of any bus to allow the loading of
passengers onto, or to allow the discharge of passengers from, any omnibus
while such bus is upon any street, alley or thoroughfare of the city except where
such loading or unloading is casual, intermittent and at a place apart from any
bus terminal facility, or where the same is confined to passengers traveling to
Change 17, July 23, 2018 15-36
and from points within the city to the area within the county immediately
adjacent to the city. (1981 Code, § 12-6)
15-613. Use of bus, taxicab stands by other vehicles restricted. No
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other
than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially
designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger
vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
(1981 Code, § 14-352)
15-614. Large vehicle and trailer parking restrictions in
residential areas. (1) Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following
words or phrases shall be defined as follows:
(a) Large vehicle. "Large vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle,
or a combination of connected vehicles and/or trailers, that exceeds
twenty-five feet (25') in length or eighty inches (80") in width or
eighty-two inches (82") in height.
Large vehicle shall also include any truck with three or more axels,
or a bus or a van with a capacity of more than fifteen (15) passengers.
Large vehicle shall not mean or include pickup trucks or sport
utility vehicles, which are less than twenty-five feet (25') in length and
eighty-two inches (82") in height.
(b) Out-of-town visitor. "Out-of-town visitor" shall mean any
natural person who does not reside in the City of Cleveland and who is
temporarily visiting a resident of the city.
(c) Residential areas. "Residential areas" shall mean those
areas of the city identified as residential zoning districts to include zones
R-1, R-2 or R-3.
(d) Street. "Street" shall mean any public street, road, or
highway within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland.
(e) Trailer. "Trailer" shall mean any trailer, semitrailer, camp
trailer (including tent trailers), unmounted camper, trailer coach, or
fifth-wheel travel trailer.
(2) Large vehicle and trailer parking restrictions. Except as provided
in §§ 15-614(c) and (d) of this code, no person may park or leave standing any
large vehicle or trailer upon any street within a residential area of the City of
Cleveland between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
(3) Exceptions. The prohibitions in § 15-614(2) shall not apply to:
(a) Any person who has been issued and is in possession of a
current valid Oversized vehicle parking permit pursuant to § 15-614(4);
Change 17, July 23, 2018 15-37
(b) Any person while actually engaged in the loading or
unloading of a large vehicle or trailer but only for a period of time not to
exceed twenty-four (24) hours;
(c) Any person while actually engaged in using a large vehicle
or trailer between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. in providing
services to a residential building, including, but not limited to, cleaning
services, residential repair services, and residential construction services;
or
(d) Any properly authorized and licensed towing vehicle in the
course of providing towing services;
(e) Any person while actually engaged in making emergency
repairs to a large vehicle or trailer which preclude removal to a permitted
parking area, but only for a period of time not to exceed twenty-four (24)
hours;
(f) Any public or private agency emergency response vehicle.
(4) Oversized vehicle parking permit. An oversized vehicle parking
permit shall be considered valid subject to the requirements and limitations set
forth in this subsection.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of authorizing the issuance of
oversized vehicle parking permits is to allow owners of oversize vehicles
and trailers additional time to park their oversize vehicles and trailers on
a public street near their residences for the purpose of loading or
unloading such large vehicles and trailers, and to allow an out-of-town
visitor to park on a street near the residence that the out of-town visitor
is visiting for a limited time period.
(b) Application. The applicant shall file with the city clerk's
office a completed city application form providing all of the information
requested. The application must include the following information:
(i) The license plate number of the large vehicle or
trailer;
(ii) The City of Cleveland residence address where the
large vehicle or trailer will be parked or left;
(iii) Contact information, including a permanent address
and phone number, of the city resident where the large vehicle or
trailer will be parked or left;
(iv) The applicant's contact information, including
permanent address and phone number;
(v) The dates for which the permit is sought to be valid.
The applicant and owner of the residence that the large vehicle or
trailer will be parked shall attest to the accuracy of the information
contained in the permit under penalty of perjury.
(c) Issuance. Oversized vehicle parking permits shall be issued
on a form approved by the city. The permit shall be issued and valid only
Change 17, July 23, 2018 15-38
for the specified parking use indicated on the permit. The permit must
include the following:
(i) The license plate number of the large vehicle or
trailer;
(ii) The applicant's name;
(iii) The address or location adjacent to which the large
vehicle or trailer is approved to park; and
(iv) The date the permit was issued;
(v) The date the permit expires; and
(vi) The dates that the permit is valid.
(d) Display. All permits shall be placed in the lower driver's side
of the windshield of the large vehicle or trailer in a manner that is clearly
visible from the exterior. If the large vehicle or trailer does not have a
windshield, the permit must be properly affixed to the outside of the large
vehicle or trailer on the left side of the front of the vehicle. Failure to
properly display the permit shall constitute a violation of this section.
(e) Permitted parking location. A vehicle with a current and
valid oversized vehicle parking permit shall only park on the public street
immediately adjacent to the address noted on the issued permit and may
not park adjacent to any address not indicated on the issued permit.
(f) Duration; expiration. City residents: A city resident may
apply for an oversized vehicle parking permit, which shall be valid for two
(2) specified periods not to exceed five (5) consecutive calendar days each,
and shall expire at 11:59 P.M. on the expiration date indicated on the
permit. After expiration, the oversized vehicle parking permit shall be
invalid.
A resident may apply for three (3) permits annually.
Out of town visitors: Out of town visitors may park an oversized
vehicle with a city issued parking permit for a period of seven (7) days,
with an option for a second seven (7) day period, not to exceed fourteen
(14) consecutive days.
An out of town visitor may apply for three (3) seven (7) day permits
annually.
(5) Enforcement. Enforcement actions may be taken as follows:
(a) Parking violations. Any person who violates any provision
of this section shall be subject to all of the enforcement provisions of title
15, chapter 7, §§ 15-701 through 15-707 of the Cleveland Municipal Code.
In addition, if an oversized vehicle or trailer is left illegally parked
or standing on a city street for five (5) consecutive days in violation of this
section, the oversized vehicle or trailer is subject to removal under
§ 15-705 of the Cleveland Municipal Code.
(b) Forged, altered, or counterfeit permits. Any person who
forges, alters, or counterfeits an oversized vehicle parking permit, or
displays a forged, altered, or counterfeit oversized vehicle parking permit
Change 17, July 23, 2018 15-39
shall be guilty of a civil offense, and is subject to civil penalty of fifty
dollars ($50.00) plus court costs. (as added by Ord. #2007-40, Oct. 2007,
and replaced by Ord. #2018-24, July 2018)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-40
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
15-701. Issuance of traffic citations.
15-702. Failure to obey citation.
15-703. Illegal cancellation of traffic citations.
15-704. Illegal parking.
15-705. Impoundment and immobilization of vehicles.
15-706. Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles.
15-707. Violation and penalty.
15-701. Issuance of traffic citations.1 When a police officer halts a
traffic violator other than for the purpose of giving a warning, and does not take
such person into custody under arrest, he shall take the name, address, and
operator's license number of said person, the license number of the motor vehicle
involved, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall
issue to him a written traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge
against him in the city court at a specified time. The officer, upon receiving the
written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the citation,
shall release such person from custody. It shall be unlawful for any alleged
violator to give false or misleading information as to his name or address. (1981
Code, § 14-132, modified)
15-702. Failure to obey citation. It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate his written promise to appear in court after giving said promise to an
officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the
charge for which the citation was originally issued. (1981 Code, § 14-137,
modified)
15-703. Illegal cancellation of traffic citations. It shall be unlawful
for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any
manner other than as provided by this chapter. (1981 Code, § 14-134)
15-704. Illegal parking. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver
is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this
1Municipal code reference
Issuance of citations in lieu of arrest and ordinance summonses in
non-traffic related offenses: title 6, chapter 3.
State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-63-101, et seq.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-41
code, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its license number and may take
any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and
shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a citation for the driver and/or owner
to answer for the violation by the next municipal court date during the hours
and at a place specified in the citation. (1981 Code, §§ 14-138 and 14-297,
modified)
15-705. Impoundment and immobilization of vehicles. Members
of the police department are hereby authorized, when reasonably necessary for
the security of the vehicle or to prevent obstruction of traffic, to remove from the
streets and impound any vehicle whose operator is arrested or any unattended
vehicle which is parked so as to constitute an obstruction or hazard to normal
traffic, or which has been parked for more than one (1) hour in excess of the time
allowed for parking in any place, or which has been involved in two (2) or more
violations of this title for which citations have been issued and the vehicle not
removed. Any impounded vehicle shall be stored until the owner or other person
entitled thereto claims it, gives satisfactory evidence of ownership or right to
possession, and pays all applicable fees and costs of impoundment and storage,
or until it is otherwise lawfully disposed of.
The officer may, at his discretion, immobilize the vehicle by installing on,
or attaching to such vehicle, a device designed to restrict the normal movement
of the vehicle. If the vehicle is immobilized, the officer shall affix to the vehicle
a notice in writing, on a form provided by the chief of police, advising the owner,
driver or person in charge of the vehicle that the vehicle has been immobilized
by the City of Cleveland Police Department and that release from the
immobilization may be obtained at a designated place for a fee of $50.00. It
shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove any such device
before a release is obtained.
15-706. Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles. "Abandoned motor
vehicles," as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-16-103, shall be
impounded and disposed of by the police department in accordance with the
provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 55-16-103 through 55-16-109.
15-707. Violation and penalty. Any violation of this title shall be a
civil offense punishable as follows:
(1) Traffic citations. Traffic citations shall be punishable by a civil
penalty up to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each separate offense.
(2) Parking citations. (a) Time limit parking. If the offense, and each
violation shall be considered a separate offense, is a time limit parking
violation, the offender may, prior to the next municipal court date, have
the charge against him disposed of by paying to the city clerk a fine of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each offense within twenty-four hours of the
time when such citation was attached to such vehicle. If he or she fails
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-42
to pay the citation on or before the scheduled court date, the fine shall be
thirty dollars ($30.00) for each offense.
(b) Handicapped parking. For the violation of parking in a
handicapped parking space under § 15-604(13) of this code, the offender
may be punished by a civil penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00).
(c) Upon finding that a vehicle has been parked in excess of the
time allowed and the owner of the vehicle has outstanding three (3)
unpaid delinquent parking citations on any vehicle, the officer may, at his
discretion, immobilize the vehicle by installing a boot on, or attaching to
such vehicle, a device designed to restrict the normal movement of the
vehicle. If the vehicle is immobilized, the officer shall affix to the vehicle
a notice in writing, on a form provided by the chief of police, advising the
owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle that the vehicle has been
immobilized by the City of Cleveland Police Department and that a
release from the immobilization may be obtained by payment of all fees
and expenses. Booted vehicles that remain longer than twenty-four (24)
hours may be towed and a hold will be placed on the vehicle until such
time as all fines and towing costs are resolved. It is owner's
responsibility to pay all costs associated with towing. It shall be unlawful
for any person to move, remove or attempt to remove any such device or
the vehicle before a release is obtained.
(d) Upon finding a vehicle parked in a fire lane or within 15 feet
of a fire hydrant the vehicle will be towed. The violator is responsible for
the tow bill and any storage bill. The officer will remain with the vehicle
until the tow truck arrives unless called to respond to another call. The
tow truck will be canceled by the officer when possible should the violator
return to the vehicle before the tow truck arrives. A violation of this
section will result in a fine not to exceed $50.00. A second or subsequent
violation of this section will result in an additional fine not to exceed
$50.00, and the vehicle will be towed. (as amended by Ords. of 1/22/2001,
Ord. of 12/10/2001, and Ord. #2013-41, Oct. 2013)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-43
CHAPTER 8
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SIGNAL ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS
SECTION
15-801. Definitions.
15-802. Administration.
15-803. Offenses.
15-804. Procedure.
15-805. Civil penalty.
15-806. Miscellaneous.
15-801. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(1) "Citations and warning notices" shall include:
(a) The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle;
(b) The registration plate number of the motor vehicle involved
in the violation;
(c) The violation charged;
(d) The location of the violation;
(e) The date and time of the violation;
(f) A copy of the recorded image;
(g) The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by
which the civil penalty should be paid;
(h) A signed statement by a member of the police department
that, based on inspection of recorded images, the motor vehicle was being
operated in violation of § 15-803;
(i) A statement that recorded images are evidence of a violation
of § 15-803; and
(j) Information advising the person alleged to be liable under
this section:
(i) Of the manner and time in which liability alleged in
the citation occurred and that the citation may be contested in the
Cleveland Municipal Court; and
(ii) Warning that failure to contest in the manner and
time provided shall be deemed an admission of liability and that
a default judgment may be entered thereon.
(2) "In operation" means operating in good working condition.
(3) "Recorded images" means images recorded by a traffic control
photographic system:
(a) On:
(i) A photograph; or
(ii) A microphotograph; or
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-44
(iii) An electronic image; or
(iv) A videotape; or
(v) Any other medium; and
(b) At least one (1) image or portion of take, clearly identifying
the registration number of the motor vehicle.
(4) "Stop line" is a transverse white marking at an approach to an
intersection that indicates a point behind which all vehicles must stop when so
required by a traffic control sign, signal or device.
(5) "System location" is the approach to an intersection toward which
a photographic, video or electronic camera is directed and is in operation.
(6) "Traffic control photographic system" is an electronic system
consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera and a vehicle sensor
installed to work in conjunction with an official traffic control sign, signal or
device, and to automatically produce photographs, video or digital images of
each vehicle violating a standard traffic control sign, signal or device.
(7) "Vehicle owner" is the person identified by the Tennessee
Department of Safety as the registered owner of a motor vehicle or a lessee of
a motor vehicle under a lease of six (6) months or more. (as added by
Ord. #2008-05, Jan. 2008)
15-802. Administration. (1) The Cleveland Police Department or an
agent of the department shall administer the traffic control photographic
systems and shall maintain a list of system locations where traffic control
photographic systems are installed. The city may contract with third parties to
perform ministerial and clerical functions.
(2) Any citation or warning for a violation of § 15-803 issued by an
officer of the Cleveland Police Department at a system location shall be treated
in the manner prescribed in this chapter.
(3) No third party contractor shall have the authority to issue citations
and no citations shall be issued except upon the review of the photograph(s),
digital and/or video images by the Cleveland Police Department. Upon review
of such images by the Cleveland Police Department, on each case, and upon
express approval for the issuance of a citation by the Cleveland Police
Department, a third party contractor may perform the ministerial and clerical
functions of preparing, mailing, serving and/or processing citations.
(4) The city shall adopt procedures for the issuance of citations and
warnings under this section. A citation or warning alleging that the violation
of § 15-803 of this chapter occurred, sworn to or affirmed by officials or agents
of the city, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic control
photographic system, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein
and shall be admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation under this
chapter. The citation or warning shall be forwarded by first-class mail
postmarked no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the alleged violation,
to the vehicle owner's address as given on the motor vehicle registration records
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-45
maintained by the State of Tennessee Department of Safety and other states'
motor vehicle registration departments. Personal delivery to or personal service
of process on the owner of the vehicle shall not be required.
(5) Signs to indicate the use of traffic control photographic systems
shall be clearly posted. Signs to indicate the use of traffic control photographic
systems shall be posted in advance of individual system locations and may be
posted elsewhere in the city.
(6) The City of Cleveland shall have all necessary power and authority
to contractually provide for the purchase, lease, rental acquisition and/or to
enter a service contract(s) so as to fully and necessarily implement the
provisions of the traffic control photographic system authorized hereby. (as
added by Ord. #2008-05, Jan. 2008)
15-803. Offense. It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to cross the stop line
at a system location, in disregard or disobedience of the traffic control sign,
signal or device at such location, or to otherwise violate any section of the
Cleveland Municipal Code with respect to obedience to traffic lights, stop signs
or traffic signals.
The owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for a violation under this
chapter, except as provided herein. When such owner provides evidence in
accordance with the procedures set forth in § 15-804(2) that the vehicle was in
the care, custody or control of another person at the time of the violation, then
the person who had the care, custody and control of the vehicle at the time of the
violation shall be responsible. (as added by Ord. #2008-05, Jan. 2008)
15-804. Procedure. (1) A person who receives a citation or warning
notice under this chapter may:
(a) Pay the civil penalty, in accordance with instructions on the
citation, directly to the City of Cleveland; or
(b) Elect to contest the citation for the alleged violation in a
hearing before the City Judge of the Cleveland Municipal Court, in
accordance with the instructions on the citation.
(2) Liability under this chapter shall be determined based upon
preponderance of the evidence. Admission into evidence of a citation or warning
notice, together with proof that the defendant was, at the time of the violation,
the registered owner of the vehicle shall permit the trier of fact in its discretion
to infer that such owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation. Such an inference may be rebutted if the owner of the
vehicle:
(a) Testifies under oath in open court that the owner was not
the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation and the
trier of fact accepts such testimony as true; or
(b) Furnishes to city court, prior to the return date established
on the citation or warning notice, the owner's sworn notarized affidavit
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-46
or statement, under penalty of perjury, that the vehicle was in the care,
custody or control of another person or entity at the time of the violation
and accurately identifying the name and accurately stating the current
address and relationship to or affiliation with the owner of the person or
entity who leased, rented or otherwise had possession of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation; or
(c) Furnishes to city court, prior to the return date established
on the citation or warning notice, a certified copy of a police report
showing that the vehicle or the registration plates had been reported to
the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation or within a
timely manner after the alleged theft occurred; or
(d) Furnishes to city court, prior to the return date established
on the citation or warning notice, an affidavit or statement under penalty
of perjury signed by the owner before a notary public, stating that, at the
time of the alleged violation, the vehicle involved was stolen or was in the
care, custody or control of some person who did not have the owner's
permission to use the vehicle. If the owner elects to present such an
affidavit or statement, the affidavit or statement must include one of the
following statements:
(i) The actual operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation is unknown to the owner; or
(ii) The actual operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation is known to the owner. If the affidavit or
statement includes this sentence, then the affidavit or statement
must also include information accurately identifying the name and
the current address of the driver at the time of the alleged
violation.
(e) In the case of a commercial vehicle with a registered gross
weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more, a tractor vehicle, a
trailer operated in combination with a tractor vehicle, or a passenger bus,
in order to demonstrate that said owner was not the violator, the owner
shall, in a letter mailed to the city court by certified mail, return receipt
requested:
(i) State that the person named in the citation was not
operating the vehicle at the time of the violation; and
(ii) Provide the name, address and driver's license
identification number of the person who was operating the vehicle
at the time of he violation.
(3) In the event the owner of a vehicle provides a name and address of
a person or entity other than the owner who had leased, rented or otherwise had
care, custody, control or possession of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, the city shall then issue a citation or warning to the person or entity
so identified. (as added by Ord. #2008-05, Jan. 2008)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-47
15-805. Civil penalty. (1) Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed
a civil violation for which a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be
assessed.
(2) Failure to pay the civil penalty by the designated date, or appear
in court to contest the citation on the designated date, or to otherwise provide
the information under § 15-804(2)(b),(c),(d) or (e) shall be deemed an
acknowledgment by the owner of an indebtedness to the City of Cleveland of
fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall result in an imposition of a judgment by default
of fifty dollars ($50.00.) Such a default judgment will also result in the
assessment of court costs and litigation tax as otherwise provided for under the
Cleveland Municipal Code for non-parking offenses. The city may collect this
debt in the same manner as any other debt to the city.
(3) All revenues generated from penalties and assessments associated
with the enforcement of this chapter shall be applied to the costs incurred in
administering the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
equipment costs, administrative costs, and associated processing costs. Any
excess revenues shall then be limited to the payment of costs associated with
traffic and safety education programs and, thereafter, shall be available for
general government operating and capital expenditures.
(4) A violation for which a civil penalty is imposed under this section
shall not be considered a moving violation and may not be recorded by the
Cleveland Police Department or the Tennessee Department of Safety on the
driving record of the owner or driver of the vehicle and may not be considered
in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. (as added by
Ord. #2008-05, Jan. 2008)
15-806. Miscellaneous. All recorded images generated by the traffic
control photograph system, including, but not limited to, photographs, electronic
images, and videotape, shall be solely owned by the City of Cleveland. (as added
by Ord. #2008-05, Jan. 2008)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-48
CHAPTER 9
RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF CERTAIN STREETS BY
CERTAIN TRUCKS; TRUCK ROUTES
SECTION
15-901. Restrictions on use of certain streets by certain trucks.
15-902. Truck routes.
15-903. Violations and penalty.
15-901. Restrictions on use of certain streets by certain trucks.
(1) As used in this chapter, the word "truck" shall mean any type of
truck with five (5) or more axles.
(2) Trucks, as defined in this chapter, shall not be operated at any time
on any of the following streets within the City of Cleveland:
(a) On North Ocoee Street (State Route 74) beginning at its
intersection with 25th Street (State Route 60) and continuing north to the
intersection of North Ocoee Street and Keith Street (U.S. 11 and State
Route 2).
(3) Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the prohibition listed
in § 15-901(2).
(a) The operation of any emergency vehicles.
(b) The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, or any
contractor or material man, while engaged in the repair, maintenance, or
construction of the street, street improvements, or street utilities.
(c) If the truck has been officially detoured through the city by
lawful authority.
(d) The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to
the conduct of business at a destination point within the city, provided
streets designated as truck routes are used until reaching the intersection
nearest the destination point.
(4) No person shall be charged with a violation of this section unless
the street is marked with appropriate signs approved by the Tennessee
Department of Transportation which notify trucks with five or more axles of the
prohibition on truck traffic.
(5) Any street restricted as to truck traffic under the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the posting of a notice on at least two (2) occasions in
a newspaper of general circulation. Said notice shall be published at least thirty
(30) days prior to the posting of signage on the restricted street. (as added by
Ord. #2008-07, Feb. 2008)
15-902. Truck routes. (1) The city hereby designates the following
route as a truck route for use by trucks as defined in this chapter.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 15-49
Beginning with the intersection of 25th Street (State Route 60) and
continuing West to Keith Street (U.S. 11 - State Route 2). This truck route shall
be posted with appropriate signs as approved by the Tennessee Department of
Transportation.
(2) Under the provisions of this section, this truck route shall be
subject to the posting of a notice on at least two (2) occasions in a newspaper of
general circulation. Said notice shall be published at least thirty (30) days prior
to the posting of signage of the truck route. (as added by Ord. #2008-07, Feb.
2008)
15-903. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any provisions of this chapter. Any person violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty for each violation not to exceed fifty
dollars ($50.00), plus applicable court costs and litigation tax. (as added by
Ord. #2008-07, Feb. 2008)
16-1
TITLE 16
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND DRAINAGE1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. STREET CUTS.
3. RAILROADS AND TRAINS.
4. STORM-WATER DRAINAGE.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
16-101. Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated.
16-102. Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited.
16-103. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted.
16-104. Banners and signs located on streets or public ways restricted.
16-105. Obstruction of drainage ditches.
16-106. Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc.
16-107. Parades, etc., regulated.
16-108. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks.
16-109. Unlawful to seize, trespass upon, etc., public streets, etc.
16-110. Unlawful to burn trash, etc., on streets.
16-111. Chapter not to interfere with cleanup or sanitation of city.
16-112. Unlawful to hang wires lower than sixteen feet from top of ground.
16-113. Unlawful to construct gates, etc., which open over the sidewalk.
16-114. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted.
16-115. Use of streets, etc. by tracked vehicles, farm machinery, etc.
16-116. Unlawful to place or leave ashes, leaves, paper, construction related
debris (including mud), etc. on street or sidewalk.
16-117. Unlawful to place boxes, barrels, brush, etc., on streets so as to
obstruct free passage of the public.
16-118. Abutting property owner may be required to build and/or repair
sidewalks.
16-119. Notice to property owner to build; construction by city upon owner's
failure.
16-120. Specifications.
16-121. Permission and direction required for building or repairs.
1Municipal code reference
Motor vehicle and traffic regulations: title 15.
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-2
16-122. Misdemeanor to fail to build sidewalks when so ordered.
16-123. Procedures for abandonment of streets, alleys, etc.
16-124. Prohibition on play and the use of skateboards, roller skates, and
coasters within the City of Cleveland.
16-125. Traffic calming measures.
16-101. Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated. It shall be
unlawful for any property owner or occupant to allow any limbs of trees on his
property to project over any street or alley at a height of less than fourteen (14)
feet or over any sidewalk at a height of less than eight (8) feet.
16-102. Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to have or maintain on
his property any tree, shrub, sign, or other obstruction which prevents persons
driving vehicles on public streets or alleys from obtaining a clear view of traffic
when approaching an intersection.
16-103. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted. Signs,
awnings, or other structures which project over any street or other public way
shall be erected subject to the requirements of the building code.1
16-104. Banners and signs located on streets or public ways
restricted. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or have placed a
sign or banner across, above or within any public street or way except as
provided herein:
(a) The Cleveland/Bradley Chamber of Commerce is hereby
designated as the coordinating agency to receive applications and
recommend approval of installations to the Cleveland Planning and
Inspections Office who shall issue the appropriate permit(s);
(b) Cleveland Utilities, Electric Division, shall, upon compliance
with the approved application procedures and notification of such
approval by the Chamber of Commerce, install to certain specifications
and remove all approved banners;
(c) Banners that span across any public street or way are
prohibited.
(d) A specified number of locations of street light poles located
in the area along 25th Street from Interstate 75 East to North Ocoee
Street (U.S. 11) are permitted for installation of an approved banner to
include the following street light pole numbers:
1Municipal code reference
Building code: title 12, chapter 1.
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-3
675, 676, 681, 684, 688, 689, 693, 694, 699, 700, 704, 707, 712, 717, 718,
721, 722, 727, 730, 735, 740, 745, 748, 752, and an unnumbered pole on
the Southwest corner of 25th Street and North Ocoee Street.
In addition to the foregoing, approved poles are also located in the
downtown Cleveland area on Inman Street from the railroad underpass to Keith
Street and on Ocoee and Broad Streets from Firehall No. 1 to the monument.
Approved poles are also located on certain streets in and around the Lee
University area. Downtown poles and Lee University area poles are subject to
approval by Cleveland Utilities. The approved poles located within the
downtown area and within the Lee University area are as follows:
LOCATION # DESCRIPTION STREET LIGHT
#
1 Parker Street North of Central Avenue 2442
2 Corner of Parker Street and 4th Street 2441
3 Corner of Parker Street and 5th Street 2440
4 Corner of Parker Street and 6th Street 2439
5 Corner of Parker Street and 7th Street 2438
6 Corner of Parker Street and 8th Street 2285
7 Corner of 8th Street and Trunk Street 2284
8 Corner of 8th Street and Walker Street 2283
9 8th Street between Walker and Montgomery
Street
2282
10 Corner of 8th Street and Montgomery Avenue 2281
11 8th Street between Parker Street and Church
Street
2286
12 Corner of 8th Street and Church Street 2554
13 8th Street West of Church Street 5338
14 8th Street East of Ocoee Street 4135
15 8th Street between Ocoee Street and Broad
Street
2945
16 Corner of Broad Street and 8th Street 2991
17 East side of Ocoee Street North of 8th Street 2946
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-4
18 Ocoee Street South of Bowman Avenue 2947
19 9th Street East of Ocoee Street 3146
20 Ocoee Street North of Bowman Avenue 2948
21 Ocoee Street North of Bowman Avenue 3275
22 Ocoee Street North of Bowman Avenue 2949
23 Ocoee Street North of 11th Street 2950
24 Ocoee Street North of 11th Street 2951
25 Corner of Ocoee Street and Centenary
Avenue
2952
26 Ocoee Street North of Centenary Avenue 2953
27 Ocoee Street North of Centenary Avenue 3276
28 Corner of 13th Street and Ocoee Street 2954
29 Ocoee Street North of 13th Street 3277
30 Corner of Ocoee Street and 14th Street 2955
31 East side of Ocoee Street South of 15th Street 3283
32 Ocoee Street across from 15th Street 2956
33 15th Street between Ocoee Street and Church
Street
2378
34 Corner of 15th Street and Church Street 2542
35 Church Street between 15th and 16th Streets 2541
36 Corner of Church Street and 16th Street 2540
37 Church Street between 16th and 18th Streets 2539
38 Church Street between 16th and 18th Streets 2538
39 Corner of Church Street and 18th Street 2537
40 Church Street between 18th Street and 20th
Street
2536
41 Corner of Church Street and 20th 2535
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-5
42 20th Street between Church and Parker
Streets
1512
43 20th Street between Church and Parker
Streets
1513
44 20th Street between Church and Parker
Streets
1514
45 18th Street between Parker and Church
Streets
2460
46 15th Street between Church and Parker
Streets
2377
47 Magnolia Avenue South of 20th Street 2410
48 Corner of Magnolia Avenue and 19th Street 2411
49 Corner of Magnolia Avenue and 18th Street 2412
50 Corner of Magnolia Avenue and 17th Street 2413
51 Corner of Magnolia Avenue and 15th Street 2375
52 Corner of Magnolia Avenue and 15th Street 2374
53 Corner of Magnolia Avenue and 13th Street 2417
54 Corner of Magnolia Avenue and 12th Street 2418
55 15th Street between Magnolia Avenue and
Peoples Street
2373
56 Corner of 15th Street and Peoples Streets 2372
57 Peoples Street between 13th and 15th Streets 2475
58 Corner of Peoples Street and 13th Street 2473
59 Corner of 12th Street and People Street 2479
60 13th Street between Peoples and Montgomery
Streets
2471
61 Corner of 12th Street and Montgomery Street 2478
62 13th Street between Peoples Street and
Magnolia Avenue
2470
A map of approved pole locations shall be available in the Chamber of
Commerce office and at Cleveland Utilities, Electric Division.
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-6
There shall be no exceptions to the foregoing approved pole locations
unless additional pole locations are approved by an ordinance amending this
section approved by the city council.
(e) The standard banner size shall be no larger than 30 inches
in width by 102 inches in length (30" x 102") on 25th Street and be limited
to only 30 inches in width by sixty inches in length (30" x 60") in the
downtown area and the Lee University area and further is subject to the
following specifications:
(i) The banner material shall be heavy-duty,
weather-resistant, and double-sided;
(ii) The diameter of the banner mounting pole shall be
one and one-quarter (1-1/4") inches;
(iii) The banner sleeve diameter shall be six and one-half
(6-1/2") inches; and,
(iv) The approved applicant shall mount the two (2) bars
per banner in the sleeve prior to installation by Cleveland Utilities.
(f) Banners may be used only for the purpose of promoting
and/or sponsoring non-profit events, activities and functions.
(g) Banners that are for political campaigns, for profit
advertising or any other purpose deemed to be a violation of the nonprofit
theme as stated in item (f) of this section are prohibited. The
Chamber of Commerce shall be responsible for deciding the eligibility of
the application for a banner.
(h) Organizations or persons shall make application to the
Chamber of Commerce a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior to
the opening date of the event. The chamber shall determine the eligibility
of the event, then notify the applicant of their decision within seven (7)
calendar days of receipt of the application. If the application is approved,
the applicant shall provide the chamber the banner(s) as well as any
necessary mounting equipment, supports and/or related hardware to
properly install the banner(s). The sponsoring organization shall provide
the chamber proof of liability insurance with the application.
(i) Banner(s) shall be removed by Cleveland Utilities, Electric
Division, a minimum of two (2) weeks following an event's closing date.
The banners may be reclaimed by the applicant or the applicant's
designee within seven (7) calendar days without charge. Banners stored
after the seven (7) days may be subject to a fee for storage not to exceed
five ($5) dollars per day. The chamber or the employees of the chamber
or Cleveland Utilities or employees of the City of Cleveland shall not be
held liable for any damage to any banner during any phase of this process
of approving, installing, displaying, removing or storage of a banner(s).
(j) The Chamber of Commerce shall assess a fee of up to twenty
dollars ($20.00) per banner to defray the cost of Cleveland Utilities
personnel and equipment used to install or remove a banner(s). The
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-7
chamber shall periodically reimburse Cleveland Utilities after receipt of
a statement that specifies the date of the work performed, personnel and
equipment utilized, the number of banners installed or removed and a
total cost to be remitted. (as replaced by Ord. of 7/14/97, and amended by
Ord. of 7/8/02, and Ord. #2005-48, Jan. 2006)
16-105. Obstruction of drainage ditches. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit or cause the obstruction of any drainage ditch in any public
right of way.
16-106. Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc. The
occupants of property abutting on a sidewalk are required to keep the sidewalk
clean. Also, immediately after a snow or sleet, such occupants are required to
remove all accumulated snow and ice from the abutting sidewalk.
16-107. Parades, etc., regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person,
club, organization, or other group to hold any meeting, parade, demonstration,
or exhibition on the public streets without some responsible representative first
securing a permit from the city clerk. Such group shall also provide a $500
refundable deposit for failure to clean up litter and trash resulting from the
parade. If the group cleans the parade route they shall be refunded their $500
deposit fee. If the route is not clean, the city will clean the route and deduct the
cost from the $500 deposit.
Such group shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that it is
insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against claims
for property damage up to $500,000.
16-108. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for
any person to ride, lead, or tie any animal, or ride, push, pull, or place any
vehicle across or upon any sidewalk in such manner as unreasonably interferes
with or inconveniences pedestrians using the sidewalk. It shall also be unlawful
for any person knowingly to allow any minor under his control to violate this
section.
16-109. Unlawful to seize, trespass upon, etc., public streets, etc.
It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to seize, trespass upon, hold
or occupy any of the streets, alleys or highways of the city or any other public
place without due permission of the city or of such other body politic, officer or
custodian as may be lawfully in charge of such public place, or to refuse to
disperse or vacate same when so directed by any lawful officer of the city. (1981
Code, § 21-1)
16-110. Unlawful to burn trash, etc., on streets. It shall be unlawful
and a misdemeanor for any person to burn any trash, rubbish or other waste
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-8
material whatsoever upon any street, avenue, highway or alley, or portion
thereof or willfully or negligently to damage or destroy such streets, avenues,
alleys or highways or any portion thereof, by the willful or negligent application
of heat in any manner whatsoever; or willfully or negligently to damage or
destroy the same by the leakage, drainage or wastage of crude oil, gasoline,
benzine, naptha, kerosene, petroleum or bituminous or other damaging products
upon the same. (1981 Code, 21-3)
16-111. Chapter not to interfere with cleanup or sanitation of
city. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with the
cleanup or sanitation of the city. Rubbish and/or refuse may be placed on the
streets or sidewalks by citizens for collection purposes in the manner and on the
dates as prescribed by the public works director. (1981 Code, § 21-12, modified)
16-112. Unlawful to hang wires lower than sixteen feet from top
of ground. It shall be unlawful for any telegraph, telephone, cable television,
or electric utility, or for any other person to place wires or guy wires on the
streets or alleys within the limits of the city lower than sixteen (16) feet from
the top of the ground; except upon written permit granted by the city manager.
(1981 Code, § 21-4, modified)
16-113. Unlawful to construct gates, etc., which open over the
sidewalk. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect or hang any
gates, doors or any kind of device so that same opens or swings upon or across
any sidewalk, street or alley within the corporate limits of the city. (1981 Code,
21-5)
16-114. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted. Signs,
awnings, or other structures which project over any street or other public way
shall be erected subject to the requirements of the building code.
16-115. Use of streets, etc., by tracked vehicles, farm machinery,
etc. (1) It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person owning or
operating any traction engine, farm implement, piece of machinery or any
vehicle whatsoever mounted upon tracks, the wheels of which are rimmed with
steel, iron or other metallic substance with treads bearing upon their exposed
faces, corrugations, protuberances or raised portions, or any conductor, driver
or operator of such vehicle, to drive, haul or otherwise transport such vehicle as
hereinbefore described over, upon or across any street, the surface of which shall
have been improved or paved with permanent material, or any material other
than gravel, chert or water-bound macadam, except as hereinafter provided.
(2) In case such person owning or operating any such vehicle as is
hereinabove fully described and set forth wishes to transport, drive, haul or pass
such vehicle across any such paved or improved street as is hereinabove
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-9
described for the purpose of passing from one portion to another of some
unimproved cross street, avenue, highway or alley, or to or from any property
or lot of land adjacent to or abutting upon any such paved or improved street as
is hereinabove described, it shall be his duty to first apply to the city manager
for a license or permit so to do, and, upon receipt of such license or permit as the
city manager may at his discretion grant, it shall be his further duty fully to
protect such improved and paved street at the point where he may wish to cross
the same with such vehicle, by means of wooden skids or wheelways, or other
suitable device satisfactory to the city manager, and it shall further be the duty
of such person as hereinabove set forth, in case of damage or destruction, by
accident or otherwise consequent upon the passage of such vehicle, to the paved
or improved surface of such street to bear the cost of repairing or replacing such
damaged or destroyed portions of such paved or improved street after such
repairs or replacements shall have been made by authority of the city and cost
thereof fully determined, and to make bond to the city in such amount as may
by inspection appear to cover such damage or destruction, with good and
satisfactory surety, conditioned that he will bear such cost of repairs or
replacements as soon as the amount thereof shall have been fully determined.
(1981 Code, § 21-8, modified)
16-116. Unlawful to place or leave ashes, leaves, paper,
construction related debris (including mud), etc., on street or sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed or left upon any
street, alley or sidewalk within the city, any leaves, straw, ashes, paper, dirt,
bottles, pieces of glass, construction related debris (including mud), or any
substances, instrument or materials which does or is calculated to in any way
render the condition of such street, alley or sidewalk, unsightly or not sanitary,
or to interfere with traffic or drainage. (1981 Code, § 21-9, modified)
16-117. Unlawful to place boxes, barrels, brush, etc., on streets so
as to obstruct free passage of the public. It shall be unlawful for any
person to obstruct the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city, by placing boxes,
barrels, brush or any other thing thereon so as to obstruct the free passage of
the public. (1981 Code, § 21-10)
16-118. Abutting property owner may be required to build and/or
repair sidewalks. Any person owning real estate abutting on any street,
avenue or alley may be required to build and keep in repair such sidewalks as
the city council shall direct to be built, the building of which shall be done under
the direction of the city manager. (1981 Code, § 21-46, modified)
16-119. Notice to property owner to build; construction by city
upon owner's failure. (1) Whenever it is deemed necessary by the city council
that any sidewalk within the limit of the city shall be constructed or repaired,
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-10
the city manager shall have notice served upon the owner of the abutting
property or upon the person having the same in charge to construct or repair the
sidewalk or pavement, notifying him of the character of material to be used, the
width and other reasonable requirements, which notice shall give him thirty (30)
days within which to build such pavement, and which notice may be served by
the chief of police.
(2) If after having received such notice any property owner shall fail
to construct his walk of such material as the city manager may designate and
in strict accordance with the specifications such city manager may make, then
the city manager is authorized to contract for the construction or repair of such
sidewalk or pavement upon the best terms obtainable and cause the same to be
made according to such specifications, and when the cost of the same shall have
been paid from the city treasury, the amount so paid shall constitute a charge
against the owner or owners of such property and become a lien on such
property, and may be recovered before any tribunal having jurisdiction of such
matters. The owner of such property shall be given ninety (90) days within
which to reimburse the city for such expenditure and shall be charged interest
on such amount from the time of completion of the work, and an additional sum
of one dollar ($1.00) as a penalty. (1981 Code, § 21-47, modified)
16-120. Specifications. The city council through the city manager shall
designate such sidewalks and the material to be used in their construction as
shall be in keeping with the locality of the property affected, and shall designate
the width and make such other specifications as would be suitable and in
keeping with the value of the property and the location of the same, making the
sidewalks in any certain locality all of the same material and of uniform
dimensions. (1981 Code, § 21-48, modified)
16-121. Permission and direction required for building or repairs.
The construction and repair of all sidewalks shall be under the direction of city
authorities, and no property owner shall undertake to build or repair any walks
or pavements anywhere within the limits of the city unless the same shall be
done with the permission of the city manager and under the direction of the city
manager or other person authorized to superintend such work.
Properties within the area zoned for central business district are eligible
for financial assistance to install decorative sidewalks, depending upon the
availability of funds. Projects will be selected giving priority to those covering
the largest total continuous linear feet of sidewalk. The city will remove the
existing sidewalk and contract for the installation of decorative brick sidewalks
using plans and specifications approved by the director of public works and city
manager. The adjoining property owners will pay for one half (1/2) of the
contract price to install the decorative brick sidewalks. Said payment must be
agreed to before the removal and reconstruction begins, using an agreement
acceptable to the city attorney. The actual payment must be received by the city
Change 16, December 14, 2015 16-11
clerk no later than ninety (90) days from billing, which will be issued upon
completion of the construction contract. (1981 Code, § 21-49, modified, as
amended by Ord. of June 1998)
16-122. Misdemeanor to fail to build sidewalks when so ordered.
Any property owner failing to comply with the demands of the city in building
sidewalks or pavements within the time specified in his notice from the city, or
any person who shall construct or repair any sidewalk without first obtaining
permission as above provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1981 Code,
§ 21-50)
16-123. Procedures for abandonment of streets, alleys, etc. The
procedures for abandonment of a street, alley or any other right of way or
easement shall be as follows:
(1) The party or parties requesting the abandonment shall submit an
application to the city manager, or designee, which shall be signed by all owners
of the property adjoining the street, alley or right-of-way which is to be
abandoned. The application shall be accompanied by a survey of the area
proposed for abandonment which shall be performed by a registered land
surveyor in the State of Tennessee. The survey shall include the area to be
abandoned as well as any easements or public facilities and shall be reviewed
by staff for additional comments.
(2) The application shall then be submitted to the planning
commission for approval or disapproval.
(3) Upon review of the abandonment request by the planning
commission, the planning director shall utilize the personnel and equipment of
the public works department in order to have a sign placed at each end of the
right-of-way proposed for abandonment. An ad shall be placed in a local
newspaper which shall contain the date the city council will have a public
hearing to consider the request and also contain a map showing the area sought
to be abandoned. No action shall be taken by city council until five (5) days after
both the ad and signs have been placed.
(4) A quitclaim deed shall be executed upon approval of the
abandonment by the city council. (Ord. of Aug. 1995, as amended by Ord. of
9/13/99, § 1, and replaced by Ord. #2015-26, Sept. 2015)
16-124. Prohibitions on play and the use of skateboards, roller
skates, and coasters within the City of Cleveland. (1) Definitions: For the
purpose of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:
(a) "Coaster" shall mean a footboard mounted upon two or more
wheels and is most often propelled by the user in an upright standing
position or while kneeling.
(b) The "courthouse and courthouse annex area" of the City of
Cleveland means all that area of land bounded by Worth Street on the
Change 16, December 14, 2015 16-12
West, Second Street on the North, Ocoee Street on the East, and First
Street on the South, including the sidewalks lining these streets on either
side.
(c) The "downtown area" of the City of Cleveland means from
and including Broad Street (NE and SE) on the West, Central Avenue
(NE and NW) on the North, Edwards Street (NE and SE) on the East,
and Third Street (SW and SE) on the South. The downtown area is
inclusive of these street sections, their intersections with each other and
connecting streets, and sidewalks lining these street sections on either
side.
(d) "Roller skates" or "roller blades" shall mean any footwear or
device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels are
attached, including wheels that are "in line" and where such wheels may
be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion.
(e) "Skateboard" shall mean a foot board of any material, which
has wheels attached to it, and is usually propelled by the user who
sometimes sits, stands, kneels or lays upon the device while it is in
motion.
(2) Actions prohibited. (a) Within the courthouse and courthouse
annex area. It shall be unlawful for any person to use roller skates, roller
blades, coasters, or skateboards within, in, or upon any property within
the courthouse and courthouse annex area of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee, at any time. This prohibition is applicable 24 hours a day, 7
days a week, 365 days a year.
(b) Within the downtown area of the City of Cleveland
(excluding the courthouse and courthouse annex area). It shall be
unlawful for any person to play on any of the streets or highways within
the downtown area of the City of Cleveland. It shall be also unlawful for
any person to use roller skates, roller blades, coasters, or skateboards on
any public street, public parking lot, public sidewalk, public alley, public
park, or upon any other public property within the downtown area of the
City of Cleveland, Tennessee, during the hours of 9:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.
local time.
(c) Actions prohibited on designated city streets and highways
within the city. In addition to the actions prohibited in 16-124(2)(a), no
person shall play on or use skateboards, roller skates, coasters, upon any
of the following streets of highways within the corporate limits of the City
of Cleveland.
(i) I-75 within the city limits of Cleveland, Tennessee
(ii) APD-40 (SR 311) within the city limits of Cleveland,
Tennessee
(iii) South Lee Highway (SR 2) from the city limits to
Keith Street (SR 2)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 16-13
(iv) Keith Street (SR 2) from South Lee Highway (SR 2)
to Paul Huff Parkway
(v) North Lee Highway (SR 2) from Paul Huff Parkway
to the city limits
(vi) Paul Huff Parkway from Georgetown Road (SR 60) to
North Lee Highway
(vii) 25th Street (SR 60) from I-70 to the city limits
(viii) Norman Chapel Road from Peerless Road to I-75
(ix) Westside Drive from 25th Street (SR 60) to Norman
Chapel Road
(x) Georgetown Road from Harrison Pike (SR 312) to 25th
Street (SR 60)
(xi) Peerless Road from Georgetown Road to Paul Huff
Parkway
(xii) Mouse Creek Road from North Ocoee Street (SR 74)
to Valley Head Road
(xiii) Valley Head Road from Mouse Creek Road to Peerless
Road
(xiv) North Ocoee Street (SR 74) from Inman Street (SR
40) to Keith Street
(xv) South Ocoee Street (SR 74) from Inman Street (SR
40) to Blue Springs Road
(xvi) Blue Springs Road from Old Chattanooga Pike to
APD-40 (SR 311)
(xvii) Broad Street (SR 74) from 8th Street to 6th Street
(xviii) Harrison Pike (SR 312) from Keith Street (SR 2) to
Westside Drive
(xix) Inman Street (SR 40) from Keith Street (SR 2) to East
of Lowery Street
(xx) South Lee Highway (SR 40) from Keith Street (SR 2)
to 3rd Street (SR 40)
(xxi) 3rd Street (SR 40) from South Lee Highway (SR 2) to
North Ocoee Street (SR 74)
(xxii) Wildwood Avenue(SR 74) from Inman Street (SR 40)
to Spring Place Road (SR 74)
(xxiii) Dalton Pike (SR 311) from Spring Place Road (SR 74)
to APD-40 (SR 311)
(xxiv) Spring Place Road (SR 74) from Dalton Pike (SR 11)
to White Street
(xxv) 20th Street, NW from Georgetown Road to Old Tasso
Road
(xxvi) Old Tasso Road from 20th Street, NW to Stuart Road
(xxvii) Stuart Road from North Lee Highway (SR 2) to the
city limits
Change 16, December 14, 2015 16-14
(xxviii) Stuart Road from the city limits to Old Tasso Road
(xxix) Michigan Avenue Road within the City of Cleveland
(xxx) Stuart Road from Old Tasso Road to Michigan Avenue
Road.
(xxxi) Blythe Ferry Road from North Ocoee Street (SR 74)
to Old Tasso Road
(xxxii) 20th Street from Old Tasso Road to Michigan
Avenue Road
(xxxiii) 37th Street from Old Tasso Road to 20th Street
(xxxiv) Raider Drive from Keith Street (SR 2) to
Peerless Road
(xxxv) Mimosa Drive from Mouse Creek Road to
Peerless Road
(xxxvi) Mouse Creek Road from Paul Huff Parkway to
the city limits
(xxxvii) Peerless Road from Paul Huff Parkway to
Valley Head Road
(xxxviii) Adkisson Drive from Executive Park Drive to
Paul Huff Parkway
(xxxix) Frontage Road from Paul Huff Parkway to the
city limits
(xl) Norman Chapel Road from Adkisson Drive to I-75
(xli) Candies Lane from Georgetown Road (SR 60) to
Freewill Road
(xlii) Freewill Road from Interlackin Circle (city limits) to
city limits
(xliii) 17th Street from Georgetown Road to North Ocoee
Street (SR 74)
(xliv) Parker Street from 3rd Street to 25th Street (SR 60)
(xlv) Central Avenue from Highland Drive (SR 74) to Gaut
Street
(xlvi) Gaut Street from Inman Street to 6th Street
(xlvii) 6th Street from Gaut Street to Benton Pike
(xlviii) Edwards Street from 3rd Street to Central
Avenue
(xlix) 3rd Street North Ocoee Street (SR 74) to Mill Street
(l) Mill Street from 7th Street to Inman Avenue (SR 74)
(li) 7th Street from Mill Street to King Edward Avenue
(SR 74)
(lii) King Edward Avenue from 7th Street to 6th Street
(liii) 6th Street from King Edward Avenue to Wildwood
Avenue
(liv) Smith Drive from South Lee Highway (SR 2) to South
Ocoee Street (SR 74)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 16-15
(lv) 20th Street from South Ocoee Street (SR 74) to Dalton
Pike (SR 311)
(lvi) Blackburn Road from Dalton Pike (SR 311) to
Dockery Lane
(lvii) Dockery Lane from Blue Springs Road to the city
limits
(lviii) Blue Springs Road from the city limits to APD-40 (SR
311)
(lix) Sunset Drive from Henderson Avenue to Ocoee Street
(lx) Henderson Avenue from Keith Street to 25th Street
(lxi) Chambliss Avenue from 20th Street to 25th Street
(lxii) Villa Drive from Georgetown Road to Freewill Road
(lxiii) Executive Park Drive from Adkisson Drive to
Ridgeway Drive
(lxiv) Ridgeway Drive from Executive Park Drive to
Georgetown Road
(lxv) Clingan Ridge Drive from Westside Drive to Peerless
Road
(lxvi) Julian Drive from 25th Street to McIntire Drive
(lxvii) McIntire Drive from Julian drive to Ocoee Street
(lxviii) Westside Drive from Georgetown Road to Harrison
Pike
(lxix) 11th Street from Georgetown Road to Harrison Pike
(lxx) 15th Street from Ocoee Street to Carolina Avenue
(lxxi) Carolina Avenue from 11th Street to 15th Street
(lxxii) Willow Street from Georgetown Road to Highland
Avenue
(lxxiii) Highland Avenue from Inman Street to 17th
Street
(lxxiv) 8th Street from Highland Avenue to Benton
Pike
(lxxv) Church Street from 11th Street, NE to 6th Street, SE
(lxxvi) Grove Avenue from Harrison Pike to South Lee
Highway
(lxxvii) 2nd Street from Worth Street to 1st Street
(lxxviii) 1st Street from Highland Avenue to Edwards
Street
(lxxix) East Street from 6th Street, NE, to Wildwood
Avenue
(lxxx) 9th Street from East Street to Euclid Avenue
(lxxxi) Euclid Avenue from 3rd Street to 9th Street
(lxxxii) King Edward Avenue from 9th Street to 20th
Street
Change 16, December 14, 2015 16-16
(lxxxiii) 14th Street from Wildwood Avenue to Johnson
Blvd.
(lxxxiv) Johnson Blvd. from Bates Pike to Wildwood
Lake Road
(lxxxv) Wildwood Lake Road from Wildwood Avenue
to Spring Place Road
(lxxxvi) White Street from Baldwin Street to Wildwood
Lake Road
(lxxxvii) Baldwin Street from APD 40 to Dalton Pike
(lxxxviii) Red Food Drive from APD 40 to Dalton Pike
(lxxxix) Westland Drive from APD 40 to Victory Street
(xc) Victory Street from Westland Drive to South Lee
Highway
(d) Actions prohibited where property is posted. In addition to
the actions prohibited in 16-124(2)(a) through 16-124(2)(c), no person
shall play on or use skateboards, roller skates, or coasters upon any
property, public or private, within the corporate limits of the City of
Cleveland which has been posted with a sign which reads:
"No Skateboards," "No Skateboarding," "No Skates," "No Skating," or any
similar language which is intended to inform a reasonable person that
said activities are prohibited on the property.
(3) Civil penalty. A person who violates any provision of this section
is guilty of a civil offense punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $50, plus
applicable court costs and litigation taxes. (as added by Ord. of 10/28/96, and
replaced by Ord. #2005-14, April 2005; and Ord. #2006-8, March 2006)
16-125. Traffic calming measures. All requests for the installation of
traffic calming measures will be directed to the public works director. The
public works director will receive these requests and compare the existing
condition at the proposed location to the minimum standards for traffic calming
as contained herein. Any locations which do not meet the minimum standards
will be rejected. All locations which meet or exceed the minimum standards will
be subjected to an engineering study which will determine:
(1) The extent of the conflicts between vehicular traffic and
pedestrians.
(2) The probability that traffic calming measures will reduce the
conflicts between vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
(3) Based upon recognized engineering guidelines, recommendations
regarding specific traffic claming measures, if any, which should be installed to
reduce conflicts between vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
Based upon the results of the engineering study, the public works director
will make the determination regarding the installation of the traffic calming
measures, and make recommendations accordingly to the city manager. The
city manager will review the recommendations and submit them to the city
Change 16, December 14, 2015 16-17
council for appropriate action. In determining whether to install traffic calming
devices, the city council will consider the benefit to be derived, the cost, and the
relative priority of the particular project compared to all other planned
transportation projects, given the limited funding available on an annual basis.
The minimum standards for traffic calming are as follows:
Major Collector Minor
Collector
Local
Street
Traffic Volume > 8,000 vpd > 4,000 vpd > 1,000
vpd
85th Percentile Speed 10 mph > speed
limit
10 mph >
speed limit
> speed
limit
Pedestrian Volume > 100 per hour > 50 per hour > 25 per
hour
(as added by Ord. of 8/14/2000)
16-18
CHAPTER 2
STREET CUTS1
SECTION
16-201. Permit required.
16-202. Applications.
16-203. Fee.
16-204. Deposit or bond.
16-205. Safety restrictions on excavations.
16-206. Restoration of streets, etc.
16-207. Insurance.
16-208. Time limits.
16-209. Supervision.
16-210. Driveway curb cuts.
16-201. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, association, or others, including utility districts to make any
excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or public place, or to tunnel under any
street, alley, sidewalk or public place without having first obtained a permit as
herein required, and without complying with the provisions of this chapter; and
it shall also be unlawful to violate, or vary from, the terms of any such permit;
provided, however, any person maintaining pipes, lines, or other underground
facilities in or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening
without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done
immediately and a permit cannot reasonably and practicably be obtained
beforehand. The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular
business day on which the office of the public works director is open for
business, and the permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was
begun. Cleveland Utilities and all franchised utilities shall be given a blanket
permit annually, but must notify the public works director on such form as he
shall require each time a cut or bore is made. (Ord. of Sept. 1995)
16-202. Applications. Applications for such permits shall be made to
the public works director, or such person as he may designate to receive such
applications, and shall state thereon the location of the intended excavation or
tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, the person, firm, corporation,
1State law reference
This chapter was patterned substantially after the ordinance upheld
by the Tennessee Supreme Court in the case of City of Paris,
Tennessee v. Paris-Henry County Public Utility District, 207 Tenn.
388, 340 S.W.2d 885 (1960).
Change 15, August 11, 2014 16-19
association, or others doing the actual excavating, the name of the person, firm,
corporation, association, or others for whom the work is being done, and shall
contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and
laws relating to the work to be done. Such application shall be approved or
rejected by the public works director within twenty-four (24) hours of its filing.
(Ord. of Sept. 1995)
16-203. Fee. (1) The fee for such permits shall be two hundred sixty-five
dollars ($265.00). This fee is to cover the costs of inspection of backfill, and an
asphalt patch of up to forty-eight (48) square feet. Any excavation larger than
forty-eight (48) square feet shall require an additional fee, to be determined by
the public works director based on the size of the excavation.
(2) In addition to the fee(s) set forth in subsection (1), there shall be
an additional fee imposed when any street cut results in any section of a city
street having street cut(s) that comprise twenty percent (20%) or more of any
five hundred foot (500') section of that street.
(a) This additional fee will be equal to the city's cost of repaving
that five hundred foot (500') section of that city street.
(b) This additional fee will be paid by the entity making the
street cut. When more than one (1) entity is responsible for the street cuts
within a particular five hundred foot (500') section, the additional fee
shall be prorated between the entities making the street cuts on a
percentage basis. The percentage assessed to each entity will be equal to
their percentage of the total street cuts that exist within a particular five
hundred foot (500') section. This assessment is illustrated by the
following example: Assume Entity A makes a street cut in a particular
city street that results in twenty percent (20%) or more of a five hundred
foot (500') section of that city street having street cuts. Assume further
that after this last street cut is made there are a total of fifteen (15) street
cuts within that five hundred foot (500') section of that city street.
Assume further that one (1) entity made ten (10) of those street cuts and
another entity made five (5). The first entity would pay the city an
amount equal to two-thirds (2/3) of the city's costs of repaving that five
hundred foot (500') section of the city street, and the second entity would
pay the remaining one-third (1/3).
(c) The additional fee set forth in subsection (b) will not be
charged if that five hundred foot (500') section of that particular city
street is already scheduled to be repaved by the city within three (3)
years. (Ord. of Sept. 1995, as amended by Ord. of Oct. 1995, and Ord.
#2003-14, June 2003, replaced by Ord. #2008-52, Aug. 2008, and
Ord. #2010-23, June 2010, and amended by Ord. #2014-18, May 2014)
16-204. Deposit or bond. No such permit shall be issued unless and
until the applicant therefor has deposited with the city a cash deposit. The
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-20
deposit shall be in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) if no pavement is
involved or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if the excavation is in a paved area
and shall insure the proper restoration of the ground and pavement, if
necessary. Where the amount of the deposit is clearly inadequate to cover the
cost of restoration, the public works director may increase the amount of the
deposit to an amount he deems adequate to cover the cost. From this deposit
shall be deducted the expense to the city of relaying the surface of the ground
or pavement, and of making the refill if this is done by the city or its contractor.
The balance shall be returned to the applicant without interest after the tunnel
or excavation is completely refilled and the surface or pavement is restored. The
public works director shall waive the bond requirements for Cleveland Utilities
and any utility company franchised by the City of Cleveland or the State of
Tennessee.
In lieu of a deposit the applicant may deposit with the city clerk a surety
bond in such form and amount as the public works director shall deem adequate
to cover the costs to the city if the applicant shall fail to make proper
restoration. (Ord. of Sept. 1995)
16-205. Safety restrictions on excavations. Any person, firm,
corporation, association, or others making any excavation or tunnel shall do so
according to the terms and conditions of the application and permit authorizing
the work to be done. Barricades and lights shall be maintained to protect
persons and property from injury by or because of the excavation being made.
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed and provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users,
as required in the Uniform Manual for Traffic Control Devices. (Ord. of Sept.
1995)
16-206. Restoration of streets, etc. Any person, firm, corporation,
association, or others making any excavation or tunnel in or under any street,
alley, sidewalk, or public place in this city shall restore the street, alley,
sidewalk, or public place to its original condition following guidelines
established by the public works director. However, the asphalt resurfacing shall
be done by the city, but shall be paid for promptly upon completion by such
person, firm, corporation, association, or others for which the excavation or
tunnel was made. In case of unreasonable delay in restoring the street, alley,
sidewalk, or public place, the city shall give notice to the person, firm,
corporation, association, or others that unless the excavation or tunnel is refilled
properly within a specified reasonable period of time, the city will do the work
and charge the expense of doing the same to such person, firm, corporation,
association, or others. If the conditions of the above notice have not been met
within the specified time, the work shall be done by the city, an accurate account
of the expense involved kept, and the total cost shall be charged to the person,
firm, corporation, or others making the excavation or tunnel. Reasonable time
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-21
for repair is defined as forty-eight (48) hours from the time the excavation
begins. Utility companies may request a time extension if line repair requires
it. If requested by the applicant, the city shall make the sidewalk repairs and
charge the full expense thereof to the applicant.
Any person, firm, corporation, association, or others making any bore
under any street, alley, sidewalk, or public place in this city shall restore the
street, alley, sidewalk, or public place to its original condition if boring results
in any damage to the original condition. Said repairs shall be made following
guidelines established by the public works director. If the necessary repairs are
not made within a reasonable time as set out by the public works director, the
work shall be done by the city, an accurate account of the expenses involved
kept, and the total cost charged to the person, firm, corporation, or others
making the bore.
If the public works director makes any changes in the guidelines
authorized in this chapter for repair of the streets, sidewalks, or other public
places, then the city council shall be notified in writing of the change(s) at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. The notification shall explain fully the
reasons for the changes. (Ord. of Sept. 1995, as amended by Ord. of Oct. 1995)
16-207. Insurance. In addition to making the deposit or giving the bond
hereinbefore required to insure that proper restoration is made, each person
applicant for an excavation permit shall file a certificate of insurance indicating
that he is insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as
against claims for property damage which might arise from or out of the
performance of the work, either by himself, his subcontractor, or anyone directly
or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive
hazards, and underground work by equipment on the street, and shall include
protection against liability arising from completed operations. The amount of
the insurance shall be prescribed by the city clerk in accordance with the nature
of the risk involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily
injury shall not be less than $150,000 for each person and $350,000 for each
accident, and for property damages not less than $50,000 for any one (1)
occurrence, and a $75,000 aggregate. (Ord. of Sept. 1995)
16-208. Time limits. Each application for a permit shall state the
length of time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work
until the restoration of the surface of the ground or pavement, or until the refill
is made ready for paving by the city. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with
this time limitation unless permission for an extension of time is granted by the
public works director. (Ord. of Sept. 1995)
16-209. Supervision. The public works director or his designees shall
inspect all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place in the city, and shall be responsible for the
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-22
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be given to him or his
designees at least two (2) hours before the work of refilling any such excavation
or tunnel commences. The public works director or his designees are hereby
authorized to issue stop work orders on any job where the excavation or refilling
is not being carried out safely, or in compliance with this chapter and the
guidelines for restoration required in § 16-206. (Ord. of Sept. 1995)
16-210. Driveway curb cuts. No one shall cut, build, or maintain a
driveway across a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the
public works director. Such a permit will not be issued when the contemplated
driveway is to be so located or constructed as to create an unreasonable hazard
to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. No driveway shall exceed thirty-five (35)
feet in width at its outer or street edge and when two (2) or more adjoining
driveways are provided for the same property a safety island of not less than ten
(10) feet in width at its outer or street edge shall be provided. Driveway aprons
shall not extend out into the street. (Ord. of Sept. 1995)
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-23
CHAPTER 3
RAILROADS AND TRAINS
SECTION
16-301. Watchman, gates or signal device required at certain crossings.
16-302. Trains to sound bell or whistle at short intervals.
16-303. Unlawful to create unnecessary noise.
16-304. Trail toilets to be closed and not used while in city.
16-305. Unlawful to obstruct road crossing for more than ten minutes at
a time.
16-306. Penalties.
16-301. Watchman, gates or signal device required at certain
crossings. Any railroad company owning or otherwise responsible for railroad
tracks within the city limits is hereby required to place and install gates or
suitable signal devices at all grade crossings within the city designated by the
city council. (Ord. of Nov. 1998)
16-302. Trains to sound bell or whistle at short intervals. Railroad
trains shall not be run inside of the city without the bell or whistle being
sounded at short intervals. Any engineer, fireman, or other servant or employee
in charge may be held liable for the violation of this section. (Ord. of Nov. 1998)
16-303. Unlawful to create unnecessary noise. It shall be unlawful
for any engineer, fireman or other person in charge of a railroad engine
unnecessarily to blow the whistle or create any other unnecessary noise, within
the limits of the city; provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit the
observance of the provisions of the laws of the state with reference to the
prevention of accidents by the sounding of alarms. (Ord. of Nov. 1998)
16-304. Trail toilets to be closed and not used while in city. It
shall be unlawful for any railroad cars to enter the city limits with the toilet
doors open, or for such doors to be left open while such cars are in the city, for
any person to enter the same and deposit offal therein while in the city. The
railroad company or conductor in charge, or either of them, may be held liable
for a violation of this section. (Ord. of Nov. 1998)
16-305. Unlawful to obstruct road crossing for more than ten
minutes at a time. No railroad company shall obstruct a road crossing by cars,
or otherwise, more than ten (10) minutes at a time, and the company or the
engineer and conductor, fireman, flagman or other servant in charge, or all or
either of them may be held liable for any violation of this section; provided,
however, that no member of a train crew may be held personally guilty of a
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-24
violation of this section upon proof that his action was necessary to comply with
the orders or instructions of his employer or its officers. (Ord. of Nov. 1998)
16-306. Penalties. Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs for each offense. Each
day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate civil
offense. The imposition of such civil penalty shall not prevent the revocation of
any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where
called for or permitted under the provisions of the municipal code or other
applicable law. (Ord. of Nov. 1998, as amended by Ord. of 2/10/03)
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-25
CHAPTER 4
STORM-WATER DRAINAGE
SECTION
16-401. Drainage ditches.
16-402. Private ditches.
16-403. Ditch enclosure by owner.
16-404. Priorities for drainage improvements.
16-405. New drainage systems.
16-406. Waiver of assessments and costs.
16-401. Drainage ditches. Where drainage ditches, creeks, streams,
and other waterways cross private property, it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to keep the banks clean and to keep the ditches, creeks, streams,
and other waterways clear of all obstructions which could impede the natural
flow of rainfall runoff. The property owner who changes the natural flow of
water or intensifies the flow of water off of his property may be liable to the
adjacent property owner(s) for any damages in accordance with Tennessee law.
No buildings shall be constructed on top of drainage systems or within any
drainage easement. (Ord. of Jan. 1999)
16-402. Private ditches. Any ditch which originates on private
property or exists outside of an accepted right-of-way or storm drainage
easement shall be considered a private ditch. The city will not participate in the
construction or maintenance of a private ditch, or of its enclosure. (Ord. of Jan.
1999)
16-403. Ditch enclosure by owner. Plans and specifications shall be
approved by the department of public works on all ditch enclosure projects
planned by the owner. No approval will be required by the property owner who
plans to enclose a private ditch unless the ditch receives direct discharge from
a city street or upstream properties. (Ord. of Jan. 1999)
16-404. Priorities for drainage improvements. (1) The city may
participate in the enclosure of ditches and improvement of existing drainage
pipes and catch basins on a priority basis. The city will determine the feasibility
of enclosing the ditches or improving existing drainage pipes and catch basins,
and notify the adjoining property owner(s) of its intentions. The city council
shall annually determine in its budgeting process, if not before, those projects
to be undertaken based upon available financial resources. Any drainage
request shall be forwarded to the public works director, who shall make a
recommendation to the city manager and city council of a priority ranking, using
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-26
the ranking system herein. Upon receiving the recommendation, the city council
shall determine the priority of the request for future funding.
(2) The city shall bear the full cost of design, labor, materials and
equipment for those projects listed below as first priority. The city shall pay for
that portion of an approved joint project listed below as a second priority which
it has agreed to in negotiations. On all such second priorities, the city manager
shall make a recommendation to the city council, after consulting with the
public works director.
(3) For all other priorities, the city will participate in enclosing or
improving a ditch by furnishing engineering design, labor and equipment. All
materials costs for other than first or second priorities shall be borne by the
affected property owners benefited using any cost assessment formula allowed
by Article II, Section I of the city charter and the general statutes of the state;
and approved by the city council. In addition, benefited property owners must
provide any required drainage easements or rights-of-way to the city. All work
will be performed or contracted by the city, with payment of property owners'
shares by special assessment. In determining the ranking of projects, the city
council will consider among other things the willingness of the benefiting
property owners to pay special assessments. All design of drainage facilities is
subject to approval by the city engineer, and must meet the minimum design
standards as established by ordinances.
(4) The five priority rankings for drainage improvements shall be as
listed below. These rankings may be changed by the city council due to
unforeseen circumstances that constitute an emergency.
(a) First priority will be drainage facilities and ditches that are
the responsibility of the city, and are inadequately sized or constructed
such that they represent a hazard to life or property. This shall include
any regional detention/retention pond recommended to reduce the hazard
to life or property. In determining priorities within this classification,
projects improving or removing hazards to life shall take precedence over
those improving or removing hazards only to property.
(b) Second priority will be joint projects with a developer
coinciding with his improvements, when in the opinion of the city council
it is in the city's best long-term interest to make this investment to
improve the city's drainage system. These projects shall be negotiated by
the city manager and the public works director on behalf of the city
council, but shall not be final without approval by the city council. Since
these projects often come up at unexpected times, the city council may
designate a certain portion of its annual budget for drainage projects as
a contingency for such projects.
(c) Third priority will be ditches receiving direct discharge from
a city-maintained street.
(d) Fourth priority will be ditches receiving secondary discharge
from a city-maintained street. (Example: A ditch receiving water from
Change 10, July 10, 2006 16-27
an abutting lot that receives direct discharge from a city-maintained
street.)
(e) Fifth priority will be ditches paralleling existing
city-maintained streets. However, where new residential, commercial,
institutional, or industrial construction requires piping for a driveway
connection, the property owner shall be responsible for the full cost of
piping installation and materials. (Ord. of Jan. 1999)
16-405. New drainage systems. (1) Owners or developers of property
10,000 square feet or more in size shall submit for approval by the city engineer
a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan meeting city regulations prior to
any construction or lot-clearing. Owners or developers of property five (5) acres
or more in size shall submit a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan to the
state for approval, with a copy sent to the city engineer.
(2) Owners or developers of property prior to any development shall
submit plans and specifications for the construction of a drainage system when
required by the soil erosion and sediment control ordinance or the subdivision
regulations. The owners or developers must install at their cost the
improvements required by said ordinances and regulations, with all necessary
easements, rights-of-way and drainage system improvements dedicated to the
city at no cost. After acceptance of such dedication, the city shall be responsible
for maintenance of the accepted drainage system. (Ord. of Jan. 1999)
16-406. Waiver of assessments and costs. The city council may waive
the payment of all or any portion of a special assessment or cost for a drainage
improvement project for any property owner whose family income would qualify
them for a housing loan under the Tennessee Housing Development Agency
(THDA) program, as amended. The city shall use the same income verification
process that THDA uses to determine eligibility for this waiver. Any waiver
granted shall not increase the amount of assessment or cost of other property
owners benefiting by the drainage project. The city shall absorb the cost of any
waived assessments or costs. (Ord. of Jan. 1999)
Change 13, May 10, 2010 17-1
1Municipal code reference
Property maintenance regulations: title 13.
TITLE 17
REFUSE AND TRASH DISPOSAL1
CHAPTER
1. SOLID WASTE AND REFUSE COLLECTION.
CHAPTER 1
SOLID WASTE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
SECTION
17-101. Definitions.
17-102. Responsibility for administration of this chapter.
17-103. Residential housing facilities, containers, collection procedures, and
general regulations.
17-104. Commercial housing facilities, containers, collection procedures, and
general regulations.
17-105 Sanitation user fee for residential housing facilities and commercial
housing facilities.
17-106. Commercial facilities-collection procedures, containers, and general
regulations.
17-107. Commercial collection fee for commercial facilities.
17-108. Premises to be kept clean.
17-109. Prohibited substances and practices.
17-110. Yard waste, brush collection, bulk rubbish, and other refuse.
17-111. Solid waste brought into the city.
17-112. Civil penalties for violations of this chapter.
17-101. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following words shall
have the following meanings:
(1) "Bag" is a plastic sack designated to store garbage with sufficient
wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. As used in
this chapter, the total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed thirtyfive
(35) lbs.
(2) "Bulk container" is a "commercial container."
(3) "Bulk rubbish" means wooden and cardboard boxes, crates,
appliances, furniture, bedding, and other refuse items which by their size and
shape cannot be readily placed in city-approved containers.
Change 13, May 10, 2010 17-2
(4) "Commercial container" is a dumpster container with a capacity of
two (2) to eight (8) cubic yards that remains at the point of collection designated
by the city.
(5) "Commercial establishment" is any business, industrial,
institutional or agricultural establishment, office or professional building,
shopping center, multiple business complex, college dormitory, church, hospital,
club or other similar organization. However, a commercial establishment does
not include any commercial or industrial establishment that is served by an
on-site commercial trash compactor which is not serviced by the city's solid
waste contractor in their capacity as the city's contractor.
(6) "Commercial housing facility" is a structure or grouping of
structures, an apartment complex, or a mobile home park, containing four (4)
or more dwelling units whether singly owned or owned by various persons but
having the appearance and utility of other housing complexes within a
contiguous area. However, a commercial housing facility does not include any
facility that is served by an on-site commercial trash compactor which is not
serviced by the city's solid waste contractor in their capacity as the city's
contractor.
(7) "Commercial housing facility garbage" means solid waste resulting
from the operation, maintenance or use of any dwelling unit located within a
commercial housing facility as defined in this chapter.
(8) "Commercial solid waste" means solid waste resulting from the
operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural
establishment, office or professional building, shopping center, multiple business
complex, church, club or other similar organization.
(9) "Construction waste" means materials from construction,
demolition, remodeling, or construction-site preparation, including, but not
limited to, rocks, bricks, dirt, debris, fill, plaster, guttering, and all types of
scrap materials.
(10) "Garbage" means all household wastes, including but not limited
to food waste, bottles, wastepaper, tin cans, clothing, small mechanical parts,
small dead animals, and rubbish. As used in this chapter, "garbage" does not
include tree limbs, shrubbery, trimmings, leaves, construction waste, human or
animal waste, large dead animals, large mechanical parts, and "bulk rubbish."
(11) "Hazardous waste" is defined as that term is defined by the State
of Tennessee in its statutes and regulations regarding hazardous waste.
(12) "Multiple business complex" is any group of more than one (1)
business located on one (1) tract of property.
(13) "Refuse" means solid waste.
(14) "Residential garbage" means garbage resulting from the operation
and maintenance of a residential housing facility. It does not include garbage
resulting from the operation, maintenance or use of a dwelling unit located
within a commercial housing facility nor does it include garbage resulting from
the operation of a commercial establishment as defined in this chapter.
Change 13, May 10, 2010 17-3
(15) "Residential garbage container" means a garbage container with
a capacity of greater than twenty (20) gallons but less than thirty-five (35)
gallons, constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate
strength for lifting, and having a tight fitting lid capable of preventing entrance
into the container by animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, insects,
rodents, or other vermin. The weight of a residential garbage container and its
contents shall not exceed sixty (60) lbs.
(16) "Residential housing facility" is a single structure containing three
(3) dwelling units or less and not operated as a part of a commercial housing
facility. It includes a single family dwelling.
(17) "Service level" means the maximum number of times or frequency
that containers are serviced.
(18) "Solid waste" is unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid
or semi-solid state, including but not limited to garbage, ashes, street refuse,
rubbish, dead animals, animal and agricultural wastes, yard wastes, appliances,
furniture, special wastes, industrial wastes, and demolition and construction
wastes, excluding "bulk rubbish" and hazardous or infectious wastes.
(19) "Yard waste" means grass clippings, leaves, tree and shrubbery
trimmings, and other related yard waste materials. (1981 Code, § 10-16, as
amended by Ord. of Oct. 1994; Ord. of June 1995; Ord. of 10/24/2000; Ord.
#2003-36, Dec. 2003; and Ord. #2005-39, Oct. 2005, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-76, Dec. 2009)
17-102. Responsibility for administration of this chapter. (1) The
public works director is responsible for:
(a) The enforcement of this chapter; and
(b) Coordination of the services provided herein; and
(c) Making recommendations to the city manager for
improvements to the city's solid waste collection and disposal system; and
(d) Periodically reviewing the city's cost of providing solid waste
collection, disposal, and recycling; and
(e) Periodically recommending an adjustment to the fees for
such services to offset the city's costs. (Ord. of Oct. 1994, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-76, Dec. 2009)
17-103. Residential housing facilities, containers, collection
procedures, and general regulations. (1) The normal collection policy for
all residential housing facilities is to collect garbage from each residential
housing facility once per week. The collection routes shall be established by the
public works director.
(2) All garbage generated by residential housing facilities shall be
placed in a "residential garbage container" or securely in "bag(s)."
(3) Residential garbage containers or bag(s) from residential housing
facilities shall be placed for collection no earlier than 3:00 P.M. on the day before
Change 13, May 10, 2010 17-4
collection. Residential garbage containers or bag(s) should be placed for
collection no later than 7:00 A.M. on the date of collection to assure collection of
the garbage. No residential garbage containers or bag(s) are permitted to remain
at the curbside collection point later than 9:00 P.M. on the day of collection.
(4) On the scheduled day for collection, all residential garbage
containers or bag(s) must be placed at the edge of the street, curb or other
designated location approved for pickup. Residential garbage containers or
bag(s) shall be placed in such a location and in such a manner as to be readily
accessible by collection equipment. Residential garbage containers or bag(s)
must not be placed in a location that interferes with overhead power lines or
tree branches, parked cars, vehicular traffic, or in any other way that would
constitute a public hazard or nuisance.
(5) It is unlawful to leave a residential garbage container or a bag at
curbside except during the time periods specified in this section. It is also
unlawful to leave a residential garbage container unsecured (without its lid
tightly secured) if it contains garbage. It is also unlawful to place a bag of
garbage for collection at curbside unless the bag is securely tied or fastened at
its opening.
(6) Bulk rubbish and construction waste, as defined in this chapter,
are hereby prohibited from being placed for collection by the city's solid waste
contractor. Bulk rubbish and construction waste shall be placed for collection in
accordance with the provisions of § 17-110. (1981 Code, §§ 10-20, 10-21, 10-22,
and 10-23, as amended by Ord. of Oct. 1994; Ord. of June 1997; Ord. of June
1998; replaced by Ord. #2005-39, Oct. 2005; amended by Ord. #2005-46, Nov.
2005; and replaced by Ord. #2006-7, March 2006, as replaced by Ord. #2009-76,
Dec. 2009)
17-104. Commercial housing facilities, containers, collection
procedures, and general regulations. (1) A "commercial housing facility"
shall be serviced with a "commercial container(s)", in order to accommodate the
"commercial housing facility garbage" generated by the tenants of the
commercial housing facility.
(2) "Commercial housing facility garbage" intended for collection by the
city, shall be placed in a city-approved "commercial container." Tenants of
commercial housing facilities must deposit all "commercial housing facility
garbage" within the commercial container(s) serving the commercial housing
facility.
(3) No residential housing containers may be placed for collection at
any commercial housing facility where a commercial container is provided. No
trash bags may be placed for collection at any commercial housing facility where
a commercial container is provided unless the bag(s) are placed within the
commercial container.
(4) All commercial containers must be compatible with the commercial
solid waste collection equipment used by the city's garbage contractor. The city
Change 13, May 10, 2010 17-5
reserves the right to recommend a smaller or larger container, and require more
or less pick-ups per week, if in the judgment of the public works director such
change will be more cost effective or provide more efficient service. The
container(s) for commercial housing facilities shall be furnished by the
commercial housing facility desiring service.
(5) The owner/user of all containers shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance, structural maintenance and the replacement of said
containers.
(6) If the public works director determines that a commercial housing
facility cannot accommodate a commercial container, then the public works
director is hereby granted the authority to require the owner of the commercial
housing facility to construct and maintain a receptacle large enough to hold and
retain a sufficient number of residential housing containers for all of the
residents or tenants of the particular commercial housing facility.
If the public works director determines that a commercial housing facility
cannot accommodate a commercial container and the director will allow the use
of a receptacle, the public works director will notify the owner of the commercial
housing facility of said determination and give the owner thirty (30) days from
the date of the notice to provide an appropriate receptacle in lieu of a
commercial container. It shall be unlawful for an owner of a commercial housing
facility to fail to provide a receptacle within thirty (30) days after receiving this
written notification by the public works director.
The size, shape, configuration, location and construction of this receptacle
shall be subject to the review and final approval of the public works director.
Each tenant who resides in a commercial housing facility with an
approved receptacle must place all garbage securely in bags. The bags must then
be placed in residential garbage containers and these containers must be placed
within the receptacle. (1981 Code, §§ 10-29 and 10-34, as amended by Ord. of
Oct. 1994; Ord. of June 1995; Ord. of 6/23/97; and Ord. #2005-39, Oct. 2005, as
replaced by Ord. #2009-76, Dec. 2009)
17-105. Sanitation user fee for residential housing facilities and
commercial housing facilities. The city's costs of collection and disposal of
garbage, refuse, and other solid waste are hereby offset by a sanitation user fee
imposed upon all residential housing facilities and each individual unit located
within any commercial housing facility in the city. The sanitation user fee is
hereby levied, and it shall be billed and collected by Cleveland Utilities as an
additional line item on a monthly utility billing. The amount billed for services
used for less than a complete month shall be prorated according to Cleveland
Utilities' policies on proration. The sanitation user fee shall be set by ordinance
of the city council. (Ord. of Oct. 1994, as replaced by Ord. #2009-76, Dec. 2009)
Change 13, May 10, 2010 17-6
17-106. Commercial facilities-collection procedures, containers,
and general regulations. (1) "Commercial solid waste" intended for collection
by the city shall be placed in a city-approved container. All containers must be
compatible with the commercial solid waste collection equipment used by the
city's garbage contractor. The city reserves the right to recommend a smaller or
larger container, and require more or less pick-ups per week, if in the judgment
of the public works director such change will be more cost effective. The
container shall be furnished by the commercial establishments desiring service.
(2) The normal collection policy for commercial solid waste is to collect
from each container of each commercial establishment, the number of times per
week, not to exceed once per day, excluding Sundays, that the establishment
selects for service.
(3) Bulk containers shall at all times be kept in a place easily
accessible to the collection equipment used by the city's garbage contractor. No
service shall be given those establishments permitting objects, obstructions, or
vehicles to hinder in any way whatsoever the servicing of said containers.
(4) The public works director may establish a special collection district
due to the density of commercial facilities, such as the downtown area, and
provide a unified service for said district. The public works director shall submit
the district boundaries to the city manager and the city council for approval.
(5) The owner/user of all bulk containers shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance, structural maintenance and the replacement of said
containers.
(6) The owner or developer of commercial, industrial, or institutional
facilities, such as regional malls, shopping centers, hospitals, medical centers,
commercial housing facilities, and other major developments shall be required
to show methods of handling solid waste and locations of all solid waste
containers on an approved site plan to the public works director prior to
beginning construction. (Ord. of Oct. 1994, as replaced by Ord. #2009-76, Dec.
2009)
17-107. Commercial collection fee for commercial facilities. The
city's costs of collection and disposal of commercial solid waste are hereby offset
by a commercial collection fee imposed upon all commercial facilities within the
city. The applicable commercial collection fee is hereby levied, and it shall be
collected by Cleveland Utilities as an additional line item on a monthly utility
billing.
The commercial fee charged each commercial establishment shall be
calculated as follows: The number of cubic yards (container size) times the
number of pickups weekly times 4.33 times the rate per cubic yard equals the
monthly fee.
The city council shall annually establish by ordinance the rate, after
receiving the recommendation of the public works director.
Change 13, May 10, 2010 17-7
The commercial recycling user fee shall be set by an ordinance adopted
by the city council. (Ord. of Oct. 1994, as amended by Ord. of Nov. 1994, and
Ord. of 8/27/2001, as replaced by Ord. #2009-76, Dec. 2009)
17-108. Premises to be kept clean. It shall be unlawful for any person
or persons owning, leasing, occupying or having control of property within the
corporate limits of the city, regardless of whether such property is vacant or
contains structures thereon, to permit the accumulation of garbage, refuse,
hazardous waste, or other undesirable materials thereon. It is the responsibility
of the individual(s) having control of residential housing facilities, commercial
housing facilities, and commercial establishments to maintain the container(s)
and the surrounding area in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times.
(as added by Ord. of 4/10/2000, as replaced by Ord. #2009-76, Dec. 2009)
17-109. Prohibited substances and practices. (1) Prohibited
substances. The following substances are hereby prohibited and shall not be
placed nor deposited in any approved containers serviced by the collection
equipment used by the city's solid waste contractor:
(a) Flammable liquids, solids or gases, such as gasoline,
benzene, alcohol or other similar substances.
(b) Any material that could be hazardous or injurious to city
employees or contractor's employees or which could cause damage to the
equipment belonging to the city or the city's contractor.
(c) "Construction waste" as defined in this chapter.
(d) Hot materials such as ashes, cinders, etc.
(e) Human waste.
(f) Animal waste unless it is placed and secured in a plastic
bag.
(g) Infectious wastes as classified by the following:
(i) Isolation wastes. Wastes contaminated by patients
who are isolated due to communicable disease as provided in the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control Guidelines for Isolation
Precautions in Hospitals (July 1983).
(ii) Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and
associated biological cultures and stocks of infectious agents,
including specimen cultures from medical and pathological
laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research
and industrial laboratories, waste from the production of
biologicals, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and cultural
dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures.
(iii) Human blood and blood products. Waste human
blood and blood products such as serum, plasma, and other blood
components.
Change 13, May 10, 2010 17-8
(iv) Pathological wastes. Pathological wastes, such as
tissues, organs, body parts, and body fluids that are removed
during surgery and autopsy.
(v) Discarded sharps. All discarded sharps (e.g.
hypodermic needles, syringes, Pasteur pipettes, broken glass,
scalpel blades) used in patient care, medical research or industrial
laboratories.
(vi) Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, and
bedding. Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts and bedding
of animals that were intentionally exposed to pathogens in
research, in the production of biologicals or in the in vitro testing
of pharmaceuticals.
(vii) Facility-specified infectious wastes. Other wastes
determined to be infectious by a written facility policy.
(h) Human/animal remains.
(2) Prohibited practices. (a) The following practices are prohibited
and it shall be unlawful for:
(i) Any person to move, remove, reset, scatter, tamper
with, use, carry away, deface, mutilate, destroy, damage or
interfere with any type of garbage container. (as added by
Ord. #2005-39, Oct. 2005, as replaced by Ord. #2009-76, Dec. 2009)
17-110. Yard waste, brush collection, bulk rubbish, and other
refuse. (1) Yard waste, brush and bulk rubbish collection. (a) Normal
schedule. Schedule for brush collection, yard waste and bulk rubbish
shall be two pickups each month. The public works director shall
recommend routes to the city manager, dividing the city into ten (10)
daily routes, with two (2) zones in each route. The recommendation shall
be in the form of a map with written descriptions of the boundaries; and
is subject to the approval of the city council. Any modification to the
routing also must be approved by the city council. During the seasonal
leaf collection period referred to in this section, the leaf collection routes
shall coincide with the routes for yard waste and bulk rubbish.
(b) Placement of brush for collection. All brush (tree limbs,
shrubbery and hedge trimmings, etc.) must be placed at the edge of a
street or serviceable alley easily accessible with city collection equipment.
(c) Piling of brush for collection. All brush shall be neatly
stacked and not scattered. Brush collections shall not be made where it
is loosely scattered. A notice shall be given to the resident that collection
cannot be made and the reason why it cannot be made.
(d) Length and size of brush. Tree trunks, stumps, and limbs
larger than seven inches (7"), measured across the diameter of the butt
end, shall not be collected by the city. All tree limbs must not exceed
seven feet (7') in length and must be stacked as required.
Change 13, May 10, 2010 17-9
(e) Separation of refuse. No items of refuse may be mixed with
brush trimmings. Mixing wire, metal, lumber, brick, rock, dirt or similar
items with brush trimmings is prohibited by landfill regulations and
collection shall be limited to separated items. Mixing leaves and grass
clippings with other brush is also prohibited.
(f) Placement of yard waste for collection. No item of yard waste
placed out for disposal shall be placed on top of water/gas meters or
valves, piled against utility poles, guy wires, fire hydrants, fences or
structures or any item which could be damaged by collection equipment,
or directly under electrical distribution lines.
(g) Grass clippings and leaves to be bagged except during
seasonal leaf collection. Except during seasonal leaf collection as outlined
in (5) below, all leaves and grass clippings collected by the city shall be
placed in clear plastic bags.
(2) Refuse generated through private enterprise. The city shall not be
responsible for the collection and disposal of construction waste, bulk rubbish,
brush or any other forms of solid waste generated or produced by contractors,
tree trimmers, or persons doing work for profit or personal gain. Nor will any
such collection of refuse be made from lot or land clearing projects including
remodeling or alterations of homes or businesses or such other private project
or improvements, whether or not a contractor is employed. However, residents
having remodeling or construction waste may request a special pick-up as
outlined in subsection (4) of this section.
(3) Bulk rubbish (junk) service. Bulk rubbish service will be performed
on the same schedule as brush collection. Bulk rubbish shall not be placed at the
street for collection until the day before the route is to be picked up. No bulk
rubbish will be picked up that exceeds the maximum rated lifting capacity of the
collection equipment. If collection cannot be made for this reason, notice shall
be given the resident of the reason for non-collection. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, partnership, corporation, syndicate, joint stock company,
association or other group operating as a unit, owning, leasing, occupying or
having control of property within the corporate limits of the city, to violate or
permit to be violated the requirements of this section.
(4) Self-help program. The public works director, or his designee, shall
have the authority to establish a reasonable self-help program for residents who
have unusual amounts of refuse, or unusual circumstances which would prevent
hauling or disposal for themselves. Such program, or special pick-up, will be at
no cost to the residents.
(5) Seasonal leaf collection. Fall leaf collection will begin between
October 1 and November 15 depending on climatic conditions and will continue
through the end of January. During this time period, leaves must be placed at
the curb, unbagged and accessible to leaf suction machinery. Except during this
time period, all leaves must be placed in clear plastic bags for collection as
scheduled by the public works director. (as added by Ord. #2009-76, Dec. 2009)
Change 14, October 10, 2011 17-10
17-111. Solid waste brought into the city. (1) It shall be unlawful for
any person to bring solid waste into the city that was generated by any person
or entity outside the city for the purpose of dumping or depositing such waste
for collection by municipal forces or the city's garbage contractor, unless
authorized by the city manager or the public works director. This section shall
not be constructed to prohibit a refuse transfer station or recycling facility.
(2) Each day that such illegal dumping or depositing occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. Any complaints of illegal dumping or depositing
in violation of this section shall be forwarded to the code enforcement officer,
who shall determine ownership of the dumped or deposited waste and then issue
a municipal citation to the offender, or forward the information to the police
department for prosecution under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-14-502 or
any other applicable state law. (as added by Ord. #2009-76, Dec. 2009, and
amended by Ord. #2010-13, May 2010)
17-112. Civil penalties for violations of this chapter. A violation of
any rule, regulation, section or provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be
unlawful and shall be punishable by the imposition of a civil penalty in an
amount not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), plus court costs and litigation tax as
provided for in the Cleveland Municipal Code. Each day of violation of any rule,
regulation, section or provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense. (as added by Ord. #2009-76, Dec. 2009)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-1
TITLE 18
WATER AND SEWERS1
CHAPTER
1. SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
2. CROSS-CONNECTIONS, ETC.
3. MS4 PHASE II STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
4. STORMWATER UTILITY ORDINANCE.
CHAPTER 1
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL2
SECTION
18-101. Purpose and policy.
18-102. Definitions.
18-103. Use of public sewers.
18-104. Building sewers, connections, and permits.
18-105. Private domestic wastewater disposal.
18-106. Prohibitions and limitations on discharges.
18-107. Control of prohibited pollutants.
18-108. Wastewater discharge permits.
18-109. Inspections, monitoring, and records.
18-110. Enforcement.
18-111. Wastewater volume determination.
18-112. Wastewater charges and fees.
18-113. Administration of sewer system.
18-114. Sewer extension outside corporate limits - urban growth.
18-101. Purpose and policy. The purpose of this chapter is to set
uniform requirements for users of the city's wastewater collection system and
treatment works to enable the city to comply with the provisions of the Clean
1Municipal code references
Building and utility codes: title 12.
Refuse disposal: title 17.
2Municipal code reference
Plumbing code: title 12, chapter 6.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-2
Water Act and other applicable federal and state law and regulations, and to
provide for the public health and welfare by regulating the quality of
wastewater discharged into the city's wastewater collection system and
treatment works. This chapter establishes conditions for connection to the
sanitary sewer system and requires a permit. Certain acts which may be
detrimental to the sewer system are prohibited. This chapter provides a means
for determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics, the
setting of charges and fees, and the issuance of permits to certain users. This
chapter establishes effluent limitations and other discharge criteria and
provides that certain users shall pretreat waste to prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) which will
interfere with due operation of the POTW, may cause environmental damage,
interfere with the use or disposal of sewage sludge; and to prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the treatment
works into the receiving waters or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible
with the treatment works; and to improve the opportunities to recycle and
reclaim wastewaters and the sludges resulting from wastewater treatment.
This chapter provides measures for the enforcement of its provisions and
abatement of violations thereof. (Ord. of Sept. 1994, as replaced by Ord.
#2012-19, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-102. Definitions. (1) For purposes of this chapter, the following
phrases and words shall have the meaning assigned below, except in those
instances where the content clearly indicates a different meaning:
(a) "Best management practices." Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 18-106.
(b) "Clean Water Act (CWA)," "Act," or "the Act." The Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, 33 United States Code (U.S.C.) 1251, et seq.
(c) "Approved Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW)
Pretreatment Program" or "Program" or "POTW pretreatment program."
A program administered by a publicly owned treatment works that meets
the criteria established in chapter 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations
(40 CFR) §§ 403.8 and 403.9, and which has been approved by a regional
administrator or state director in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.11.
(d) "Board." Cleveland Utilities Board.
(e) "Building drain." That part of the lowest horizontal piping
of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste,
another drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') outside the inner face of the
building wall.
(f) "Building sewer." A sewer conveying wastewater from the
building drain to a community sanitary sewer or other place of disposal.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-3
(g) "Bypass." The intentional diversion of wastestreams from
any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
(h) "Categorical standards." National pretreatment standards
established by the Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter EPA)
for specific industrial user Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code
categories.
(i) "Centralized Waste Treatment Facility (CWT)." A
commercial centralized waste treatment facility (other than a landfill or
an incinerator) which treats or stores aqueous wastes generated by
facilities not located on the CWT site and which disposes of these wastes
by introducing them to the POTW.
(j) "City." City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
(k) "Cleveland Utilities." The department of the City of
Cleveland charged with the responsibility for operation, maintenance,
and financial management of the electric distribution system; the water
treatment and distribution system; wastewater collection, treatment, and
disposal system; and all facilities to perform the necessary services
provided by these utilities under the direction of the Cleveland Utilities
Board.
(l) "Combined sewer." A sewer which has been designed to
carry both sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff.
(m) "Community sewer." A sanitary sewer to which all owners
of abutting properties have equal rights and which is owned by the
utility.
(n) "Conventional pollutant." Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(BOD), Total Suspended Solids (TSS), pH, fecal coliform bacteria, and oil
and grease.
(o) "Direct discharge." The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Tennessee.
(p) "Discharge monitoring report." A report submitted by an
industrial user to the utility pursuant to this chapter containing
information relating to the nature and concentration of pollutants and
flow characteristics of a discharge from the industrial user to the POTW
using standard methods approved by the utility.
(q) "Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)." An agency of the
United States or the administrator or other duly authorized official of
said agency.
(r) "Grab sample." A sample taken from a waste stream
without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time
not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
(s) "Holding tank waste." Any waste from holding tanks such
as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and
vacuum-pump tank trucks. This specifically includes wastewater from
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-4
industrial users conveyed to the POTW by any means other than by a
standard connection to a sanitary combined sewer.
(t) "Indirect discharge." The discharge or the introduction of
pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) into the POTW (including holding tank waste
discharged into the system) for treatment before direct discharge to state
waters.
(u) "Industrial user." A source of indirect discharge which does
not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued
pursuant to section 402 of the Act. For the purposes of this chapter, an
industrial user is a source of nondomestic wastes from industrial
processes.
(v) "Infiltration." Water other than wastewater that enters a
sewer system (including sewer service connections) from the ground
through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or
manholes. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
(w) "Inflow." Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer
system (including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof
leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, fountain drains, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections
between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, stormwaters,
surface runoff, street wash waters, and drainage. Inflow does not include,
and is distinguished from, infiltration.
(x) "Interference." A discharge which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use
or disposal or exceeds the design capacity of the treatment works or the
collection system.
(y) "Mass emission rate." The weight of material discharged to
the community sewer system during a given time interval. Unless
otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day
of the particular constituent or combination of constituents.
(z) "Maximum concentration." The maximum amount of a
specified pollutant in a volume of water or wastewater.
(aa) "National Pretreatment Standard." Any regulations
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which
applies to industrial users. These terms also include prohibited
discharges promulgated in 40 CFR 403.5 and local limits adopted as part
of the city's approved pretreatment program.
(bb) "New source." (i) Any building, structure, facility, or
installation from which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-5
307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that one (1) of the following criteria is applicable:
(A) The building, structure, facility, or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located.
(B) The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that
causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source.
(C) The production or wastewater generated
processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation
are substantially independent of an existing source at the
same site. In determining whether these are substantially
independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent
to which the new facility is engaged in the same general
type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
(ii) Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (i)(B) or (C) of this
subsection but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process or production equipment.
(iii) Construction of a new source as defined under this
paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has taken one
(1) of the following actions:
(A) Begun or caused to begin as part of a
continuous on-site construction program:
- Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities
or equipment.
- Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment.
(B) Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are
intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable
time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and
contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do
not constitute a contractual obligation under this
paragraph.
(cc) "National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Permit." A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
1342).
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-6
(dd) "Normal wastewater." Effluent which contains constituents
and characteristics similar to effluent from a domestic premise, and
specifically for the purposes of this chapter, does not contain BOD5, COD,
or TSS in concentrations in excess of the following:
BOD5 - 300 milligrams per liter
COD - 600 milligrams per liter
TSS - 400 milligrams per liter
(ee) "Pass through." A discharge which exits the POTW into
waters of the United States in the quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). In the
case of POTW receiving discharges from CWTs as defined above, pass
through also means the failure of the CWT and the POTW to reduce
pollutant discharges from the POTW to the degree required under section
301(b)(2) of the CWA if the CWA discharged directly to surface waters.
(ff) "Person." Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine; the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the
context.
(gg) "Pollution." The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
(hh) "Premises." A parcel of real estate or portion thereof,
including any improvements thereon which is determined by the utility
to be a single user for purposes of receiving, using, and paying for
services.
(ii) "Pretreatment." The reduction of the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration
may be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; process
changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR § 403.6(d).
Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such
as equalization tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug
loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the
POTW. However, where wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in
an equalization facility with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater
from another regulated process, the effluent from the equalization facility
must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with
40 CFR § 403.6(e).
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-7
(jj) "Pretreatment requirements." Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment other than a national pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.
(kk) "Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW)." A treatment
works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292). This
definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to such a
treatment works and any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or liquid
industrial waste, but does include pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment.
(ll) "Reclaimed water." Water which, as a result of the treatment
of waste, is suitable for direct beneficial or controlled use that would not
occur otherwise.
(mm) "Sanitary sewer" A sewer which carries wastewater and
from which storm, surface, and ground waters are intentionally excluded.
(nn) "Severe property damage." Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to pretreatment facilities rendering them inoperable,
or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in
production.
(oo) "Significant industrial user." (i) All dischargers subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40
CFR chapter I, subchapter N.
(ii) Any other industrial user that: discharges an average
of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the WWF (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process waste
stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average
dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the WWF treatment
plant.
(iii) All non-categorical dischargers that, in the opinion of
the utility, have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the
POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement. This may include, but not be limited to all
centralized waste treatment discharges, all tank and drum
cleaning facilities, and all paint manufacturing facilities.
(iv) All non-categorical discharges that contain more than
one hundred (100) pounds per day of combined BOD5 and TSS load
above that level found in normal wastewater, or that contain more
than one thousand (1,000) pounds in a month of combined BOD
and TSS load above that level found in normal wastewater.
(pp) "Standard industrial classification." A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-8
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
(qq) "Toxic pollutant." Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
listed as toxic in 40 CFR part 401 promulgated by the administrator of
the EPA under the provisions of 33 U.S.C. 1317.
(rr) "Treatment works." Any devices and systems used in the
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of domestic sewage of
liquid industrial wastes, including interceptor sewers, outfall sewers,
sewage collection systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and
alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled
supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any
works, including land, that will be an integral part of the treatment
process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such
treatment; and including combined stormwater and sanitary sewer
systems.
(ss) "Twenty-four-hour, flow-proportional composite sample." A
sample consisting of several effluent portions collected during a twentyfour
(24) hour period in which the portions of sample are proportionate to
the flow and combined to form a representative sample.
(tt) "Unpolluted water." Water to which no constituent has been
added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such
water unacceptable to the State of Tennessee or the EPA having
jurisdiction thereof for disposal to storm or natural drainage or directly
to surface waters.
(uu) "User." Any person, firm, corporation, or governmental
entity that discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of wastewater
into a community sewer.
(vv) "Utility." The president/CEO of Cleveland Utilities,
superintendents, engineers, technicians, or other employees of Cleveland
Utilities, designated by the president/CEO to act on behalf of the general
manager and report directly to the president/CEO.
(ww) "Utility board." Cleveland Utilities Board, a department of
the City of Cleveland.
(xx) "Waste." Sewage and other waste substances (liquid, solid,
gaseous, or radioactive) associated with human habitation or of human
or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing
operation, including such waste placed within containers of whatever
nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.
(yy) "Wastewater." Wastewater and water, whether treated or
untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a community sewer.
(zz) "Wastewater constituents and characteristics." The
individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameter
including toxicity, volume, and flow rate and such other parameters that
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-9
serve to define, classify, or measure the contents, quality, quantity, and
strength of wastewater.
(aaa) "Waters of the State of Tennessee." Any water, surface or
underground, within the boundaries of the state.
(2) The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings:
(a) BAT - Best Available Technology.
(b) BMP - Best Management Practices
(c) BPT - Best Practical Technology.
(d) BOD5 - Biochemical Oxygen Demand (5-day).
(e) CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.
(f) COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand.
(g) CWA - Clean Water Act.
(h) CWT - Centralized Waste Treatment Facility.
(i) EPA - Environmental Protection Agency.
(j) GMP - Good Management Practices.
(k) MBAS - Methylene-blue-active substances.
(l) mg/L - Milligrams per liter.
(m) NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
(n) POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
(o) RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
(p) SIC - Standard Industrial Classification.
(q) SIU - Significant Industrial User
(r) SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.
(s) TDEC - Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation.
(t) TSS - Total Suspended Non-filterable Solids.
(u) U.S.C. - United States Code. (Ord. of Sept. 1994, as replaced
by Ord. #2012-19, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-103. Use of public sewers. (1) Connection with sanitary sewer
required. (a) Sewer connection required. Every building having plumbing
fixtures installed and intended for human habitation, occupancy, or use
on premises abutting a street, alley, or easement in which there is a
sanitary sewer segment adjacent to the property line of the parcel
containing the building shall be considered as being served by the utility's
sanitary sewer system. The utility shall make any decision as to the
availability of sewer service to a premise. All premises served by the
utility sanitary sewer are subject to sewer user charges as described in
§ 18-112(5) whether connected to the utility's sewer or not. All new
buildings hereafter constructed on property which is served by the
utility's sewer system shall not be occupied until the connection has been
made. Septic tanks shall not be used for new buildings where sanitary
sewers are available. All existing buildings shall be connected to the
utility's sanitary sewer system within ninety (90) days after date of
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-10
official notice that sewer service is available to the property except as
provided in § 18-103(b).
(b) Unconnected sewer service lines prohibited where
connection is available. Except for discharge to a properly functioning
septic tank system approved by the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation (hereinafter TDEC) or discharges
permitted by a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
(hereinafter NPDES) issued by TDEC, the discharge of sewage into places
other than the utility's sewer system is prohibited. The owner or occupant
of each lot or parcel of land which is now served or which may hereafter
be served by the utility's sewer system shall cease to use any other
method for the disposal of sewage except as approved for direct discharge
by TDEC or by discharge to a properly functioning and approved septic
tank system.
(c) Insufficient capacity, connection moratorium. In those parts
of the utility sewer collection system where no additional dry weather
flow capacity exists or no additional treatment capacity is available at the
treatment works, no new or additional sewer connections shall be
permitted. Connection permits issued prior to the date of the moratorium
and other connections that have received prior legal authorization maybe
made. No permits shall be issued for new sewer connections in a
moratorium area after the effective date of the moratorium nor shall any
new line extensions be made in that area that have not received prior
legal approval. A moratorium shall continue in effect until the capacity
restriction has been corrected.
(d) Illegal connections. No person shall make or permit
connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to a public sanitary sewer. If evidence of such illegal connections is
discovered by the utility, the owner will be notified in writing and
directed to eliminate the illegal connection and/or repair the building
sewer, as appropriate.
(2) Adequate and minimum fixtures. (a) Minimum number of
fixtures. All new dwellings shall have at least one commode, one (1)
bathtub or shower, one (1) lavatory, one (1) kitchen-type sink, and an
adequate source of hot water for each family unit to meet minimum basic
requirements for health, sanitation, and personal hygiene. All other
buildings, structures, or premises intended for human occupancy or use
shall be provided with adequate sanitary facilities as may be required by
any other law or regulation, but not less than one (1) commode and one
(1) hand-washing lavatory.
(b) Adequate water for disposal of waste required. It shall be
unlawful for any person in possession of premises into which a pipe or
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-11
other connection with the city sanitary sewers and drains have been laid
to permit the same to remain without adequate fixtures attached to allow
a sufficient quantity of water to be so applied as properly to carry off all
waste matter and keep the same unobstructed.
(3) Right to enter, inspect connection. The utility, the plumbing
inspector, or other designated employees of the city shall have free and
unobstructed access to any part of the premises where house drains or other
drains connected with or draining into the utility's sewer are laid for the
purpose of examining the construction, condition, and method of use of the same,
upon cause or reasonable suspicion that there may be inadequate plumbing,
that the facilities present may not be properly functioning, or that there is an
improper discharge, or for a period systematic inspection of a particular
drainage basin or other large segment of the system at any time of the day
between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. or any other time in the event of
an emergency. If such entry is refused, the sewer service may be disconnected
upon reasonable notice and an opportunity for a hearing. The service may be
suspended immediately in the event of an emergency if there is reasonable cause
to suspect that the discharge will endanger the public health or the
environment, shall have the potential to interrupt the treatment process, or
shall damage the utility's lines or facilities, and a hearing shall thereafter be
afforded the user as soon as possible.
(4) Demolished buildings. When a building is demolished or relocated,
it shall be the responsibility of the owner to have the sewer service line plugged
securely so that extraneous water will not enter the sewer. The owner of the
premises or his agent shall notify the plumbing inspector of such a plug and
allow same to be inspected prior to covering of any work. If such line is to be
reused, it must first undergo inspection by the plumbing inspector and be
inconformity with current standards for building sewers.
(5) Locations on point of discharge; temporary facilities. No person
shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other opening in a
utility sanitary sewer other than through an approved building sewer unless he
has been issued a temporary permit by the utility. Permission may be granted
at the discretion of the utility to provide for discharges from portable sanitary
facilities for festivals or public shows or for other reasonable purposes. The
utility shall incorporate in such a temporary permit such conditions as he deems
reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Any discharge other than through an approved building sewer shall be unlawful.
(6) Vehicle wash racks. All new gasoline filing stations, garages,
self-service automobile washers, and other public wash racks where vehicles are
washed shall install catch basins in conformity with the plumbing code in
accordance with a permit obtained from the plumbing official. In the event any
existing premises does not have a catch basin and the sewer line servicing the
facility stops up due to grit or slime in the sewer lines, then the owner or
operator of such premises shall be required to modify these facilities to construct
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-12
a catch basin as a condition of continuing use of the system. If such users are
industrial users as defined in § 18-102, a permit as specified therein will be
required. No stormwater shall be diverted to these catch basins.
(7) Grease traps, grit traps, oil traps, and lint traps. All new and
existing restaurants, laundries, wash racks, vehicle service stations, private
multi-user systems, engine or machinery repair shops, and other facilities that
produce, grease, grit, oil, lint, or other materials which accumulate and cause
or threaten to cause stoppages or impair the efficiency of the utility's sewers or
threaten the safety of its employees, shall install and maintain a grease trap,
grit trap, lint trap, oil interceptor, or other appropriate device of standard design
and construction to prevent excess discharges of such materials. The design and
construction of any such device shall be subject to prior approval of the utility
and constructed in accordance with applicable building codes.
(8) Multi-user private sewer systems. Excluding those industrial waste
facilities with a permit issued pursuant to § 18-108 the owner or operator of a
private sewer system such as, but not limited to, multi-tenant buildings,
building complexes, and shopping centers shall be responsible for the quality of
wastewater discharged at the point of connection to the utility's sanitary sewer
system and shall be responsible for any violations of the provisions of this
chapter, including liability for the damage or injury caused to the utility's
system as a result of any discharge through the private system. (Ord. of
Sept.1994, as amended by Ord. #2005-40, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord.
#2012-19, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-104. Building sewers, connections, and permits. (1) Installation,
maintenance, repair of sewer service lines; charge; exception. (a) Definition. A
standard sanitary sewer service line is a four or six inch (4" or 6") pipe
extending from the sewer main or trunk location in a street, alley, or
easement to the property served by the main or trunk.
(b) Installation of sewer service lines. The construction and
installation of all building sewers shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the latest edition of the Standard Plumbing Code
published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc.1
The utility may establish additional requirements and/or standards for
materials and methods of installation in accordance with good
engineering practice.
Four inch (4") building sewers shall be laid on a grade of at least
one percent (1%). Larger building sewers shall be laid on a grade that will
produce a velocity when flowing full of a least two feet (2') per second.
The slope and alignment of all building sewers shall be neat and regular
1The Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. was replaced
by the International Code Council.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-13
and shall be bedded in material suitable to achieve proper slope and
alignment.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another
as an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed
to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway,
the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
Building sewers shall be constructed only one (1) of the following
approved materials:
(i) Cast iron soil pipe using rubber compression joints of
approved type;
(ii) Polyvinyl chloride pipe with rubber compression
joints;
(iii) ABS composite sewer pipe with solvent-welded or
rubber compression joints of approved type; or
(iv) Similar materials of equal or superior quality
following utility approval. Under no circumstances will cement
mortar joints be acceptable.
Each connection to the sewer system must be made at a tee or
stubbed-out service line, or in the absence of any other provision, by
means of a saddle of a type approved by the utility, attached to the sewer.
No connection may be made by breaking into an existing sewer and
inserting the service line.
The building sewer may be brought into the building below the
basement floor when gravity flow from the building to the sewer is at a
grade of one percent (1%) or more where possible. In cases where
basement or floors are lower than the ground elevation at the point of
connection to the sewer, adequate precautions through the installation of
check valves or other backflow prevention devices to protect against
flooding shall be provided by the owner. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the sewer, wastes
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged into the utility's sewer.
(c) Standard sewer stub-outs. Hereafter, as a part of sanitary
sewer projects, the utility shall install, or cause to be installed, standard
sanitary sewer service stub-outs from mains or trunks located in a street,
alley, or easement to the property line of each lot or residence on the
street being sewered. In the case of sewers being constructed in
undeveloped subdivisions located within a designated sewer project, the
standard sanitary sewer service stub-out may be constructed to each lot
as shown by the developer on the plat of the subdivision as filed in the
Register's Office of Bradley County, Tennessee. Sewer service stub-outs
may not be constructed at the expense of the utility in a street where the
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-14
property is unsubdivided and undeveloped. In such cases, a fee shall be
charged upon connection to the sewer line as provided in § 18-112.
(d) Sewer service stub-out charge. A sewer connection charge
shall be paid by property owners at the time that application is made to
the utility for permission to tie on to the sanitary sewer line. The
collection of such payments shall be the responsibility of the utility. This
service connection charge shall be in addition to any required fees for
inspection, street cuts, or other fees.
(e) Title and maintenance. When a property owner ties into a
sanitary sewer stub-out installed pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section
and pays the sewer service line charge levied in paragraph (d) of this
section, thereafter, all repairs and maintenance of the sanitary sewer
service due shall be the responsibility of the property owner or user of the
sewer.
(f) Location of sewer stub-outs and tees. The plumbing
contractor is responsible for locating sewer service line stub-outs and
tees. Pursuant to payment of fees levied in paragraph (d) of this section,
utility personnel will provide whatever information is available for this
purpose. If a manhole needed for locating a service line has been lost,
then the utility shall be responsible for locating the manhole.
(g) Taps on utility sewers. Where a sewer service line stub-out
has not been provided, the utility shall provide one. All taps made
directly into the utility's sewer lines shall be made by utility personnel.
(h) Manhole required. A new manhole will be required
whenever a sewer service line larger than six inches (6") is needed to tie
into the utility's sewer. The utility's personnel shall install the manhole.
The cost of the manhole, including labor and materials, shall be included
in the connection fee.
(i) Maintenance of sewer service lines. All repairs and
maintenance of the sanitary sewer service line to include correction of
excessive inflow or infiltration shall be the responsibility of the property
owner or user of the sewer. The utility shall be responsible for the
maintenance of collector lines only up to the point where the owner's
sewer service line connects to the utility's stub-out.
If, upon smoke testing or visual inspection by the utility, roof
downspout connections, exterior foundation drains, area drains, basement
drains, building sewer leaks or other sources of rainwater, surface runoff
or groundwater enter into the utility sewer system are identified on
building sewers on private property, the superintendent may take any of
the following actions.
(i) Notify the property owner in writing of the nature of
the problem(s) identified on the property owner's building sewer
and the specific steps required to bring the building sewer within
the requirements of this chapter. All steps necessary to comply
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-15
with this chapter must be complete within sixty (60) days from the
date of the written notice and are entirely at the expense of the
property owner. The inspection requirements of § 18-104(2) of this
chapter apply.
(ii) Notify the property owner in writing of the nature of
the problem(s) identified on the property owner's building sewer
and inform the property owner that the utility will provide all
labor, equipment and materials necessary to make the repairs
required to bring the building sewer within the requirements of
this chapter. The work on private property will be performed at
the utility's convenience and the cost of all labor, equipment and
materials used will be charged to the property owner. The utility
will be responsible for bringing any excavations back to original
grade, replacing topsoil and hand raking all disturbed areas;
however, the property owner shall be responsible for final
landscaping, including but not limited to seeding, fertilizing,
watering, mulching, sodding and replacing any shrubbery or trees
displaced or damaged by the utility during the execution of the
work.
(j) Cost of building sewers. All costs and expenses incidental to
the installation and connection of the building sewer to the system sewer
shall be borne by the owner. All costs and expenses associated with the
installation and operation of pumping equipment necessary to lift sewage
to the level of the system sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify Cleveland Utilities from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
(k) Service lines to enter sanitary sewers at junction; exception.
No service lines shall enter a sanitary sewer at any point except where
a junction has been made and left therefore unless by special permission
of the utility. In all cases where such permission is given, the work shall
be done by the utility's personnel and at the risk and expense of the party
requesting the connection.
(2) Permit required to make connection. (a) Before the owner of any
property connects such property into the utility sewer, the owner or
owner's agent shall make application to and be issued permits by both the
city and the utility. The work shall be performed only by a plumber
approved by the city and utility who has also signed the permits. All
connections shall be inspected and approved by both the City of Cleveland
Plumbing Inspector and the utility.
(b) In order to secure the required connection permits, the
owner or owner's agent shall:
(i) Make application for a plumbing permit to the City of
Cleveland Plumbing Inspector's Office. The permit application
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-16
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the plumbing
inspector. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the City of
Cleveland at the time the application for permit is filed.
(ii) Take the plumbing permit to Cleveland Utilities and
make application for service and pay the appropriate connection
charge and inspection fee.
(c) Connections made without an approved application may be
severed by order of the utility. Such unapproved connection may be
allowed to remain active if inspected and accepted; however, the owner
shall be required to pay an alternative fee in lieu of the permit
application fee in an amount double the current regular fee.
(d) No permit for a connection which may be used for discharge
of industrial process wastes or other non-domestic waste regulated by
§ 18-106 shall be issued except upon separate application to the utility
and approval of the discharge under the provisions of § 18-108.
(3) Sewer construction; acceptance of work. All sewer construction
involving sanitary sewer lines, pump stations, metering stations, and
appurtenances which are to become a part of the utility's sewer system shall not
be constructed until the plans are approved and the construction inspected and
approved by the utility. Any construction work where utility sewers are opened,
uncovered, or undercut must have the prior approval of the utility. Any
construction must be done by a contactor approved by the utility. (Ord. of Sept.
1994, as replaced by Ord. #2012-19, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-105. Private domestic wastewater disposal. (1) Availability.
When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 18-103(1), the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Requirements. (a) A private domestic wastewater disposal system
may not be constructed within the sewer service area unless and until a
written statement is obtained from the utility stating that a public sewer
is not accessible to the property and no such sewer is proposed for
construction in the immediate future. No written statement shall be
issued for any private domestic wastewater disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than
that specified by zoning regulations and TDEC.
(b) Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first obtain written permission from
TDEC. The owner shall supply any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by TDEC.
(c) A private sewage disposal system shall not be placed in
operation until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of TDEC.
They shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-17
and, in any event, the owner shall notify TDEC when the work is ready
for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
The inspection shall be made within a reasonable period of time after the
receipt of notice by TDEC.
(d) The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of TDEC. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet.
(e) The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
utility.
(f) No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed
to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
TDEC. (Ord. of Sept. 1994, as replaced by Ord. #2012-19, Sept. 2012, and
Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-106. Prohibitions and limitations on discharges. (1) Purpose
and policy. This section establishes limitations and prohibitions on the quantity
and quality of wastewater which may be legally discharged into the POTW.
Pretreatment of some wastewater discharges will be required to achieve the
goals established by this chapter and the Clean Water Act. The specific
limitations set forth in § 18-106(10) hereof, and other prohibitions and
limitations of this chapter, are subject to change as necessary to enable the
utility to provide efficient wastewater treatment, to protect the public health
and environment, and to enable the utility to meet requirements contained in
its NPDES permit. The utility shall review said limitations from time to time
to ensure that they are sufficient to protect the health and safety of sewer
system personnel, and the operation of the treatment works to enable the
facility to comply with its NPDES permit, provide for a cost-effective means of
operating the treatment works, and protect the public health and the
environment. The utility shall recommend changes or modifications as
necessary.
(2) Prohibited pollutants. No person shall introduce into the POTW
any pollutant(s) which cause pass-through or interference. Additionally, the
following specific prohibitions apply:
(a) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the
POTW, including but not limited to, pollutants with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees (140E) Fahrenheit sixty
degrees (60E) Centigrade, as determined by a Pensky-Martens closed-cup
tester, using the test method specified in the American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) D-93-79 or D-93-80k, or a Setaflash closed-cup
tester, using the test method specified in ASTM D-3278-78, or pollutants
which cause an exceedance of ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive
Limit (LEL) at any point within the POTW.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-18
(b) Pollutants which cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than
10.5.
(c) Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which cause
obstruction to the flow of the sewers, or other interference with the
operation of or which cause injury to the POTW, including waxy or other
materials which tend to coat and clog a sewer line or other appurtenances
thereto.
(d) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.), released in a discharge (slug) of such volume or strength as
to cause interference in the POTW or individual unit operations or cause
adverse effects on its workers or the environment.
(e) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the
POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities
that the temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds forty
degrees (40E) Centigrade (one hundred four degrees (104E) Fahrenheit).
Unless, upon approval by the approval authority, a higher temperature
is allowed in the user's wastewater discharge permit, no user shall
discharge into any sewer line or other appurtenance of the POTW
wastewater with a temperature exceeding sixty-five point five degrees
(65.5E) Centigrade (one hundred fifty degrees (150E) Fahrenheit).
(f) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker's health and safety problems.
(g) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW.
(h) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that cause interference or pass-through.
(3) Affirmative defenses. A user shall have an affirmative defense in
any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions
established in § 18-106(2) and the specific prohibitions in paragraphs (c), (d), (e),
(f), and (h) of that section where the user can demonstrate one of the following:
(a) A local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or
interference, as the case may be, was developed pursuant to
§ 18-106(10)and (11) for each pollutant in the user's discharge that
caused pass-through or interference and the user was in compliance with
each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass-through or
interference.
(b) If a local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or
interference, as the case may be, has not been developed for the
pollutant(s) that caused the pass-through or interference and the user's
discharge directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference
did not change substantially in nature of constituents from the user's
prior discharge activity when the POTW was regularly in compliance
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-19
with the POTW's NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of
interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal.
(4) Wastewater constituent evaluation. The wastewater of every
industrial user shall be evaluated using the following criteria:
(a) Wastewater containing any element or compound which is
known to be an environmental hazard and which is not adequately
removed by the treatment works.
(b) Wastewater causing a pass-through, discoloration, foam,
floating oil and grease, or any other condition in the quality of the
utility's treatment work effluent such that receiving water quality
requirements established by law cannot be met.
(c) Wastewater causing conditions at or near the utility's
treatment works which violate any statute, rule, or regulation of any
public agency of Tennessee or the United States.
(d) Wastewater containing any element or compound known to
act as a lacrimator, known to cause nausea, or known to cause odors
constituting a public nuisance.
(e) Wastewater causing interference with the effluent or
another product of the treatment process, residues, sludges, or scums
causing them to be unsuitable for reclamation, reuse, causing
interference with the reclamation process, or causing them to be
unsuitable for disposal.
(f) Wastewater discharged at a point in the collection system
that is upstream of any overflow, bypass, or combined sewer overflow and
which may thereby cause special environmental problems or specific
discharge limitations.
(g) Wastewater having constituents and concentrations in
excess of those listed in § 18-106(10) or cause a violation of the limits in
§ 18-106(11).
(h) The capacity of existing sewer lines to carry the anticipated
wastewater flow, particularly with respect to any problems, overflows, or
overloads caused by heavy rain infiltration. The utility shall establish
reasonable limitations, prohibitions, or monitoring requirements in
addition to the limits established pursuant to § 18-106(5) and (10) in the
wastewater discharge permit of any industrial user that discharges
wastewater violating any of the above criteria or that has processes that
generate wastewater that could violate any of the above criteria prior to
pretreatment as shall be reasonably necessary to achieve the purpose and
policy of this chapter.
(5) National pretreatment standards. Certain industrial users are now
or hereafter shall become subject to national pretreatment standards
promulgated by the EPA specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants
or pollutant properties which may be discharged into the POTW. All industrial
users subject to such standard shall comply with all requirements and with any
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-20
additional or more stringent limitations contained in this chapter. Compliance
with national pretreatment standards for existing sources subject to such
standards or for existing sources which hereafter become subject to such
standards shall be within three (3) years following promulgation of the
standards unless a shorter compliance time is specified. Compliance for new
sources shall be required upon promulgation. New sources shall have in
operating condition and shall start up all pollution control equipment required
to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge.
Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed ninety (90) days), new sources
must meet all applicable pretreatment standards.
(6) Dilution. Except where expressly authorized by an applicable
national pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall increase the use of
process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitution for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with such
standard.
(7) Limitation on radioactive waste. No person shall discharge or
permit to be discharged any radioactive waste into a community sewer, except
as follows:
(a) When the person is authorized to use radioactive materials
by TDEC or the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).
(b) When the waste is discharged in strict conformity with
applicable laws and regulations of the agencies having jurisdiction.
(c) When a copy of permits received from said regulatory
agencies has been filed with the utility.
(8) Septic tank pumping, hauling, and discharge. No person owning
vacuum or cesspool pump trucks or other liquid waste transport trucks shall
discharge sewage directly or indirectly into the POTW, unless that person first
receives from the utility a septic tank truck discharge permit for each vehicle
used in this manner. All applicants for a septic tank truck discharge permit
shall complete the forms required by the utility, pay appropriate fees, and agree
in writing to abide by the provisions of this chapter an any special conditions or
regulations established by the utility.
(a) The owners of such vehicles shall affix and display the
permit number in four inch (4") block figures on the side of each vehicle
used for such purposes.
(b) The permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from
date of issuance, provided that the permit should be subject to suspension
or revocation by the utility for violation of any provisions of this code,
regulations as established by the utility, or other applicable laws and
regulations. A revocation or suspension of the permit shall be for a period
not to exceed five (5) years. Such revocation or suspension shall bind the
permittee, any member of the immediate family of the permittee, or any
person who has purchased the business or a substantial amount of the
assets of the permittee who paid less than fair market value for such
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-21
business or assets. Users found operating in violation of a permit issued
under this subsection and whose permit is therefore revoked by the
utility, shall be notified of the violation by certified mail or by a notice
personally delivered to the user.
(c) Septic tank discharge permits are not automatically
renewed. Application for renewal must be made to the utility.
(d) Such permits shall be limited to the discharge of domestic
sewage waste containing no industrial waste. All other hauled wastes
shall be governed by § 18-106(9). Any user transporting, collecting, or
discharging non-domestic industrial process wastewaters or a mixture of
such wastewaters with domestic wastewater shall obtain a holding tank
discharge permit in accordance with § 18-106(9).
(e) The utility shall designate the locations and times where
such trucks may be discharged and may refuse to accept any truckload of
waste at his absolute discretion where it appears that the waste could
interfere with the effective operation of the treatment works or any sewer
line or appurtenance thereto, or where it appears that a truckload of
waste contains industrial process waste or a mixture of domestic sewage
and industrial process waste.
(f) The utility shall have authority to investigate the source of
any hauled waste and to require testing of the waste at the expense of the
discharger prior to discharge.
(9) Other holding tank waste. No user shall discharge any other
holding tank wastes, including hauled industrial waste, into the POTW unless
he has been issued a holding tank discharge permit by the utility. Unless
otherwise allowed under the terms and conditions of the permit, a separate
permit must be secured for each separate discharge. All applicants for a holding
tank discharge permit shall complete forms required by the utility, pay
appropriate fees, and agree in writing to abide by the provisions of this chapter
and any special conditions or regulations established by the utility. All such
dischargers and transporters must show that they have complied with federal
manifest and other regulations under RCRA. The permit shall state the specific
location of the discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume
of the discharge, and the source and character of the waste, and shall limit the
wastewater constituents and characteristics of the discharge. The user shall
pay any applicable charges or fees and shall comply with the conditions of the
permit. However, the utility may waive at his discretion the application and the
fees for discharge of domestic waste from a recreational vehicle holding tank.
(10) Limitations on wastewater strength (local limits). No user shall
discharge wastewater with pollutant concentrations in excess of the
concentration set forth in Table 1 below unless:
(a) An exception has been granted the user under the provisions
of § 18-107(8) or
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-22
(b) The user's wastewater discharge permit provides as a special
permit condition temporarily allowing a higher interim concentration
level in conjunction with a requirement that the user construct a
pretreatment facility or institute changes in operation and maintenance
procedures to reduce the concentration of pollutants to levels not
exceeding the standards set forth in the table within a fixed period of
time.
TABLE 1
Limitations on Wastewater Strength
Parameter
Maximum
Concentration
(24 Hour Composite
Sample/Discrete
Batch Sample)
(mg/L)
Maximum
Concentration
(Instantaneous Grab
Sample)
(mg/L)
Arsenic 0.192 0.38
Cadmium 0.123 0.25
Chromium, III 1,874 3,748
Chromium, VI 7.645 15.29
Total Chromium 2.482 4.96
Copper 4.073 8.15
Total Cyanide ---- 2.481
Lead 0.796 1.59
Mercury 0.023 0.046
Molybdenum 0.250 0.50
Nickel 2.327 4.65
Selenium 0.269 0.538
Silver 1.033 2.07
Zinc 5.245 10.49
Total Phenols ---- 4.176
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-23
Parameter
Maximum
Concentration
(24 Hour Composite
Sample/Discrete
Batch Sample)
(mg/L)
Maximum
Concentration
(Instantaneous Grab
Sample)
(mg/L)
Benzene ---- 0.281
Carbon Tetrachloride ---- 0.381
Chloroform ---- 4.936
Ethylbenzene ---- 0.552
Methylene Chloride ---- 2.151
Naphthalene ---- 0.072
Total Phthalates* ---- 1.016
Tetrachloroethylene ---- 2.404
Toluene ---- 4.126
Trichloroethylene ---- 1.722
1,1,1 Trichloroethane ---- 3.903
1,2
Transdichloroethylene
---- 0.072
pH 5.0 -- 10.5 S.U.
*Total Phthalates is the sum of Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, Butyl benzyl
phthalate, Di-n-butyl phthalate, and Diethyl phthalate.
(11) Criteria to protect the treatment plant influent. The utility shall
monitor the treatment works influent for each pollutant in Table 2. Industrial
users shall be subject to the reporting and monitoring requirements set forth in
§ 18-109 as to these pollutants. In the event that the influent at the treatment
works reaches or exceeds the established levels, the utility shall initiate
technical studies to determine the cause of the influent violation and shall
recommend remedial measures as necessary, including but not limited to, the
establishment of new or revised pretreatment levels for these pollutants. The
utility shall also recommend changes to any of these criteria in the event the
POTW effluent standards or applicable laws or regulations are changed, or
when changes are necessary for a more effective operation.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-24
TABLE 2
Treatment Plant Protection Criteria
Parameter
Protection Criteria
(mg/l)
Arsenic 0.0192
Cadmium 0.0109
Chromium, III 93.75
Chromium, VI 0.406
Total Chromium 0.1337
Copper 0.2189
Total Cyanide 0.1461
Lead 0.0637
Mercury 0.00135
Molybdenum 0.0172
Nickel 0.1259
Selenium 0.0230
Silver 0.0612
Zinc 0.3513
Total Phenols 0.2617
Benzene 0.0150
Carbon Tetrachloride 0.0200
Chloroform 0.2575
Ethylbenzene 0.0285
Methylene Chloride 0.1315
Naphthalene 0.0045
Total Phthalates* 0.1697
Tetrachloroethylene 0.125
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-25
Parameter
Protection Criteria
(mg/l)
Toluene 0.2142
Trichloroethylene 0.0909
1,1,1 Trichloroethane 0.200
1,2 Transdichloroethylene 0.0045
*Total Phthalates is the sum of Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, Butyl benzyl
phthalate, Di-n-butyl phthalate, and Diethyl phthalate.
(12) Storm drainage, ground water, unpolluted water, and
contaminated stormwater.
(a) No stormwater, ground water, rain water, street drainage,
rooftop drainage, basement drainage, subsurface drainage, foundation
drainage, yard drainage, swimming pool drainage, process water
drainage, cooling water, or other unpolluted or minimally polluted water
shall be discharged into the city's sewer unless no other reasonable
alternative is available, except with permission from the utility.
Reasonable conditions shall be prescribed, and a sewer service charge will
be issued based upon the quantity of water discharged as measured by a
flowmeter or a reasonable estimate accepted by the utility. All users shall
be required to maintain their private sewer lines so as to prevent
infiltration of ground or stormwater as a condition of use of the system
and shall immediately repair or replace any leaking or damaged lines.
(b) The utility will accept the discharge of contaminated
stormwater if the following criteria are met:
(i) All known and available technology will not prevent
contamination or treat contaminated water to meet state
standards for discharge to receiving waters or will cause
unreasonable financial burden;
(ii) The contaminated stormwater meets the utility's
discharge limits and all state and federal pretreatment
requirements; and
(iii) Adequate containment and storage facilities are
available as to allow the discharge to occur at such a time and flow
rate approved by the utility. At a minimum, the stormwater
discharge will not be allowed until after the hydraulic loading from
a storm event has subsided.
(13) Limitations on the use of garbage grinders. No waste from
commercial or institutional garbage grinders shall be discharged into the
utility's sewers except from private garbage grinders used in an individual
residence or upon approval of the utility for preparation of food consumed on
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-26
premises, and then only where applicable fees are paid. Installation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a three-fourths horsepower (or greater) motor
shall require approval. The utility may grant approval when there is inadequate
space on the user's premises to properly store food preparation waste between
regularly scheduled garbage pickup by a service with in equal or greater
frequency of collection. Provided, further, that such grinders shall shred the
waste sufficiently that it can be carried freely under normal flow conditions
prevailing in the utility's sewer lines. It shall be unlawful for any person to use
a garbage grinder connected to the sewer system for the purpose of grinding and
discharging plastic, paper products, inert materials, or anything other than the
waste products from normal food preparation and consumption.
(14) Hospital or medical waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to
dispose of medical waste, surgical operating room waste, or delivery room waste
into the utility's sewer.
(15) Obstruction of or damage to sewer lines. It shall be unlawful for
any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any waste which may obstruct or
damage storm or sanitary sewer lines or which may inhibit, disrupt, or damage
either system, including the sewer treatment process and operations. This
prohibition includes all substances, whether liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive
and whether associated with human habitation, of human or animal origin, or
from any producing, manufacturing, or processing. It shall be unlawful to block
or obstruct any catch basin, sewer line, or other appurtenance; or to break,
injure, or remove any portion from any part of a sewer, drain, or catch basin,
including plates covering manhole. (Ord. of Sept. 1994, as replaced by Ord.
#2012-19, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014, and amended by Ord.
#2014-50, Jan. 2015)
18-107. Control of prohibited pollutants. (1) Pretreatment
requirements. Industrial users of the POTW shall design, construct, operate,
and maintain wastewater pretreatment facilities when necessary to reduce or
modify the user's wastewater composition to achieve compliance with the
limitations in wastewater strength set forth in § 18-106(10), to meet applicable
national pretreatment standards, to prevent slug discharges or to meet another
wastewater condition or limitation contained in the industrial user's wastewater
discharge permit.
(2) Plans and specifications. Plans and specifications for wastewater
monitoring and pretreatment facilities shall be prepared, signed, dated, and
sealed by a registered engineer, and be submitted to the utility for review in
accordance with accepted engineering practices. The utility shall review the
plans, within forty-five (45) days of receipt and recommend to the industrial user
any appropriate changes. Prior to beginning construction of a monitoring or
pretreatment facility, the user shall submit a set of construction plans and
specifications to be maintained by the utility. Prior to beginning construction,
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-27
the industrial user shall also secure building, plumbing, and all other required
permits.
The industrial user shall construct the pretreatment facility within the
time provided in the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit. Following
completion of construction, the industrial user shall provide the utility with
as-built drawings to be maintained by the utility. The review of such plans and
specifications will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying
the facilities as necessary to produce an effluent complying with the provisions
of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
methods of operations shall be reported to and be approved by the utility prior
to implementation.
(3) Prevention of accidental discharges. All users shall provide such
facilities and institute such procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent
or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the POTW of waste
regulated by this chapter from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck
loading and unloading areas, from in-plant transfer or processing and materials
handling areas, and from diked areas or holding ponds of any waste regulated
by this chapter. The wastewater discharge permit of any industrial user who has
a history of significant leaks, spills, or other accidental discharge of waste
regulated by this chapter shall be subject on a case-by-case basis to a special
permit condition or requirement for the construction of facilities or
establishment of procedures which will prevent or minimize the potential for
accidental discharge. Plans, specifications, and operating procedures for special
permit conditions shall be developed by the user and submitted to the utility for
review under the provisions of § 18-108(5)(k) and (l).
(4) Oil and grease discharge, control program. Disposal of oil by
discharge to the sewer system is not permitted. Oils include automotive
lubricating oils, transmission and brake fluid, other industrial oils, and
vegetable oils used in a restaurant or food processing facility. The utility shall
contact all wastewater discharge permit holders, restaurants, service stations,
septic tank pumpers, commercial food processors, oil tank firms and
transporters, and others as appropriate, by letter as often as needed to advise
them of requirements for oil and grease discharge control. These dischargers
will also be informed of approved oil and grease disposal options available in the
Cleveland vicinity. The dischargers of oil and grease waste shall be required to
provide an equivalent of primary treatment based on gravity separation of
visible and floating oil and grease and oil and grease sludge from wastewater
discharges. Such pretreatment processes shall be subject to the best
management practices as required by § 18-107(8)(f) and approval by the utility.
Discharges shall also be subject to monitoring, entry, inspection, reporting, and
other requirements as determined by the utility at his discretion. These
dischargers may be required by the utility to apply for industrial waste
discharge permits if the utility determines that the dischargers are a source of
prohibited pollutants, toxic pollutants in toxic amounts, or are otherwise
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-28
controlled by federal or state regulations. All dischargers of oil and grease as
listed above are subject to all enforcement and penalty provisions of this
chapter.
(5) Slug control program. (a) Each user including SIUs shall provide
protection from slug discharges of restricted materials or other
substances regulated by this chapter. A slug is defined as any discharge
of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an
accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a
reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any
other way violates the utility's regulations, local limits, or permit
conditions. No user who commences discharge to the sewerage system
after adoption of this chapter shall be permitted to introduce pollutants
into the system until the need for slug discharge control plans or
procedures has been evaluated by the utility.
(b) Certain users (i.e. SIUs) will be required to prepare Slug
Discharge Prevention and Contingency plans (SDPC) showing facilities
and operating procedures to provide this protection. These plans shall be
submitted to the utility for review and approval. All existing users
required to have SDPC plans shall submit such a plan within three (3)
months after notification from the utility and complete implementation
within six (6) months. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the
user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(c) In the case of a slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the
user to immediately notify the POTW of the incident by telephone or in
person. Information concerning the location of the discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume, and corrective action shall be provided
by the user. SIUs must notify the utility immediately of changes that
occur by the SIU which may affect the potential for a slug discharge.
Within five (5) days following a slug discharge, the user shall submit a
detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures being taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage,
or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
sewerage system, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property,
nor shall notification relieve the user of any penalties, civil penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable
law.
(d) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's premises
advising employees of a contact to call in the event of a slug discharge.
The user shall ensure that all employees who may cause or allow such
slug discharge to occur are advised of the proper emergency notification
procedure.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-29
(6) Prohibition of bypass. (a) Except as allowed in paragraph (c) below,
bypass is prohibited, and the utility may take enforcement action against
an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
(i) The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage.
(ii) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of
equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate
backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance.
(iii) The industrial user submitted notices as required in
§ 18-109(13).
(b) The utility may approve an anticipated bypass after
considering its adverse effect if the utility determines that it will meet
the three conditions listed in paragraph (a) of this section.
(c) Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which
does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated,
but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the reporting provisions of
§ 18-109(13).
(7) Centralized waste treatment facilities. The utility shall establish
effluent limits for Centralized Waste Treatment facilities (CWT) in order that
the level of pollution discharged from the CWT through the POTW to the
environment will not exceed the level that would be allowed if the CWT
discharged directly to surface waters under section 301(b)(2) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1311). Additionally, centralized waste treatment facilities shall
maintain records and submit reports as directed by the utility regarding the SIC
codes of their customers and the frequency, characteristics, and volume of
wastes from the various categories.
(8) Exception to wastewater strength standard. (a) Applicability. This
section provides a method for industrial users subject to the limitation on
wastewater strength pollutants listed in § 18-106(10) to apply for and
receive a temporary exception to the discharge level for one or more
pollutants or parameters.
(b) Time of application. Applicants shall apply for a temporary
exception when they are required to apply for a wastewater discharge
permit or renewal provided that the utility allows applications at any
time unless the applicant has submitted the same or substantially similar
application within the preceding year that was denied by the board.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-30
(c) Written applications. All applications for an exception shall
be in writing and shall contain sufficient information for evaluation of
each of the factors to be considered by the utility pursuant to paragraph
(d) of this section.
(d) Review by utility. All applications for an exception shall be
reviewed by the utility. If the application does not contain sufficient
information for complete evaluation, the utility shall notify the applicant
of the deficiencies and request additional information. The applicant
shall have thirty (30) days following notification by the utility to correct
such deficiencies. This thirty (30) day period may be extended by the
utility upon application and for just cause shown. Upon receipt of a
complete application, the utility shall evaluate it within thirty (30) days
and approve or deny the application based upon the following factors:
(i) The utility shall consider if the applicant is subject to
a national pretreatment standard containing discharge limitations
more stringent than those in § 18-106(10) and grant an exception
only if such exception is within the limitations of applicable federal
regulations.
(ii) The utility shall consider if the exception would apply
to discharge of a substance classified as a toxic substance under
regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of
section 307(a) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), or similar state
regulation, and then grant an exception only if such exception may
be granted within the limitations of federal and state regulations.
(iii) The utility shall consider if the exception would create
conditions or a hazard to utility personnel that would reduce the
effectiveness of the treatment works taking into consideration the
concentration of said pollutant in the treatment works' influent
and the design capability of the treatment works.
(iv) The utility shall consider the possibility of the
exception causing the treatment works to violate its NPDES
permit.
(v) The utility shall consider if the exception would cause
elements or compounds to be present in the sludge of the
treatment works which would prevent sludge use or disposal by
the utility or which would cause the utility to violate any
regulation promulgated by EPA, under the provisions of section
405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345) or similar state regulatory
measure.
(vi) The utility may consider the cost of pretreatment or
other types of control techniques which would be necessary for the
user to achieve effluent reduction, but prohibitive cost alone shall
not be the basis for granting an exception.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-31
(vii) The utility may consider the age of equipment and
industrial facilities involved to the extent that such factors affect
the quality or quantity of wastewater discharge.
(viii) The utility may consider the process employed by the
user and process changes available which would affect the quality
or quantity of wastewater discharge.
(ix) The utility may consider the engineering aspects of
various types of pretreatment or other control techniques available
to the user to improve the quality or quantity of wastewater
discharge.
(x) The utility may consider an application for exception
based upon the fact that water conservation measures instituted
or proposed by the user result in a higher concentration of
particular pollutants in the wastewater discharge of the user
without increasing the amount of mass of pollutants discharged.
To be eligible for an exception under this subparagraph, the
applicant must show that except for water conservation measures,
the applicant's discharge has been or would be in compliance with
the limitations on wastewater strength set forth in § 18-106(10).
No such exception shall be granted if the increased concentration
of pollutants in the applicant's wastewater would have significant
adverse impact upon the operation of the POTW.
(e) Review by utilities board. The board shall review any appeal
to a denial by the utility of an application for an exception and shall take
into account the same factors considered by the utility. At such hearing,
the applicant and the utility shall have the right to present relevant proof
by oral or documentary evidence. The procedure set forth in § 18-110(4)
shall be applicable to such a hearing. The applicant shall bear the burden
of proof in an appeal hearing.
(f) Best management practices required. The utility shall not
grant an exception unless the applicant demonstrates to the utility that
best management practices (BMP) are being employed to prevent or
reduce the contribution of pollutants to the POTW. BMPs include, but are
not limited to, preventive operating and maintenance procedures,
schedule of activities, process changes, prohibiting activities, and other
management practices to reduce the quantity of pollutants discharged
and to control plant site runoff, spillage, leaks, and drainage from raw
material storage. (Ord. of Sept. 1994, as replaced by Ord. #2012-19, Sept.
2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-108. Wastewater discharge permits. (1) Applicability. The
provisions of this chapter are applicable to all industrial users of the POTW. The
utility has an "Approved POTW Pretreatment Program" as that term is defined
in 40 CFR, part 403.3(d) and any permits issued hereunder to industrial users
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-32
who are subject to or who become subject to a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard as defined in 40 CFR, part 403.3(j) shall be conditioned
upon the industrial user also complying with all applicable substantive and
procedural requirements promulgated by the EPA or the State of Tennessee
regarding such categorical standard unless an exception for the utility's program
or for specific industrial categories is authorized.
(2) Application and permit requirements for industrial users. Prior to
discharging non-domestic waste into the POTW, all significant industrial users
of the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit. The industrial user
shall request that the utility determine if the proposed discharge is significant
as defined in § 18-102. If the discharge is determined not to be significant, then
the utility may still establish appropriate discharge conditions for the user. Any
non-categorical industrial user designated as significant may petition the utility
to be deleted from the list of significant industrial users on the grounds that
there exists no potential for adverse effect on the POTW's operation or violation
of any pretreatment standard or requirement.
All significant industrial users shall obtain an industrial wastewater
discharge permit and shall complete such forms as required by the utility, pay
appropriate fees, and agree to abide by the provisions of this chapter and any
specific conditions or regulations established by the utility. All original
applications shall be accompanied by a report containing the information
specified in § 18-108(3). All original applications shall also include a site plan,
floor plan, and mechanical and plumbing plans with sufficient detail to show all
sewers and appurtenances in the user's premises by size and location. The
industrial user shall also submit revised plans to the utility when alterations or
additions to the user's premises affect said plans.
(3) Report requirement. The report required for all significant
industrial users by § 18-108(2) or other provisions of this chapter shall contain
in units and terms appropriate for evaluation the information listed in
subparagraphs (a) through (e) below. Within either one hundred eighty (180)
days after the effective date of a categorical Pretreatment Standard, or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under Tennessee Rule
1400-40-14-.06(1)(d), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users
currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to
the utility a report which contains the information listed in subparagraphs (a)
through (g), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard, shall submit to the utility a report which contains the information
listed in subparagraphs (a) through (g), below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
pretreatment standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. This report is
called the Baseline Monitoring Report (BMR).
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-33
Additionally, all significant industrial users who are unable to achieve a
discharge limit set forth in § 18-106 without improved operation and
maintenance procedures or pretreatment shall submit a report which contains
the information listed in paragraphs (a) through (g) of this section.
As specified, the report shall contain all applicable portions of the
following:
(a) Identifying information. (i) The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner;
(ii) Contact information, description of activities,
facilities, and plant production processes on the premises.
(b) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
(c) Description of operations. (i) A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production (including each product
produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production), and
standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out
by such industrial user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to
the POTW from the regulated processes;
(ii) Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw
materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or
could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(iii) Number and type of employees, hours of operation,
and proposed or actual hours of operation;
(iv) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average
and maximum per day);
(v) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and
appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of
discharge;
(vi) Time and duration of discharges;
(vii) The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the
permit.
(d) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow
use of the combined wastestream formula (Tennessee Rule
1400-40-14-.06(5)).
(e) Measurement of pollutants. (i) The categorical pretreatment
standards applicable to each regulated process and any new
categorically regulated processes for existing sources.
(ii) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-34
pretreatment standard or by the utility, of regulated pollutants in
the discharge from each regulated process;
(iii) Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported;
(iv) The sample shall be representative of daily operations
and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
§ 18-109(4) of this ordinance. Where the pretreatment standard
requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention
alternative, the industrial user shall submit documentation as
required by the utility or the applicable pretreatment standards to
determine compliance with the pretreatment standard;
(v) Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 18-109(4) of this ordinance. When pH
information is required in the initial report or in regular periodic
self-monitoring reports, it shall be provided to the utility as a copy
of the chart from a continuous pH recorder or copy of logged PH
readings taken at least every hour of operation using a "probe"
type PH meter;
(vi) The industrial user shall take a minimum of one
representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply
with the requirements of this paragraph;
(vii) Samples should be taken immediately downstream
from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists.
If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater
prior to pretreatment the industrial user should measure the flows
and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula of 1400-40-14-.06(5) in order to evaluate
compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate
concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with
1400-40-14-.06(5) this adjusted limit along with supporting data
shall be submitted to the utility;
(viii) The utility may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures;
(ix) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and
place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that
such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles
and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
(f) Certification. A statement that has been reviewed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a
professional engineer indicating if pretreatment standards are being met
on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-35
maintenance procedures or additional pretreatment is required for the
industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(g) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment or
operation and maintenance procedure will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards the report shall contain the shortest schedule by
which the industrial user will provide the additional pretreatment. The
completion date in this schedule shall be no later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
For purposes of this paragraph when the context so indicates, the phrase
"pretreatment standard" shall include either a national pretreatment standard
or a pretreatment standard imposed as a result of the industrial user's
discharging any incompatible pollutant regulated by § 18-106. For purposes of
this paragraph, the term "pollutant" shall include any pollutant identified in a
national pretreatment standard or any incompatible pollutant identified in
§ 18-106.
(4) Incomplete applications. The utility will act only on applications
that are accompanied by a report which contains all the information required
in § 18-108(3). Industrial users who have filed incomplete applications will be
notified by the utility that the application is deficient and the nature of such
deficiency and will be given thirty (30) days to correct the deficiency. If the
deficiency is not corrected within that period or with such extended time allowed
by the utility, the utility shall deny the application and notify the applicant in
writing of such action.
(5) Evaluation of application permit conditions. Upon receipt of
complete applications, the utility shall review and evaluate the applications and
shall propose such special permit conditions as the utility deems advisable. The
utility may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. All
wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the provisions of
this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations.
Wastewater discharge permits shall contain at a minimum:
(a) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date as specified in
§ 18-108(9).
(b) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the utility as specified in
§ 18-108(10), and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator
with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(c) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based
on applicable pretreatment standards.
(d) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based
on federal, state, and local law.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-36
(e) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time
for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local
law.
(f) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
utility to be necessary.
The utility may also propose that the wastewater discharge permit be subject
to one or more special conditions in regard to any of the following:
(a) Pretreatment requirements.
(b) The average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(c) Limits on rate and time of discharge of requirements for flow
regulations and equalization.
(d) Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling
facilities.
(e) Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports.
(f) Requirements for maintaining records relating to
wastewater discharge.
(g) Mean and maximum mass emission rates, or other
appropriate limits when toxic pollutants (as set forth in § 18-106) are
proposed or present in the industrial user's wastewater discharge.
(h) Other conditions deemed appropriate by the utility to ensure
compliance with this chapter or other applicable ordinance, law, or
regulation.
(i) A reasonable compliance schedule, as determined by the
utility, up to one (1) year in duration or such earlier date as may be
required by other applicable law or regulation, whichever is sooner, to
ensure the industrial user's compliance with pretreatment requirements
or improved methods of operation and maintenance.
(j) Requirements for the installation of facilities to prevent and
control accidental discharge or spills at the user's premises.
(k) The unit discharge or schedule of charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
(6) Applicant to be notified; right to object. (a) Upon completion of the
evaluation, the utility shall notify the applicant of any denial or special
permit conditions proposed for inclusion in the wastewater discharge
permit.
(b) The applicant shall have thirty (30) days from and after the
date of the utility's recommendations for denial or special permit
conditions to review same and file written objections with the utility in
regard to any denial or special permit conditions recommended. The
utility may, but is not required, to schedule a meeting with applicant's
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-37
authorized representative within fifteen (15) days following receipt of the
applicant's objections, to attempt to resolve disputed issues concerning
the denial or special permit conditions.
(c) If applicant files no objection to special permit conditions
proposed by the utility or a subsequent agreement is reached concerning
same, the utility shall issue a wastewater discharge permit to applicant
with such special conditions incorporated therein. Otherwise, the utility
shall submit the disputed matters to the board for resolution.
(7) Board to establish permit conditions; hearing. (a) In the event the
utility cannot issue a wastewater discharge permit pursuant to
§ 18-108(6), the utility shall submit to the board the reasons for the
denial or the proposed permit conditions and the applicant's written
objections thereto at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board
or a specially called meeting.
(b) The board shall schedule a hearing within ninety (90) days
following the meeting referred to above unless such time is extended for
just cause shown to resolve any disputed matters relevant to such permit.
(c) The utility shall notify the applicant of the date, time, place,
and purpose of the hearing scheduled by the board. The applicant and the
utility shall have the right to participate in the hearing and present any
relevant evidence to the board concerning the proposed denial or special
permit conditions or other matters being considered by the board.
(d) Following the hearing or additional hearings deemed
necessary and advisable by the board, the board shall render a decision
on the utility's denial to issue a wastewater discharge permit or establish
special permit conditions deemed advisable to ensure the applicant's
compliance with this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations and
direct the utility to issue a wastewater discharge permit to the applicant
accordingly.
(8) Compliance schedule and reporting requirements. The following
conditions shall apply to the schedules required by this section:
(a) Schedule components. The schedule shall contain increments
of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment requirements for the industrial user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing the
engineering report, completing final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
(b) Schedule intervals. No such increment shall exceed nine (9)
months.
(c) Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall
submit a progress report to the utility including, at a minimum, whether
or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-38
and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial
user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event
shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to
the utility.
(9) Duration of permit. All existing permits for significant industrial
users shall be reviewed and reissued with revisions as necessary to comply with
new regulatory measures of this chapter within one year of adoption of this
ordinance.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed
five (5) years. Permits issued to industrial users granted an exception pursuant
to § 18-107(8) shall be issued for a period of one (1) year. A permit may remain
effective after the expiration date if the IU has submitted a formal appeal or the
utility requires an extended time for review.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, industrial users subject to a national
pretreatment standard shall apply for new permits on the effective date of such
national pretreatment standards. The utility shall notify in writing any
industrial user whom the utility has cause to believe is subject to a national
pretreatment standard of the promulgation of such federal regulations, but any
failure of the utility in this regard shall not relieve the industrial user of the
duty of complying with such national pretreatment standards. An industrial
user must apply in writing for a renewal permit within the period of time not
more than ninety (90) days and not less than thirty (30) days prior to expiration
of the current permit.
Limitations or conditions of a permit are subject to modification or change
as such changes become necessary due to changes in applicable water quality
standards, changes in the utility's NPDES permit, changes in § 18-106(11),
changes in other applicable law or regulation, or for other just cause. Industrial
users shall be notified of any proposed changes in their permit by the utility at
least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the change. Any change or new
condition in a permit shall include a provision for a reasonable time schedule for
compliance. The industrial user may appeal the decision of the utility in regard
to any changed permit conditions as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(10) Transfer of a permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to
a specific industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, a
different premises, or a new or changed operation, unless as approved by the
utility. Upon approval by the utility, a copy of the existing permit shall be given
to the new owner/operator.
(11) Revocation of permit. Any permit issued under the provisions of
this chapter is subject to modification, suspension, or revocation in whole or in
part during its term for cause, including but not limited to, the following:
(a) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit or other applicable law or regulation.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-39
(b) Obtaining of a permit by misrepresentation or failure to
disclose fully all relevant facts.
(c) A change in any condition that requires either a temporary
or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge.
(d) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premise for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring. (Ord. of Sept. 1994, as replaced by
Ord. #2012-19, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-109. Inspections, monitoring, and records. (1) Inspections,
monitoring, and entry. (a) When required to carry out the objective of this
chapter, including but not limited to:
(i) Developing or assisting in the development of any
effluent limitation, or other limitation, prohibition, or effluent
standard, pretreatment standard, standard of performance, or
permit condition under this chapter;
(ii) Determining whether any person is in violation of any
such effluent limitation, or other limitation, prohibition, or effluent
standard, pretreatment standard, standard of performance, or
permit condition;
(iii) Any requirement established under this section.
(b) The utility shall require any industrial user to:
(i) Establish and maintain records;
(ii) Make reports;
(iii) Install, use, and maintain monitoring equipment or
methods, including where appropriate, biological monitoring
methods;
(iv) Sample effluents in accordance with these methods,
at such locations, at such intervals, and in such manner as the
utility shall prescribe; and
(v) Provide such other information as the utility may
reasonably require.
(c) Specific requirements under the provisions of paragraph (b)
of this section shall be established by the utility, or the board as
applicable, for each industrial user and such requirements shall be
included as a condition of the industrial user's wastewater discharge
permit. The nature of degree of any requirement under this provision
shall depend upon the nature of the user's discharge, the impact of the
discharge on the POTW, the volume of water discharged, and the
technical feasibility of an economic reasonableness of any such
requirement imposed.
(d) The utility or his authorized representative shall, upon
presentation of his credentials:
(i) Have a right of entry to, upon, or through any user's
premises in which an effluent source is located or in which any
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-40
records required to be maintained under this subsection are
located.
(ii) Have access at reasonable times to and copy any
records, inspect any monitoring equipment or method required
under paragraph (b), and sample any effluents which the owner or
operator of such source is required to sample.
(e) In the event any industrial user denies the utility or his
authorized representative the right of entry for inspection, sampling
effluents, inspecting and copying records, or verifying that a user is not
discharging industrial wastes or performing such other duties as shall be
imposed upon the utility by this chapter, the utility shall seek a warrant
or use such other legal procedures as advisable and reasonably necessary
to discharge the duties of this section.
(f) Any industrial user failing or refusing to discharge any duty
imposed upon the user under the provisions of this section, or who denies
the utility or authorized representative the right to enter the user's
premises for purposes of inspection, sampling effluents, inspecting and
copying records, or such other duties as may be imposed upon him by this
section, shall be deemed to have violated the conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit and such permit shall be subject to modification,
suspension, or revocation under the procedures established in this
chapter. A user who does not have an industrial waste discharge permit
and denies the utility or authorized representative the right to inspect as
described herein is subject to having the sewer service in question
terminated by the utility.
(2) Reports. (a) Progress reports. No later than fourteen (14) days
following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the
industrial user shall submit a progress report to the utility, including as
a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met
on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this
increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and steps being taken by
the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established.
In no event shall more the nine (9) months elapse between such progress
reports to the utility.
(b) Ninety (90) day report, new source compliance. Within
ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit to the utility a report containing the information described in
§ 18-108(3)(d) through (f).
(c) Self-monitoring reports. (i) All SIUs shall submit to the
utility during the months of May and November, unless required
more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the utility, a
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-41
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
effluent which are limited by their permit. In addition, this report
shall include a record of the total daily flows. At the discretion of
the utility and in consideration of such factors as local high or low
flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the utility may agree to
alter the months during which the above reports are to be
submitted.
(ii) The utility, as applicable, may impose mass
limitations on industrial users employing dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other
cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In
such cases, the report required by paragraph (c)(i) of this section
shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment
standards in the effluent of the industrial user.
(d) The reports required in this section shall contain the results
of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the
nature and concentration or production rate and mass limits where
requested by the utility, as applicable, of pollutants contained therein
which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards or industrial
permit. For industrial user subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the utility as alternative standards, the report shall
contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For
all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), the report shall include the
user's actual average production rate for the reporting period. In cases
where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP or
pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation to
determine the compliance status. The frequency of monitoring shall be
prescribed in the applicable treatment standard.
(3) Monitoring facilities. (a) All SIUs shall install a monitoring
station of a standard design or one satisfactory to the utility within one
(1) year from adoption of this chapter. All users who propose to discharge
or who in the judgment of the utility could now or in the future discharge
wastewater with constituents and characteristics different from that
produced by a domestic premise may be required to install a monitoring
facility. Monitoring facilities shall be properly maintained in good
working order at all times. Failure to maintain the monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(b) Installation. Required monitoring facilities shall be
constructed, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. The
purpose of the facility is to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of wastewaters. If sampling or metering equipment is also
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-42
required by the utility, it shall be provided, installed, and operated at the
user's expense. The monitoring facility will normally be required to be
located on the user's premises outside the building. The utility may,
however, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street right-of-way with the approval of the public agency having
jurisdiction of that right-of-way and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
(c) Access. If the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence,
there shall be accommodations to allow safe and immediate access for
utility personnel. There shall be ample room in or near such facility to
allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. The
entire facility and any sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by and
at the expense of the user.
(d) The industrial user shall be required to design any
necessary facility and to submit according to the permit compliance
schedule an engineering report, including detailed design plans and
operating procedures to the utility for review in accordance with accepted
engineering practices. The utility shall review the plans and other
documents within forty-five (45) days and shall recommend to the
industrial user any change deemed appropriate.
(e) Upon approval of plans and other documents, the industrial
user shall secure all building, electrical, plumbing, and other permits
required and proceed to construct any necessary facility and establish
required operating procedures within the time provided in the industrial
user's wastewater discharge permit.
(4) Sampling and analysis. (a) All collected samples must be of such
nature that they provide a true and accurate representation of the
industry's normal workday effluent quality.
(b) Chain-of-custody procedures, sample preservation
techniques, and sample holding times recommended by EPA shall be
followed in all self-monitoring activities. Grab samples must first be used
for cyanide, phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organics, and when
a continuous monitor is not used; pH. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. All other samples
shall be twenty-four (24) hour flow-proportional composite samples,
unless otherwise approved by the utility.
(c) Monitoring shall be performed at the approved monitoring
station on the effluent sewer. Location and design of the monitoring
station shall be subject to the review and approval of the utility. Any
change in monitoring location will be subject to the approval of the
utility.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-43
(d) All analyses shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by EPA under the provisions of section 304(h) of
the Act [33 U.S.C. 1314(h)] and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and
amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by EPA.
Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved
by EPA. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the Administrator of
the EPA determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical
techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any
other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the utility or other parties, approved by the
administrator of the EPA.
(e) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety (90) day compliance reports, a minimum of four (4) grab samples
must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and
volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling
data does not exist; a lower minimum may be authorized. For
self-monitoring reports, the SIU is required to collect the number of grab
samples as specified in the industrial user discharge permit to assess and
assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(5) Dangerous discharge notification. (a) Telephone notification. Any
person or user causing or suffering any discharge, whether accidental or
not, which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to human health and welfare or the environment, or which
is likely to cause interference with the POTW, shall notify the utility
immediately by telephone. In the absence of the utility, notification shall
be given to the utility employee then in charge of the treatment works.
Such notification will not relieve the permit holder from any expense,
loss, liability, or penalty which may be incurred as a consequence of the
discharge.
(b) Written report. Within five (5) days following such
occurrence, the user shall provide the utility with a detailed written
report describing the cause of the dangerous discharge and measures to
be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW,
fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any penalties, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
(c) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted
on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employers
of a contact in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-44
ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous
discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(6) Slug reporting. The industrial user shall notify the utility or the
POTW immediately by telephone of any slug loading or changes that occur by
the user which may affect the potential for a slug discharge, as defined by
§ 18-107(5), by the industrial user.
(7) Notification of the discharge of hazardous wastes. (a) The
industrial user shall not as soon as practicable the POTW, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous
waste authorities of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which
is a listed or characteristic waste under section 3001 of RCRA (42 USCA
§ 6921). Such notification must include a description of any such wastes
discharged, specifying the volume and concentration of such wastes and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other), identifying the
hazardous constituents contained in the listed wastes and estimating the
volume of hazardous wastes expected to be discharged during the
following twelve (12) months. The notification must take place within
one hundred eighty (180) days after notification by the utility. This
requirement shall not apply to pollutants already reported under the
self-monitoring requirements of § 18-109(2).
(b) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of this
paragraph during a calendar month in which they generate no more than
fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.5(2), (f), (g), and (j).
Generation of more than one hundred (100) kilograms of hazardous
wastes in any given month requires a one (1) time notification.
Subsequent months during which the industrial user generates more
than one hundred (100) kilograms of hazardous waste do not require
additional notification, except for the acute hazardous wastes specified in
40 CFR 261.5(3), (f), (g), and (j).
(c) In the case of new regulations under section 3001 of
RCRA(42 USCA § 6921) identifying additional characteristics of
hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous
waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW of the discharge of such
substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations,
except for the exemption in paragraph (b) of this section.
(d) In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of wastes generated to the degree it has determined
to be economically practicable and that it has selected the method of
treatment, storage, or disposal currently available which minimizes the
present and future threat to human health and the environment.
(8) Notification of changed discharge. All industrial users shall
promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-45
or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or
characteristic hazardous wastes, for which the industrial user submitted initial
notification under § 18-109(7).
(9) Provisions governing fraud and false statements. The reports
required to be submitted under this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of
18 U.S.C. § 1001 relating to fraud and false statements and the provisions of
sections 309(c)(4) and (6) of the Act (33 USCA § 1311), as amended, governing
false statements, representation, or certifications in reports required under the
Act.
(10) Signatory requirements for industrial user reports. The reports
required by this chapter shall include a certification statement as follows:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the
system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware
that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations.
The reports shall be signed as follows:
(a) By a responsible corporate officer if the industrial user
submitting the reports required by this section is a corporation. For the
purpose of this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer is:
(i) A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of
the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making
functions for the corporation, or
(ii) The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing,
production or operation facilities, provided, the manager is
authorized to make management decisions which govern the
operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or
implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can assure the necessary
systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and
accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and
where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-46
(b) By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
submitting the reports required by this section is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, respectively.
(c) By a duly authorized representation of the individual
designation in paragraph (a) of this section if:
(i) The authorization is made in writing by the
individual described in paragraph (a).
(ii) The authorization specifies either an individual or a
position having responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, operator of a well, well field utility, or
a person in position of equivalent responsibility or with overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company.
(iii) The written authorization is submitted to the control
authority.
(d) If an authorization under paragraph (c) of this section is no
longer accurate because, a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph (c) of this section
must be submitted to the utility prior to or in conjunction with any
reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(11) Reporting of violation. If sampling performed by an industrial user
indicates a violation, the user shall notify the utility within twenty-four (24)
hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
utility within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Where the
utility has performed sampling and analysis in lieu of the user, the utility must
perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the
violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. The industrial
user is not required to resample if one of the following criteria is met:
(a) The utility performs sampling at the industrial user at a
frequency of at least once per month.
(b) The utility performs sampling at the user between the time
when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
(12) Reporting of all monitoring. If an industrial user subject to the
reporting requirements, by this section of this chapter monitors any pollutant
more frequently than required by the utility using approved procedures
prescribed in this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report unless otherwise exempted by the utility.
(13) Notice of bypass. (a) If an industrial user knows in advance of the
need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the utility. If possible,
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-47
this should be submitted at least ten (10) days before the date of the
bypass.
(b) An industrial user shall submit oral notice to the utility of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards
within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the industrial user becomes
aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within
five (5) days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass.
The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its
cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; and,
if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is exposed to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The utility may waive the written report on
a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twentyfour
(24) hours.
(14) Maintenance of records. Any industrial user subject to the
reporting requirements established in this section shall maintain records of all
information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this section.
Such records shall include for all samples:
(a) The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the
names of the persons taking the samples.
(b) The dates on which analyses were performed.
(c) Who performed the analyses.
(d) The analytical techniques/methods.
(e) The results of the analyses.
(15) Retention period. Any industrial user subject to the reporting
requirement established in this section shall be required to retain for a
minimum of three (3) years any records of monitoring activities and results
(whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this section) and any
documentation associated with the application of best management practices
and shall make these records available for inspection and copying by the utility,
TDEC Director of the Division of Water Pollution Control, and EPA. The
retention period shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation
regarding the industrial user or upon request from the utility, the director, or
the EPA.
(16) Confidential information. Any records, reports, or information
obtained under this section shall:
(a) In the case of effluent data, be related to any applicable
effluent limitations, toxic, pretreatment, or permit condition, and
(b) Available to the public to the extent provided by 40 CFR,
part 2.302. If, however, upon showing satisfactory to the utility by any
person that, if made public records, reports, information, or particular
parts (other than effluent data) to which the utility has access under this
section, would divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as
trade secrets of such person, the utility shall consider such record, report,
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-48
or information, or information, particular portion thereof confidential in
accordance with the purposes of this chapter. Such record, report, or
information may be disclosed to officers, employee, or authorized
representatives of the United States or the State of Tennessee concerned
with carrying out the provisions of the CWA or when relevant in any
proceeding under this chapter or other applicable laws. (Ord. of Sept.
1994, as replaced by Ord. #2012-19, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct.
2014)
18-110. Enforcement. (1) Complaints and orders. (a) Should the utility
have reason to believe that a violation of any provision of the ordinance
or orders of the board issued pursuant thereto has occurred, is occurring,
or is about to occur, the utility may order that a written complaint be
served upon the alleged violator(s).
(b) The complaint shall specify the provision(s) of the
pretreatment program or order alleged to be violated or about to be
violated, the facts alleged to constitute a violation thereof, and may order
that necessary corrective action be taken within a reasonable time to be
prescribed in such order, and shall inform the violators of the opportunity
for a hearing before the utility board.
(c) Any such order shall become final and not subject to review
unless the person or persons named therein request by written petition
a hearing before the board as provided in § 18-110(4), no later than thirty
(30) days after the date such order is served; provided, however, that the
board may review such final order on the same grounds upon which a
court of the state may review default judgments.
(2) Additional remedies. In addition to other remedies provided
herein, the utility may issue a show-cause notice to any user who appears to be
violating any provision of this chapter to show cause why sewer service should
not be discontinued. The notice shall include the nature of the violation with
sufficient specificity as to the character of the violation and the date(s) which
such violation(s) occurred to enable the user to prepare a defense. Such notice
shall be mailed to the user by certified mail, return receipt requested, or shall
be personally delivered to the user at least twenty (20) days prior to the
proposed action, except in the event of an emergency. At the show-cause
hearing, the user may present any defense to such charges, either in person or
through submission of written or documentary proof. Following the hearing or
opportunity for a hearing, the board may at the board's discretion order
termination of sewer service if satisfied from all available proof that the
violation was willful and the termination is necessary to abate the offending
condition or to prevent future violations. The board may terminate service for
a period not to exceed one (1) year for a willful violation and may terminate
service indefinitely to abate offending conditions or prevent future violations
subject to the corrections of such conditions or violations by the user.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-49
Any violation of provisions of this chapter that is not corrected or abated
following a notice and opportunity for a hearing shall be grounds for termination
of water service and/or plugging of the sewer line.
(3) Emergency termination of service. (a) When the utility finds that
an emergency exists in which immediate action is required to protect
public health, safety, or welfare, the health of animals, fish, or aquatic
life, a public water supply, or the facilities of the POTW of the
pretreatment agency, the utility may, without prior notice, issue an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that certain
action(s) be taken as the utility deems necessary to meet the emergency.
(b) If the violator fails to respond or is unable to respond to the
utility's order, the utility may take such emergency action as deemed
necessary or contract with a qualified person(s) to carry out the
emergency measures. The utility may assess the person(s) responsible for
the emergency condition for actual costs incurred by the utility in
meeting the emergency.
(c) In the event such emergency action adversely affects the
user, the utility shall provide the user an opportunity for a hearing as
soon as practicable thereafter to consider restoration of service upon
abatement of the condition or other reasonable conditions. Following the
hearing, the utility may take any such authorized action should the proof
warrant such action.
(4) Hearings. (a) Any hearing or re-hearing brought before the board
shall be conducted in accordance with the following:
(i) Upon receipt of a written petition from the alleged
violator pursuant to this section, the utility shall give the
petitioner thirty (30) days' written notice of the time and place of
the hearing, but in no case shall the hearing be held more than
sixty (60) days from the receipt of the written petition unless the
utility and the petitioner agree to a postponement.
(ii) The hearing provided may be conducted by the board
at a regular or special meeting. A quorum of the board must be
present at the regular or special meeting in order to conduct the
hearing.
(iii) A verbatim record of the prehearings of the hearings
shall be made and filed with the board in conjunction with the
findings of fact and conclusions of law made pursuant to paragraph
(vi) of this section. The transcript shall be made available to the
petitioner or any party to a hearing upon payment of a charge set
by the utility to cover the costs of preparation.
(iv) In connection with the hearing, the chairman shall
issue subpoenas in response to any reasonable request by any
party to the hearing requiring the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-50
involved in the hearing. In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a
notice of hearing or subpoena issued under this section, the
chancery court of Bradley County shall have jurisdiction upon the
application of the board or the utility to issue an order requiring
such person to appear and testify or produce evidence as the case
may require. Failure to obey such order of the court is punishable
by the court as contempt.
(v) Any member of the board may administer oaths and
examine witnesses.
(vi) On the basis of the evidence produced at the hearing,
the board shall make findings of fact and conclusion of law and
enter such decisions and orders as in its opinion will best further
the purposes of the pretreatment program and shall give written
notice to such decisions and orders to the alleged violator. The
order issued under this subsection shall be issued no later than
thirty (30) days following the close of the hearing by the person or
persons designated by the chairman.
(vii) The decision of the board shall become final and
binding on all parties unless appealed to the courts as provided in
paragraph (b).
(viii) Any person to whom an emergency order is directed
pursuant to § 18-110(3) shall comply therewith immediately but on
petition to the board shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
possible, but in no case shall such hearing be held later than three
(3) days from the receipt of such petition by the board.
(ix) Upon agreement of all parties, the testimony of any
person may be taken by deposition or written interrogatories.
Unless otherwise agreed, the deposition shall be taken in a
manner consistent with rules 26 through 33 of the Tennessee
Rules of Civil Procedure, with the chairman to rule on such
manners as would inquire a ruling by the court under said rules.
(x) The party at the hearing bearing the affirmative
burden of proof shall first call witnesses, which shall be followed
by witnesses called by other party. Rebuttal witnesses shall be
called in the same order. The chairman shall rule on any
evidentiary questions arising during such hearing and shall make
other rulings necessary or advisable to facilitate an orderly
hearing subject to approval of the board. The board, the utility, his
representative, and all parties shall have the right to examine any
witness. The board shall not be bound by or limited to rules of
evidence applicable to legal proceedings.
(xi) Any person aggrieved by any order or determination
of the utility where an appeal is not otherwise provided by this
section may appeal said order or determination to be reviewed by
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-51
the board under the provisions of this section. A written notice of
appeal shall be filed with the utility and the chairman, and said
notice shall set forth with particularity the action or inaction of the
utility complained of and the relief being sought by the person
filing said appeal. A special meeting of the board may be called by
the chairman upon the filing of such appeal, and the board may, at
members' discretion, suspend the operation of the order or
determination of the utility on which is based the appeal until such
time as the board has acted upon the appeal.
(xii) The vice chairman or the chairman pro tem shall
possess all the authority delegated to the chairman by this section
when acting in his absence or in his place.
(b) An appeal may be taken from any final order or other final
determination of the utility or board by any party who is or may be
adversely affected thereby to the chancery court pursuant to the common
law writ of certiorari set out in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 27-8-101,
within sixty (60) days from the date such order or determination is made.
(5) Civil penalty. (a) Any person, including, but not limited to,
industrial users, who does any of the following acts or omissions shall be
subject to a civil penalty of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per
day for each day during which the act or omission continues or occurs:
(i) Violates any effluent standard or limitation imposed
by a pretreatment program.
(ii) Violates the terms or conditions of a permit issued
pursuant to a pretreatment program.
(iii) Fails to complete a filing requirement of a
pretreatment program.
(iv) Fails to allow or perform an entry, inspection,
monitoring, or reporting requirement of a pretreatment program.
(v) Fails to pay user or cost recovery charges imposed by
a pretreatment program.
(vi) Violates a final determination or order of the board.
(b) Any civil penalty shall be assessed in the following manner:
(i) The utility may issue an assessment against any
person or industrial user responsible for the violation.
(ii) Any person or industrial user against whom an
assessment has been issued may secure a review of such
assessment by filing with the utility a written petition setting
forth the grounds and reasons for his objections and asking for a
hearing on the matter involved before the board. If a petition for
review of the assessment is not filed within thirty (30) days of the
date the assessment is served, the violator shall be deemed to have
consented to the assessment, and it shall become final.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-52
(iii) When any assessment becomes final because of a
person's failure to appeal the utility's assessment, the utility may
apply to the appropriate court for a judgment and seek execution
of such judgment and the court, in such proceedings, shall treat a
failure to appeal such assessment as a confession of judgment in
the amount of the assessment.
(iv) In assessing the civil penalty, the utility may consider
the following factors:
(A) Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a
substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity.
(B) Damages to the utility, including compensation
for the damage or destruction of the facilities of the POTW,
which also includes any penalties, costs, and attorneys' fees
incurred by the utility as the result of the illegal activity, as
well as the expenses involved in enforcing this section and
the costs involved in rectifying any damages.
(C) Cause of the discharge or violation.
(D) The severity of the discharge and its effect
upon the facilities of the POTW and upon the quality and
quantity of the receiving waters.
(E) Effectiveness of action taken by the violator to
cease the violation.
(F) The technical and economic reasonableness of
reducing or eliminating the discharge.
(G) The economic benefit gained by the violator.
(v) The utility may institute proceedings for assessment
in the name of the Cleveland Utilities Board in the chancery court
of the county in which all or part of the pollution of violation
occurred.
(c) The board may establish by regulation a schedule of the
amount of civil penalty which can be assessed by the utility for certain
specific violations or categories of violations.
(i) Any civil penalty assessed to a violator pursuant to
this section may be in addition to any civil penalty assessed by the
Commissioner of Environment and Conservation for violations of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-115(a)(a)(F). Provided, however,
the sum of penalties imposed by this section and by Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 69-3-115(a) shall not exceed ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) per day for each day during which the act or
omission continues or occurs.
(6) Assessment for noncompliance with program permits or orders.
(a) The utility may assess the liability of any polluter or violator
for damages to the pretreatment agency resulting from any person(s) or
industrial user(s) pollution or violation, failure, or neglect in complying
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-53
with any permits or orders issued pursuant to the provisions of the
pretreatment program. Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 69-3-123,
69-3-124, or 69-3-125, or §§ 18-110(5) or (9).
(b) If an appeal from such assessment is not made to the board
by the polluter or violator within thirty (30) days of notification of such
assessment, he shall be deemed to have consented to such assessment
and it shall become final.
(c) Damages may include any expenses incurred in
investigating and enforcing the pretreatment program or Tennessee Code
Annotated, §§ 69-3-123 through 69-3-129 or § 18-110(5) through (9), in
removing, correcting, and terminating any pollution, and also
compensation for any actual damages caused by the pollution or violation.
(d) Whenever any assessment has become final because of a
person's failure to appeal within the time provided, the utility may apply
to the appropriate court for a judgment and seek execution on such
judgment. The court, in such proceedings, shall treat the failure to appeal
such assessment as a confession of judgment in the amount of the
assessment.
(7) Judicial proceedings and relief. The utility may initiate proceedings
in the chancery or circuit court of the county in which the activities occurred
against any person or industrial user who is alleged to have violated or is about
to violate the pretreatment program, Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 69-3-123
through 69-3-129, § 18-110(5) through (9), or orders of the board. In such action,
the utility may seek, and the court may grant, injunctive relief and any other
relief available in law or equity.
(8) Administrative enforcement remedies. (a) Notification of
violation. When the utility finds that any industrial user has violated or
is violating this chapter, or a wastewater permit or order issued
hereunder, the utility or his agent may serve upon said user written
notice of the violation. Within fifteen (15) days of the receipt date of this
notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions,
shall be submitted to the utility. Submission of this plan in no way
relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation.
(b) Consent orders. The utility is hereby empowered to enter
into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user
responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action
to be taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the
same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to
paragraph (d) below.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-54
(c) Show-cause hearing. The utility may order any industrial
user which causes or contributes to a violation of this chapter or
wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the
user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any principal
executive, general partner, or corporate officer. Whether or not a duly
notified industrial user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action
may be pursued.
(d) Compliance order. When the utility finds that an industrial
user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order
issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the industrial user
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and
are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements
deemed reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology,
additional self-monitoring, and management practices.
(e) Cease and desist orders. When the utility finds that an
industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, the utility may issue an order to cease
and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance
to do one of the following:
(i) Comply with the order.
(ii) Take appropriate remedial or preventive action
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and terminating the discharge.
(9) Assessment of damages to users. When the discharge of waste or
any other act or omission cause an obstruction, damage, or any other
impairment to the utility's facilities which causes an expense or damages of
whatever character or nature to the utility, the utility shall assess the expenses
and damages incurred by the utility to clear the obstruction, repair damage to
the facility, and otherwise rectify any impairment, and bill the person
responsible for the damage for reimbursement of all expenses and damages
suffered by the utility. If the person responsible refuses to pay, then the utility
shall forward a copy of the statement and documentation of all expenses to the
utility's attorney who shall be authorized to take appropriate legal action.
(10) Disposition of damage payments and penalties. All damages and/or
penalties assessed and collected under the provisions of § 18-110(5) through (9)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-55
shall be placed in a special fund by the utility and allocated and appropriated
to the sewer system for the administration of its pretreatment program.
(11) Criminal penalties. In addition to civil penalties imposed by the
local administrative officer and the State of Tennessee, any person who willfully
and negligently violates permit conditions is subject to criminal penalties
imposed by the State of Tennessee and the United States.
(12) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this
ordinance are not exclusive. The utility may take any, all, or any combination
of these actions against a noncompliant industrial user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the utility's
enforcement response guide. However, the utility may take other action against
any industrial user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the utility is
empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any
noncompliant user. (Ord. of Sept. 1994, as replaced by Ord. #2012-19, Sept.
2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-111. Wastewater volume determination. (1) Metered water
supply. Charges and fees related to the volume of wastewater discharged to the
utility's sewer system shall be based upon the user's total water consumption
from all water supply sources. The total amount of water used shall be
determined from public meters installed and maintained by the utility and/or
private meters installed and maintained at the expense of the user and
approved by the utility.
(2) Actual wastewater volume. When charges and fees are based upon
water usage and/or discharge and where, in the opinion of the utility, a
significant portion of the water received from any metered source does not flow
into the community sewer because of the principal activity of the user or
removal by other means, the charges and fees will be applied only against the
volume of water discharged from such premises into the community sewer.
Written notification and proof of the diversion of water must be provided by the
user, and approved by the utility.
The users may install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the
utility, to measure either the amount of sewage discharged or the amount of
water diverted. Such meters shall be maintained at the expense of the user and
be tested for accuracy at the expense of the user when deemed necessary by the
utility.
(3) Estimated wastewater volume. For users where, in the opinion of
the utility, it is unnecessary or impractical to install meters, charges and fees
may be based upon an estimate of the volume to be discharged. The estimate
shall be prepared by the user and approved by the utility. The number of
fixtures, seating capacity, population equivalent, annual production of goods and
services, and other such factors as deemed rational by the utility shall be used
to estimate the wastewater discharge volume.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-56
(4) Domestic flows. For the separate determination of the volumes of
domestic and industrial flows from industrial users for purposes of calculating
charges based upon industrial wastewater flows alone, users shall install a
meter of a type and at a location approved by the utility. For users where, in the
opinion of the utility, it is unnecessary or impractical to install such a meter, the
volume of the domestic and industrial wastewater shall be based upon an
estimate prepared by the users and approved by the utility. (Ord. of Sept. 1994,
as replaced by Ord. #2012-19, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-112. Wastewater charges and fees. (1) Purpose of charges and
fees. A schedule of charges and fees shall be adopted by the utility which will
enable it to comply with the revenue requirements of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments. Charges and fees shall be determined in a
manner consistent with regulations of the federal grant program in order that
sufficient revenues are collected to defray the utility's cost of operating and
maintaining adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems and to
provide sufficient funds for equipment replacement, capital outlay, bond service
costs, capital improvements, and depreciation.
(2) Abutting property owners; to pay charges. The owner or occupant
of each lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a street or other public way
containing a sanitary sewer upon which lot or parcel a building has been or may
hereafter be constructed for residential, commercial, or industrial use shall pay
the sewer service charges as provided in this chapter. The utility or his designee
shall make the determination whether or not a lot or parcel abuts upon a
segment of street, alley, easement, or other public way in which there is a sewer
for the purposes of levying service charges; provided that he or she may waive
the collection of such charges where the connection is infeasible based upon
engineering or hydraulic principles, the connection would not comport with
applicable plumbing or building codes, or the connection would not comport with
other applicable codes, laws, or regulations.
(3) Contracts for disposal of sewage authorized; charges. The utility
may (subject to approval by the city council) enter into contracts with any
municipality, county, incorporated district or person for the treatment and
disposal of sewage collected and pumped or delivered to some part of the sewer
system; provided, however, that the charges to be paid for the treatment and
disposal of such sewage shall not be less than an amount which is fair and
equitable, taking into account the cost to the city of such treatment and disposal
and the cost of the sewage disposal system. All revenues received pursuant to
such contract shall be deemed to be revenue of the sewer system, and shall be
applied and accounted for in the same manner as other revenues derived from
the operation of such system.
(4) Secondary metering. Whenever a property upon which a sewer user
charge is imposed under this chapter uses water for an industrial or commercial
purpose, which water so used is not discharged into the sewerage system of the
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-57
utility, the quantity of water so used and not discharged into the utility's sewers
shall be excluded in determining the sewer user charge of the owner or
occupant; provided that the quantity of water so used and not discharged into
the utility sewers is measured by a device or meter (called a secondary meter)
approved by the utility and installed by the owner or occupant without cost to
the utility. The sewer user charge based upon the consumption of water to be
paid by the owner or occupant of such property shall be computed at the rates
provided in this chapter less the quantity not discharged into the utility's
sewers. The utility reserves the right to require calibration of secondary meters
when appropriate. A secondary meter shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Meters should read in one hundred (100) cubic feet.
(b) Meters must be located either in an outdoor meter box or
vault, or inside the user's building or structure in a clean, dry, safe place
not subject to wide temperature variations so that the meter can be easily
examined, read, or removed.
(c) The user shall, at its expense, provide suitable pipe
connections and shut-off valves, one (1) each at the inlet and outlet sides
of the meter.
(d) The meter box or vault may be constructed to protect the
meter from freezing and damage by vehicular traffic, and its location and
design shall prevent, as far as possible, inflow of surface water.
(e) Any changes in location of secondary meters, malfunctions,
replacements, or any other changes in the approved secondary meter
installation must be reported to the utility in writing. Also, a copy must
be forwarded to the water company containing all pertinent information
regarding that particular meter.
(f) No retroactive credits will be issued if the holder of the
secondary meter permit fails to comply with the rules and regulations in
force at any particular time.
(g) If any water exempted from the sewer service charge is
returned to the sewer system at any time or point, a metering device shall
be installed. Any flow registered through such a meter shall be charged
for sewer service.
(h) Any secondary meter must be easily accessible by the utility.
If this is not possible, remote read meters shall be installed and protected
from any magnetic interference. It is the responsibility of the permit
holder to assure the accuracy of the remote read to the installed meter.
(i) All meters must be calibrated and certified for accuracy once
every eighteen (18) months. The certification of the inspection or a copy
thereof has to be forwarded to the utility.
(5) Types of charges and fees. The charges and fees established in the
utility's schedule of charges and fees may include, but not be limited to, the
following:
- Connection fees.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-58
- User charges and surcharges.
- Fees for monitoring requested by user.
- Fees for permit applications.
- Fees for garbage grinders.
- Fees for truck discharge operation permits.
- Fees for discharge of holding tank wastes.
- Inspection fees.
(6) Basis for determination of charges. Charges and fees shall be based
upon a minimum basic charge for each premise, computed on the basis of normal
wastewater from a domestic premise with the following characteristics:
BOD5 - 300 mg/l
COD - 600 mg/l
Suspended Solids - 400 mg/l
Volume - 300 mg/l
The charges and fees for all users other than the basic domestic premise
shall be based upon the relative difference between the average wastewater
constituents and characteristics of that user as related to those of a domestic
premise.
The charges and fees established for permit users shall be based upon the
measured or estimated constituents and characteristics of the wastewater
discharge of that user which may include, but not be limited to, BOD, COD,
suspended solids, oil and grease, and volume.
(7) User charges. Each user of the utility's sewer system will be levied
a charge for payment of bonded indebtedness of the utility and for the user's
proportionate share of the operation, maintenance, and replacement costs of the
sewer system. A surcharge may be levied against those users with wastewater
that exceeds the strength of normal wastewater.
The user charge will be computed from a base charge plus a surcharge.
The base charge will be the user's proportionate share of the costs of operation,
maintenance, and replacement for handling its periodic volume of normal
wastewater plus the user's share of the bond amortization costs of the utility.
(a) Operation, maintenance, and replacement (OM&R) user
charges. Each user's share of OM&R costs will be computed by the
following formula:
Ct
Cu = ??? (Vu)
Vt
Where:
Cu = User's charge for OM&R per unit of time.
Ct = Total OM&R cost per unit of time, less cost recovered from
surcharges
Vt = Total volume contribution from all users per unit of time.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-59
Vu = Volume contribution from a user per unit of time.
(b) Bonded indebtedness charges. Each user's share of bonded
indebtedness costs will be based on a schedule which reflects the user's
volumetric and/or waste strength contribution to the system.
(c) User surcharges. The surcharge will be the user's
proportionate share of the OM&R costs for handling its periodic volume
of wastewater which exceeds the strength of BOD5, SS, and/or other
elements in normal wastewater as defined by § 18-112(6). The amount
of the surcharge will be determined by the following formula:
Cs = (Bc x B + Sc x S + Pc x P) 8.34 Vu
Where:
Cs = Surcharge for wastewaters exceeding the strength of normal
wastewater expressed in dollars per billing period.
Bc = OM&R cost for treatment of a unit of BOD5 expressed in
dollars per pound.
B = Concentration of BOD5 from a user above the base level of 300
mg/l expressed in mg/l.
Sc = OM&R cost for treatment of a unit of SS expressed in dollars
per pound.
S = Concentration of SS from a user above the base level of 400
mg/l, expressed in mg/l.
Pc = OM&R cost for treatment of a unit of any pollutant which
the POTW is committed to treat by virtue of an NPDES permit or
other regulatory requirement, expressed in dollars per pound.
P = Concentration of any pollutant from a user above a base
level. Base levels for pollutants subject to surcharges will be
established by the utility.
Vu = Volume contribution of a user per billing period in million
gallons based on a twenty-four (24) hour average for billing period.
The concentrations of any pollutant of an industrial user and the
volume contribution of that user shall be calculated from discharge
monitoring reports subject to verification by the utility, from records
maintained by the industrial user, and from reliable information obtained
from any other source.
The values of parameters used to determine user charges may vary
from time to time. Therefore, the utility is authorized to modify any
parameter or value as often as is necessary. Review of all parameters and
values shall be undertaken where necessary, but in no case less
frequently than annually.
(d) Pretreatment program charges. Industrial users may be
required to pay a separate pretreatment program charge. The
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-60
pretreatment program charge will be based on the user's proportional
shares of the costs of administering the POTW pretreatment program
which includes costs incurred by the utility for verification monitoring,
analysis, and reporting. Each user's share of the pretreatment program
costs will be computed by the following formula:
Ct
Cu = ??? (Vu)
Vt
Where:
Cu = User's charge for POTW pretreatment program per unit of
time.
Ct = Total POTW pretreatment program costs per unit of time.
Vt = Total volume contribution of permitted industrial users per
unit of time.
Vu = Volume contribution from a permitted industrial user per
unit of time.
(8) Review of OM&R charges. The utility shall review at least
annually the wastewater contribution by users, the total costs of OM&R of the
treatment works, and it's approved user charge system. The utility shall revise
the user charges to accomplish the following:
(a) Maintain the proportionate distribution of OM&R costs
among users or classes of users.
(b) Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total OM&R costs of
the treatment works.
(c) Apply any excess revenues collected to the costs of operation
and maintenance for the next year and adjust the rate accordingly.
(9) Charges for extraneous flows. The costs of operation and
maintenance for all flow not directly attributable to users, e.g.,
infiltration/inflow, will be distributed proportionally among all users of the
treatment works.
(10) Notification, billing, and collection. (a) Notification. Each user will
be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill of the rate
and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to OM&R
charges.
(b) Billing. Wastewater charges imposed by this chapter shall
be added to, included in, and collected with the monthly water service
bills and shall be due and payable monthly. This shall not affect the right
of the utility to collect wastewater charges from customers who utilize
private water supplies or public water supplies from other utilities.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-61
Where water is provided by either private or other public sources,
rates will be determined by the president/CEO of the utility for affected
customers based upon all known factors at the time of the billing.
(c) Collection. Wastewater charges and fees imposed by this
chapter shall be collected by the utility in a manner established by the
utilities board.
(d) Delinquent accounts. The utility may discontinue water
service to any customer who has a delinquent wastewater charge until
such wastewater charge has been paid, except as provided by state or
federal law.
(e) Adjustments. The utility shall make appropriate
adjustments in the wastewater charge of sewer customers for over or
under registration of utility meters, leaks, or other recognized
adjustments.
(f) Appeals. A user may contest a credit or billing determination
by the utility by paying said bill under protest and within thirty (30) days
following the due date of said bill lodging with the utility a written notice
of appeal with the utility board. The appeal shall follow the procedures
in § 18-110(4). (Ord. of Sept. 1994, as amended by Ord. #2005-40, Oct.
2005, and replaced by Ord. #2012-19, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct.
2014)
18-113. Administration of sewer system. (1) Utility board. In
addition to any other duty or responsibility otherwise conferred upon the utility
board by this chapter, the board shall have the duty and power as follows:
(a) To recommend from time to time to the city council of the
City of Cleveland that it amend or modify the provisions of this chapter.
(b) To grant exceptions pursuant to the provisions of § 18-107(8)
hereof, and to determine such issues of law and fact as are necessary to
perform this duty.
(c) To hold hearings upon appeals from orders of actions of the
president/CEO as may be provided under any provision of this chapter.
(d) To hold hearings relating to the suspension, revocation, or
modification of a wastewater discharge permit and issue appropriate
orders relating thereto.
(e) To hold other hearings that may be required in the
administration of this chapter and to make determinations and issue
orders necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
(f) To request assistance from any office; agent, or employee of
the city government and to obtain any necessary information or other
assistance for the board.
(g) The board, acting through its chairman, shall have the
power to issue subpoenas requiring attendance, the testimony of
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-62
witnesses, and the production of documentary evidence relevant to any
matter properly heard by the board.
(h) The chairman, vice chairman, or chairman pro tem shall be
authorized to administer oaths to people giving testimony before the
board.
(i) The board shall hold annual meetings and special meetings
as the board deems necessary.
(2) President/CEO. (a) President/CEO and staff. The president/CEO
and his or her staff shall be responsible for the administration of all
sections of this chapter. Administratively, the president/CEO shall be
appointed by and shall report to the utilities board.
(b) Authority of president/CEO. The president/CEO shall have
the authority to enforce all sections of this chapter. The president/CEO
shall be responsible and have the authority to maintain and operate the
various treatment works, sewer lines, pump stations, and other
appurtenances. The president/CEO shall be responsible for preparation
of operating budget subject to the normal budgetary processes of the
utility.
(c) Records. The president/CEO shall keep in this office or at an
appropriate storage facility all applications required under this chapter
a complete record thereof, including a record of all wastewater discharge
permits.
(d) President/CEO to assist board. The president/CEO shall
attend all meetings of the utilities board, or when it is necessary for the
superintendent to be absent, a designated representative shall be sent to
make reports to and assist the board in the administration of this
chapter.
(e) Notice on national pretreatment standard. The
president/CEO shall notify industrial users identified in 40 CFR, part
403.8(f) (2) of any applicable pretreatment standards or other applicable
requirements promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of section
204(b) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1284), section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345),
or under the provisions of sections 3001 (42 U.S.C. 6921), 3304 (42 U.S.C.
6924), or 4004 (42 U.S.C. 6944) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act. Failure
of the superintendent to notify industrial users shall not relieve the users
from the responsibility of complying with these requirements.
(f) Public participation notice. The president/CEO shall comply
with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR, part 25 in the
enforcement of national pretreatment standards. The president/CEO
shall at least annually provide public notification in a newspaper of
general circulation published in Bradley County of all significant
industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months,
significantly violated applicable pretreatment standards or other
pretreatment requirements. For the purposes of this provision, a
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-63
significant industrial user is in significant violation if its violations meet
one or more of the following criteria:
(i) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of
all of the measurements taken during a six (6) month period
exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit including
instantaneous limits or the average limit for the same pollutant
parameter.
(ii) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined
here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of
the measurements taken during a six (6) month period equal or
exceed the product of the daily average maximum limit including
instantaneous limits or the average limit times the applicable TRC
(TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH).
(iii) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit
(daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the superintendent believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, or
pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel and the general public.
(iv) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health and welfare or to the
environment and has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
(v) Violation by ninety (90) days or more after the
schedule date of a compliance schedule milestone contained in a
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance.
(vi) Failure to provide required reports, such as baseline
monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules within thirty (30) days of the due date.
(vii) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(viii) Any other violation or group of violations, including
BMP violations, which the president/CEO considers to be
significant.
(g) Regulations and standards authorized. The president/CEO
may promulgate rules, regulations, and design criteria not inconsistent
with this chapter and have them printed for distribution. These rules
may include requirements for performing wastewater characterizations,
analyses, and other measurements by standard methods allowed by the
utility. Such rules and regulations shall be ratified and adopted by the
utilities board.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-64
(h) Sewer credits. The president/CEO shall approve secondary
meters and determine other kinds of sewer user charge credits.
(i) Approves new construction. The president/CEO shall give
approval in acceptance of newly constructed sanitary sewer lines, pump
stations. and other appurtenances.
(j) Emergency powers. The president/CEO shall have the
authority to take whatever emergency action he deems necessary
whenever a situation occurs that creates danger to the personnel of
Cleveland Utilities or the facilities of the system or where there is a
danger to public health. (Ord. of Sept. 1994, as replaced by Ord.
#2012-19, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-114. Sewer extension outside corporate limits - urban growth.
(1) No connection to city sewer shall be allowed for any property
outside the city limits unless the owner(s) of the property submit a written
request to the city. The request must state that the property owner(s) are
requesting that the property be annexed into the city, and must include a
statement by the property owner(s) that the request is binding upon the
property owner(s) and all successors in title. Once the written request is
submitted to the city, the city council shall then make a determination of
whether the requested annexation is appropriate. Nothing in this section is
intended to create any obligation on behalf of the city to annex any property
outside the corporate limits of the city.
(2) Where property outside of the city's present Urban Growth
Boundary (UGB) is crossed by a sewer line having capacity to this serve
property and or other properties within the same drainage basin, the city shall
pursue expansion of its UGB to include the area that the sewer line is capable
of serving.
(3) Where the city determines that urbanization is occurring, or is
reasonably expected to occur over the period to 2035, outside the city limits, the
city will consider annexation and pursue expansion of its UGB if necessary.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 18-114(1) through (3), or any
other ordinance of the city, if the city council determines, based on a review by
Cleveland Utilities and city staff, that extension of sewer or sewer connection
outside of the city limits is appropriate for reasons of practical system design,
environmental necessity, or economic benefit to the citizens of Cleveland, the
city council may approve such extension or connection or approve it with
conditions. (as added by Ord. #2012-19, Sept. 2012, and amended by Ord.
#2014-20, May 2014, and Ord. #2014-33, Oct. 2014)
18-65
CHAPTER 2
CROSS-CONNECTIONS, ETC.
SECTION
18-201. Definitions.
18-202. Standards.
18-203. Approval of state department of health required.
18-204. Required statement from consumers with other supply sources.
18-205. Inspection of cross-connections.
18-206. Utility's right-of-entry for inspection purposes.
18-207. Correction of defects, etc.
18-208. Protective devices.
18-209. Labeling of water outlet not supplied by potable system.
18-201. Definitions. The following definitions and terms shall apply in
the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
(1) "Auxiliary intake." Any piping connection or other device whereby
water may be secured from a source other than that normally used.
(2) "By-pass." Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the
water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant.
(3) "Cross-connection." Any physical connection whereby the public
water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public
or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such manner
that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the
manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves,
or because of any other arrangement.
(4) "General manager." Shall mean the general manager of the utility
or officials or employees of the utility as may be designated by the general
manager.
(5) "Interconnection." Any system of piping or other arrangement
whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain,
conduit, pool, storage reservoir or other device which does or may contain
sewage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water supply.
(6) "Person." Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws this or any other state or country.
(7) "Public water supply." The Cleveland utilities-water division
furnishing to the city and the surrounding areas of the county for general use
and which supply is recognized as the public water supply by the state
department of public health.
18-66
(8) "Utility." Shall mean the Cleveland utilities, a department of the
city or duly appointed officials or representatives of Cleveland utilities. (1981
Code, § 23-135)
18-202. Standards. The Cleveland utilities public water supply is to
comply with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-221-101 and § 68-221-104 as well
as the rules and regulations for public water supplies, legally adopted in
accordance with this code, which pertain to cross-connections, auxiliary intakes,
by-passes and interconnections, and establish an effective ongoing program to
control these undesirable water uses. (1981 Code, § 23-136)
18-203. Approval of state department of health required. It shall
be unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass
or interconnection to be made, or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever,
unless the construction and operation of same has been approved by the state
department of health, and the operation of such cross-connection, auxiliary,
intake, by-pass or interconnection is at all times under the direct supervision of
the general manager of the utility. (1981 Code, § 23-137)
18-204. Required statement from consumers with other supply
sources. Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public
water supply, and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water
supply or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from
which the water stored therein is circulated through a piping system, shall file
with the general manager of the utility a statement of the nonexistence of
unapproved or unauthorized cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes or
interconnections. Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no
cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass or interconnection will be permitted
upon the premises. (1981 Code, § 23-138)
18-205. Inspection of cross-connections. It shall be the duty of the
utility to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public
water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed
possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential
health hazards involved shall be as established by the utility and as approved
by the state department of health. (1981 Code, § 23-139)
18-206. Utility's right-of-entry for inspection purposes. The officials
of the utility, or its authorized representative, shall have the right to enter at
any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the utility for the
purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections,
auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or interconnections. On request, the owner, lessee,
or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the utility any pertinent
information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The
18-67
refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed
evidence of the presence of cross-connections. (1981 Code, § 23-140)
18-207. Correction of defects, etc. (1) Any person who had
cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes or interconnections in violation
of the provisions of this chapter on November 28, 1977, shall be allowed a
reasonable time within which to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
After a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the
time required to complete the work, the amount of time shall be designated by
the utility.
(2) The failure to correct conditions threatening the safety of the public
water system as prohibited by this chapter and Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 68-221-104, within a reasonable time and within the time limits set by the
utility, shall be grounds for denial of water service. If proper protection has not
been provided after a reasonable time, the utility shall give the customer legal
notification that water service is to be discontinued, and then physically
separate the public water supply from the customer's on-site piping system in
such a manner that the two (2) systems cannot again be connected by an
unauthorized person.
(3) Where cross-connections, interconnections, auxiliary intakes, or
by-passes are found which constitute an extreme hazard of immediate concern
of contaminating the public water system, the general manager of the utility
shall require that immediate corrective action be taken to eliminate the threat
to the public water system. Immediate steps shall be taken to disconnect the
public water supply from the on-site piping system unless the eminent hazard
is corrected immediately. (1981 Code, § 23-141)
18-208. Protective devices. (1) Where the nature of use of the water
supplied a premises by the utility is such that is deemed:
(a) Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation;
(b) That the owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is
not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the utility, or his
designated representative, that the water use and protective features of
the plumbing are such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability
of the water supply;
(c) That the nature and mode of operation within a premises
are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing;
(d) There is a likelihood that protective measures may be
subverted, altered or disconnected;
The utility shall require the use of an approved protective device on the
service line serving the premises to assure that any contamination that may
originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. The protective devices
shall be a reduced pressure zone type backflow preventer approved by the state
department of health as to the manufacturer, model and size. The method of
18-68
installation of the backflow protective devices shall be approved by the utility
prior to installation and shall comply with the criteria set forth by the state
department of health. The installation shall be at the expense of the owner or
occupant of the premises.
(2) The utility shall have the right to inspect and test the device or
devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary. Water service shall
not be disrupted to test the service without the knowledge of the occupant of the
premises.
(3) Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal
operations or protection of life, property, or equipment, duplicate units shall be
provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair
the protective device or devices. Where only one unit is installed and the
continuance of service is critical, the utility shall notify, in writing, the occupant
of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually
acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The utility shall require the
occupant of the premises to make all repairs indicate promptly, and the expense
of such repairs shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the premises. These
repairs shall be made by qualified personnel, acceptable to the utility.
(4) If necessary, water service shall be discontinued (following legal
notification) for failure to maintain backflow prevention devices in proper
working order. Likewise the removal, by-passing or altering of the protective
devices in such a manner as to make them ineffective shall constitute grounds
for discontinuance of water service. Water service to such premises shall not be
restored until the customer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or
defects to the satisfaction of the utility. (1981 Code, § 23-142)
18-209. Labeling of water outlet not supplied by potable system.
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public
water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified herein.
Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and
which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous
manner as:
WATER UNSAFE
FOR DRINKING
A minimum acceptable sign shall have white letters one-inch high located on a
red background. (1981 Code, § 23-143)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-69
CHAPTER 3
MS4 PHASE II STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
SECTION
18-301. Creation, title and short title.
18-302. General provisions.
18-303. Definitions.
18-304. Waivers and alternatives for compliance.
18-305. Land disturbance permits.
18-306. Stormwater pollution prevention plan design standards.
18-307. Permanent stormwater management: operation, maintenance,
and inspection.
18-308. Post construction landscaping.
18-309. Existing locations and ongoing developments.
18-310. Illicit discharges.
18-311. Enforcement and compliance.
18-312. Penalties.
18-313. Stormwater regulations board and administrative appeals.
18-314. Appendix.
18-301. Creation, title and short title. The City of Cleveland,
Tennessee created by Ordinance 2004-11 a MS4 Phase II Stormwater
Management Program for the City of Cleveland as mandated by the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES) pursuant to 40 CFR
122.26. This section shall provide authority for establishing and administering
the MS4 Phase II Stormwater Management Program, and is amended from
time-to-time, particularly as necessary due to changes in NPDES requirements.
This section may be referred to by its short title, the "stormwater ordinance." (as
added by Ord. #2004-41, Nov. 2004, and replaced by Ord. #2015-06, March 2015)
18-302. General provisions. (1) Purpose. The purpose of this
ordinance is to:
(a) Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the City
of Cleveland and the public health, safety and the general welfare of the
citizens of the city, by controlling discharges of pollutants to the city's
stormwater system and to maintain and improve the quality and
quantity of stormwater discharges to the receiving waters into which the
stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, lakes, rivers,
streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater.
(b) Enable the City of Cleveland to comply with the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES) and applicable
regulations, 40 CFR 122.26 for stormwater discharges.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-70
(c) Allow the City of Cleveland to exercise the powers granted
in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-221-1105, which provides that among
other powers municipalities have with respect to stormwater facilities, is
the power by ordinance or resolution to:
(i) Exercise general regulation over the planning,
location, construction, and operation and maintenance of
stormwater facilities in the municipality, whether or not owned
and operated by the municipality;
(ii) Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to
accomplish the purposes of this ordinance, including the adoption
of a system of stormwater construction inspection fees and permits;
(iii) Establish standards to regulate the quantity of
stormwater discharged and to regulate stormwater contaminants
as may be necessary to protect water quality;
(iv) Review and approve development/redevelopment
plans that will result in land disturbing activity.
(v) Issue permits for stormwater discharges, or for the
construction, alteration, extension, or repair of stormwater
facilities; and collect any fees approved by the city council for
permits or plans review pursuant to the stormwater ordinance.
(vi) Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that
the permittee has violated any applicable ordinance, resolution, or
condition of the permit; and assess and collect administrative or
civil penalties for violations of the stormwater ordinance.
(vii) Regulate and prohibit discharges into stormwater
facilities of sanitary, industrial, or commercial sewage or waters
that have otherwise been contaminated.
(viii) Enter contracts, expend funds, or otherwise employ
available resources to remediate or mitigate the detrimental
effects of contaminated land or other sources of stormwater
contamination, whether public or private, or to carry out other
responsibilities under the stormwater ordinance.
(2) Jurisdiction and administering entity. (a) The "MS4 Phase II
Stormwater Management Program" shall govern all properties within the
municipal boundary or corporate limits of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee;
(b) The City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Services Department shall administer the provisions of this chapter;
(c) The City of Cleveland may enter into interlocal agreements
to administer stormwater MS4 permit programs located outside the
municipal boundary or corporate limits of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee, subject to enabling provisions in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-101 and approval by the city council. (as added by Ord. #2004-41,
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-71
Nov. 2004, amended by Ord. #2005-38, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord.
#2015-06, March 2015)
18-303. Definitions. (1) "Administrative or civil penalties." As defined
in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means those penalties
authorized by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-221-1106 for violations of the
stormwater ordinance. The authorized penalty is not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) and not more than five-thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day for each
day of violation.
(2) "As built plans." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means drawings developed from field survey data
depicting conditions as they are actually constructed.
(3) "Best Management Practices" or "BMPs." As defined in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices
to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage. To be considered as BMPs, the foregoing
types of practices, procedures, prohibitions, requirements, etc., are to be those
approved by the City of Cleveland and incorporated in the stormwater
ordinance, whether fully set out herein or incorporated by reference.
(4) "Board." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means stormwater regulations board.
(5) "Borrow pit." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this is an excavation from which erodible material (typically soil) is
removed to be fill for another site. There is typically no processing or separation
of erodible material conducted at the site. Given the nature of activity and
pollutants present at such excavation, a borrow pit is considered a construction
activity for the purposes of the application of the stormwater ordinance.
(6) "Buffer zone." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means a setback from the top of water body's bank of undisturbed
vegetation, including trees, shrubs and herbaceous vegetation; enhanced or
restored vegetation; or the re-establishment of native vegetation bordering
streams, ponds, wetlands, springs, reservoirs or lakes, which exists or is
established to protect those water bodies. The goal of the water quality buffer
is to preserve undisturbed vegetation that is native to the streamside habitat in
the area of the project. Vegetated, preferably native, water quality buffers
protect water bodies by providing structural integrity and canopy cover, as well
as stormwater infiltration, filtration and evapotranspiration. Buffer width
depends on the size of a drainage area. Streams or other waters with drainage
areas less than one (1) square mile will require buffer widths of thirty feet (30')
minimum. Streams or other waters with drainage areas greater than one (1)
square mile will require buffer widths of sixty feet (60') minimum. The sixty feet
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-72
(60') criterion for the width of the buffer zone can be established on an average
width basis at a project, as long as the minimum width of the buffer zone is
more than thirty feet (30') at any measured location.
(7) "Building permit." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means written authorization issued by the City of
Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department for construction
that pertains to building activities associated with a structure.
(8) "Building official." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means an employee of the City of Cleveland who is
a managing inspector certified by the State of Tennessee to inspect structures
under specific code requirements.
(9) ''Channel." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conveys water continuously or periodically.
(10) "City." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means the City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
(11) "City engineer." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means a person employed by the City of Cleveland
whose position title is "city engineer," "assistant city engineer," or some similar
title, and who is licensed by the State of Tennessee as a professional engineer.
(12) "Common plan of development or sale." As defined in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this is broadly defined as any
announcement or documentation (including a sign, public notice or hearing,
sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request,
computer design, etc.) or physical demarcation (including boundary signs, lot
stakes, surveyor markings, etc.) indicating construction activities may take
occur on a specific plot. A common plan of development or sale identifies a
situation in which multiple areas of disturbance are occurring in contiguous
areas. This applies because the activities may take place at different times, on
different schedules, by different operators.
(13) "Community water." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches,
lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other
bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or
forming a part of the boundaries of the City of Cleveland.
(14) "Contaminant." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means any physical, chemical, biological, or
radiological substance or matter in water.
(15) "Design storm event." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means a hypothetical storm event, of a given
frequency interval and duration, used in the analysis and design of a
stormwater facility. The estimated design rainfall amounts, for any return
period interval (i.e., 2-yr, 5-yr, 25-yr, etc.,) in terms of either twenty-four (24)
hour depths or intensities for any duration, can be found by accessing the
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-73
following NOAA National Weather Service Atlas 14 data for Tennessee:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/ pfds_map_cont.html?bkmrk=tn. Other data
sources may be acceptable with prior written approval by TDEC Water Pollution
Control.
(16) "Detention." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means the temporary delay of storm runoff prior to discharge into
the natural receiving waters.
(17) ''Developer." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
or trust authorized as an owner or corporate officer to obtain permits, whether
federal, state, or local and whose plan or intent is to alter or modify land
characteristic or attributes.
(18) "Development." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means any alteration or modification to land
improved or unimproved, including but not limited to, building construction,
demolition, mining, excavation, dredging filling, grading, paving, excavating,
drilling operation, or permanent storage of materials ("materials" of like nature
stored in whole or in part for more than a period of thirty (30) days).
(19) "Development/redevelopment plans." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means any drawing, sketch, or other
document intended as the basis for a land disturbing permit or as a description
of the work to be carried out as part of any development or land disturbing
activity, or any plat or similar surveyor's drawing reflecting a subdivision or
other dividing of land.
(20) "Discharge."' As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or
place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured,
injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct
or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
(21) "Easement." Currently this means an acquired privilege or right
of use or enjoyment that a person, party, firm, corporation, municipality or other
legal entity has in the land of another.
(22) "Easement interest." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means the acquired privilege or the right of use or
enjoyment that any lot owner in a platted subdivision has in the private
stormwater facilities for the storage and conveyance of all stormwater runoff
from the individual lot owners' lot and/or any other lot in a platted subdivision.
(23) "Engineer" or "professional engineer." As defined in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means a person licensed by the State
of Tennessee as a professional engineer.
(24) "Erosion." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means the removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-74
ice or other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in
conjunction with or promoted by human activities or effects.
(25) "Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan (EPSCP)." As
defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means a
written plan (including drawings or other graphic representations) that is
designed to minimize the erosion and sediment runoff at a site during
construction activities.
(26) "Hotspot." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means an area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater. The following land uses and activities are
deemed stormwater hot spots, but that term is not limited to only these land
uses:
(a) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities
(b) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities
(c) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities
(d) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.)
(e) Industrial sites (included on Standard Industrial
Classification code list)
(f) Marinas (service and maintenance)
(g) Public works storage areas
(h) Facilities that generate or store hazardous waste materials
(i) Commercial container nursery
(j) Restaurants and food service facilities other land uses and
activities as designated by an appropriate review authority.
(k) Ready mix facilities (concrete manufacturers)
(27) "Illicit connections." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the
municipal separate stormwater system whether or not such connections result
in discharges into that system.
(28) "Illicit discharge." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means any discharge to the municipal separate storm
sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater and not specifically
exempted under §18-310(2).
(29) "Impaired waters." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means a watercourse, stream, creek, river, or wetland
delineated by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation
which is listed on the "303d" list as degraded or non-supportive of specific
classified uses, including but not limited, to recreation, drinking water,
agricultural, irrigation, fish and aquatic life.
(30) "Improved sinkhole." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this is a natural surface depression that has been altered
in order to direct fluids into the hole opening. Improved sinkhole is a type of
injection well regulated under TDEC's Underground Injection Control (UIC)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-75
program. Underground injection constitutes an intentional disposal of waste
waters in natural depressions, open fractures, and crevices (such as those
commonly associated with weathering of limestone).
(31) "Inspector." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this is an inspector is a person that has successfully completed (has
a valid certification from) the "Fundamentals of Erosion Prevention and
Sediment Control Level I" course or equivalent course. An inspector performs
and documents the required inspections, paying particular attention to
time-sensitive permit requirements such as stabilization and maintenance
activities. An inspector may also have the following responsibilities:
(a) Oversee the requirements of other construction-related
permits, such as Aquatic Resources Alteration Permit (ARAP) or Corps
of Engineers permit for construction activities in or around waters of the
state;
(b) Update field SWPPPs;
(c) Conduct pre-construction inspection to verify that
undisturbed areas have been properly marked and initial measures have
been installed; and
(d) Inform the permit holder of activities that may be necessary
to gain or remain in compliance with the Construction General Permit
(CGP) and other environmental permits.
(32) "Land disturbing activity." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means any activity on property that
results in an alteration of the existing soil cover both vegetative and
non-vegetative and/or the existing soil topography. Land-disturbing activities
include development, re-development, demolition, construction, reconstruction,
clearing vegetation, grading, filling, and excavation.
(33) "Land disturbance permit." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means written authorization issued to an
applicant to proceed with or conduct "land disturbing activity" with specific
terms and conditions.
(34) "Maintenance." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means any activity that is necessary to keep a
stormwater facility functional and in conformance with an approved "erosion
and sediment control plan." Maintenance shall include complete reconstruction
of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed in order to restore the facility
to its original operational design parameters. Maintenance shall also include the
correction of any condition on the site property that may directly impair the
functions of the stormwater facility.
(35) "Memorial tree fund." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means a distinct separate fund or account maintained
by the City of Cleveland that is solely dedicated to receive and expend funds to
landscape public properties and right-of-ways.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-76
(36) "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)." As defined in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means the conveyances
owned or operated by the municipality for the collection and transportation of
stormwater, including the roads and streets and their drainage systems, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and storm drains, and
where the context indicates, it means the municipality that owns the separate
storm sewer system.
(37) "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit" or
"NPDES permit." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means a permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342.
(38) "Off-site facility." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means a structural BMP located outside the subject
property boundary described in the permit application for land development
activity.
(39) "On-site facility." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means a structural BMP located within the subject
property boundary described in the permit application for land development
activity.
(40) "Peak flow." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means the maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a
particular point resulting from a storm event.
(41) "Person." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm or association and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws of Tennessee or any other state or country.
(42) "Phasing." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means planning land disturbance activities in segments or
increments to result in the permanent stabilization of one segment prior to the
land disturbance of the next segment.
(43) "Priority area" means "hot spot." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103.
(44) "Priority construction activity." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means those construction activities
discharging directly into, or immediately upstream of, water the state recognizes
as impaired (for siltation or habitat alteration) or Exceptional Tennessee
Waters.
(45) "Private stormwater facilities." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means stormwater storage, conveyance,
or treatment facilities that are not located within public right-of-way and shall
include but are not limited to detention and retention ponds, structural and
non-structural stormwater treatment, and conveyance systems.
(46) "Qualified contractor." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means a person who holds certification in the
UT/TDEC Level 1 course provided by the Tennessee Department of
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-77
Environment and Conservation, or has satisfactorily completed equivalent
training provided by the City of Cleveland.
(47) "Redevelopment." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means the alteration of developed land that disturbs
one (1) acre or more, or less than an acre if part of a larger common plan of
development, and increases the site or building impervious footprint, or offers
a new opportunity for stormwater controls. The term is not intended to include
such activities as exterior remodeling, which would not be expected to cause
adverse stormwater quality impacts.
(48) "Regional detention or retention facility." As defined in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means a stormwater facility
constructed with public or private funds in the interest of public safety to abate
or reduce the potential of localized flooding and adverse impacts to established
flood hazard districts. A regional detention or retention facility is an offsite
stormwater facility maintained by the City of Cleveland serving two (2) or more
separate property owners in the same watershed or sub watershed.
(49) "Regional detention or retention banking." As defined in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means a private capital cash or real
property investment by a person or a corporate entity for the purpose of building
or causing to be built a regional off-site detention or retention stormwater
facility to serve existing properties in the same watershed in lieu of on-site
detention or retention.
(50) "Retention pond." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means artificial pond used to store or detain
stormwater runoff to allow for settlement of suspended solids and biological
treatment.
(51) "Runoff." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means that portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that
is discharged from the area into the municipal separate stormwater system.
(52) "Sediment." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or
below sea level.
(53) "Sedimentation." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means soil particles suspended in stormwater that
can settle in streambeds. Where sedimentation occurs to a sufficient extent it
can disrupt the natural flow of the stream.
(54) "Soils report." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means a study of soils on a subject property with the primary
purpose of characterizing and describing the soils. The soils report shall be
prepared by a qualified soils engineer, who shall be directly involved in the soil
characterization either by performing the investigation or by directly
supervising employees conducting the investigation.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-78
(55) "Stabilization." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means providing adequate erosion control measures,
vegetative and/or structural, such that erosion is prevented from occurring.
(56) "Start of construction." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means the first date that mechanized land
disturbance is authorized to proceed under a land disturbance permit.
(57) "Stormwater" means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface
runoff, street wash waters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration
and drainage.
(58) "Stormwater program manager" or "stormwater coordinator." As
defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means an
employee of the City of Cleveland charged with the responsibility of
implementing and enforcing the provisions of this ordinance.
(59) "Stormwater management." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means a program to maintain quality and
quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels.
(60) "Stormwater management facilities." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means the drainage structures, conduits,
ditches, combined sewers, sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of
which stormwater is collected, transported, pumped, treated, or disposed of.
(61) "Stormwater management plan." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means the set of drawings and other
documents prepared by a civil engineer licensed in the State of Tennessee and
comprised of information and specifications pertaining to site specific drainage
systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques intended to maintain or
restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to predevelopment levels.
(62) "Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)." As defined in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means a written plan
that includes site map(s), an identification of construction/contractor activities
that could cause pollutants in the stormwater, and a description of measures or
practices to control these pollutants. It must be prepared and approved before
construction begins. In order to effectively reduce erosion and sedimentation
impacts, Best Management Practices (BMPs) must be designed, installed, and
maintained during land disturbing activities. The SWPPP should be prepared
in accordance with the current Tennessee Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook. The handbook is intended for use during the design and construction
of projects that require erosion and sediment controls to protect waters of the
state. It also aids in the development of SWPPPs and other reports, plans, or
specifications required when participating in Tennessee's water quality
regulations. All SWPPPs shall be prepared and updated in accordance with
Section 3 of the General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater
Associated with Construction Activities.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-79
(63) "Stormwater regulations board." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means a five (5) member board appointed
by the Cleveland City Council to serve in accordance with the terms of § 18-313.
(64) "Stormwater runoff."' As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
(65) "Stream." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means a surface water that is not a wet weather conveyance.
(66) "Structural Best Management Practices (BMPs)." As defined in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means devices or
facilities that are constructed to provide control of stormwater runoff.
(67) "Surface water." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this includes waters upon the surface of the earth
inbounds created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams,
other watercourses, lakes and reservoirs.
(68) ''Urban forester." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means an employee of the City of Cleveland whose
position title is "urban forester."
(69) "Watercourse." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 69-3-103. Currently this means a manmade or natural hydrologic feature with
a defined linear channel that discretely conveys flowing water, as opposed to
sheet flow.
(70) "Watershed" means all the land area that contributes runoff to a
particular point along a waterway.
(71) "Waters of the state" or simply "waters." As defined in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently this means any and all water, public or
private, on or beneath the surface of the ground, that are contained within, flow
through, or border upon Tennessee or any portion thereof, except those bodies
of water confined to and retained within the limits of private property in single
ownership that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or
underground waters.
(72) "Wetland(s)." As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-103.
Currently this means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
to life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
(73) "Wet weather conveyances." As defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-103. Currently these are man-made or natural watercourses,
including natural watercourses that have been modified by channelization, that
flow only in direct response to precipitation runoff in their immediate locality
and whose channels are above the groundwater table and are not suitable for
drinking water supplies; and in which hydrological and biological analyses
indicate that, under normal weather conditions, due to naturally occurring
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-80
ephemeral or low flow, there is not sufficient water to support fish or multiple
populations of obligate lotic aquatic organisms whose life cycle includes an
aquatic phase of at least two months. (Rules and Regulations of the State of
Tennessee, chapter 1200-4-3-.04(3)). (as added by Ord. #2004-41, Nov. 2004,
amended by Ord. #2005-38, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2015-06, March
2015)
18-304. Waivers and alternatives for compliance. (1) General. No
waivers will be granted for any new development or redevelopment subject to
this ordinance. All new development construction and site work shall provide for
stormwater management as required by this ordinance. However, alternatives
to the 2010 NPDES General Permit for discharges from small municipal
separate storm sewer systems primary requirement for on-site permanent
stormwater management may be considered, if:
(a) Management measures cannot be designed, built and
maintained to infiltrate, evapotranspire, harvest and/or use, at a
minimum, the first inch of every rainfall event preceded by seventy-two
(72) hours of no measurable precipitation. This first inch of rainfall must
be one hundred percent (100%) managed with no discharge to surface
waters.
(b) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not
likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter. Alternative
minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges
have been established in a SWPPP that has been approved by the city.
(2) Downstream damage, etc. prohibited. In order to receive
consideration, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of
Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department that the
proposed alternative will not lead to any of the following conditions downstream:
(a) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures;
(b) Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
(c) Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
(d) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or
property.
(3) Grading permit not to be issued where alternatives requested. No
grading permit shall be issued where an alternative has been requested until
the alternative is approved. If no alternative is approved, the plans must be
resubmitted with a SWPPP and/or stormwater management plan, which meets
the primary requirement for on-site stormwater management.
(4) Existing development to comply. All existing development shall
comply with the stormwater management requirements of this ordinance that
are applicable to such existing development. (as added by Ord. #2004-41, Nov.
2004, amended by Ord. #2005-38, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2015-06,
March 2015)
Change 17, July 23, 2018 18-81
18-305. Land disturbance permits. (1) When required. Every person
conducting the following "land disturbance activity" is required to obtain land
disturbance permit coverage pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, and
stormwater pollution prevention plan approval from the City of Cleveland
Development and Engineering Services Department. These requirements apply
to all land development activities and the associated plan and permit review and
approval processes including, but not limited to, site plan applications,
subdivision applications, land disturbance applications and grading
applications. Land disturbance permit coverage and SWPPP approval shall be
obtained prior to conducting any land disturbing activity for which such permit
coverage or SWPPP approval is required. These requirements apply to any new
development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following
criteria:
(a) New development that involves any land development
activity on any tract, lot, or parcel of land that is either of one (1) acre or
more; or
(b) Redevelopment that involves other land development
activity of one (1) acre or more; or
(c) New development or redevelopment that is part of a larger
common plan of development encompassing one (1) acre or more. The
larger common plan of development may or may not involve properties
that are individually less than one (1) acre and may involve multiple land
disturbing activities carried out at different times on different schedules;
or
(d) Projects or developments of less than one (1) acre of total
land disturbance may also be required to obtain authorization under this
ordinance if:
(i) The City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Services Department has determined that the stormwater
discharge from a site is causing, contributing to, or is likely to
contribute to a violation of a state water quality standard;
(ii) The City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Services Department has determined that the stormwater
discharge is, or is likely to be a significant contributor of pollutants
to waters of the state; or
(e) Changes in state or federal rules require sites of less than
one (1) acre that are not part of a larger common plan of development or
sale to obtain a stormwater permit; or
(f) Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size,
that is defined by City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Services Department to be a hotspot land use; or
(g) Land disturbing activity on a site of any size, if such activity
is adjacent to an impaired stream appearing on the 303d list of the
Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation; or
Change 17, July 23, 2018 18-82
(h) The creation and operation of borrow pits where material is
excavated and relocated offsite, and fill sites where materials or earth is
deposited by mechanized methods resulting in an increase elevation or
grade.
Note: Any discharge of stormwater or other fluid to an improved sinkhole
or other injection well, as defined, must be authorized by permit or rule
as a Class V underground injection well under the provisions of
Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation (TDEC) Rules,
chapter 1200-4-6.
(2) Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from obtaining a
land disturbance permit:
(a) Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for
the protection of life, property, or natural resources, or for the health and
safety of the community, or for the continuation of essential services;
(b) Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as
a permitted main or accessory use;
(c) Logging or agricultural activity that is consistent with an
approved farm conservation plan or a timber management plan approved
by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation Surface
Mining Division, the Tennessee Department of Agriculture, or the
Natural Resource Conservation Service;
(3) Building permits in abeyance. Building permits issued under the
authority of the building official, or a designee of, shall be held in abeyance until
the applicant, owner, or designated representative has fully satisfied the
following requirements for a land disturbance permit:
(a) Site plan approval pursuant to title 14, chapter 2, subsection
6.2 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cleveland;
(b) Submittal of a "notice of coverage" issued by the Tennessee
Department of Environment and Conservation and provided to the City
of Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department
authorizing the applicant to discharge stormwater associated with
construction activity, if applicable;
(c) Approval of a SWPPP and post construction components
from the City of Cleveland Development and Engineering Services
Department consistent with §§ 18-304 through 18-309 of this ordinance;
(d) Attended a pre-construction conference with the City of
Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department to review
implementation of an approved SWPPP in accordance with §§ 18-304
through 18-309 for land. A pre-construction conference shall be conducted
for all proposed land disturbance activities of one (1) acre or more located
in the watershed of an impaired stream as determined by the 303d
classification list of the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 18-83
(4) Application for a land disturbance permit. (a) Authorization to
implement land disturbance permit program. The City of Cleveland
Development and Engineering Services Department is authorized to
develop and implement a land disturbance permit program and
associated policies that are consistent with this ordinance. A land
disturbance permit application shall include the following:
(i) Name of applicant;
(ii) Address of applicant;
(iii) Name, address, and telephone number of the current
property owner of record listed in the office of the assessor of
property;
(iv) Address and legal description of subject property
including the tax map reference number and parcel number of the
subject property;
(v) Name, address and telephone number of the
contractor and any subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land
disturbing activity and who shall implement the erosion and
sediment control plan;
(vi) A narrative statement indicating the nature, extent
and purpose of the land disturbing activity, including the size of
the area for which the permit shall be applicable and a schedule
for completion of the land disturbing activity;
(vii) The estimated cost of stormwater infrastructure to
accommodate the proposed development;
(viii) The watershed location and receiving waters for the
proposed development;
(ix) Where the property includes a sinkhole and/or waters
defined as natural resource or wetland and the proposed land
disturbance activity will encroach, potentially impact, or alter
state waters, the applicant shall obtain from the Tennessee
Department of Environment and Conservation, or appropriate
regulatory permits. The issuance of a land disturbing permit under
the authority of this ordinance will be in abeyance until state and
federal permits, if applicable, are obtained;
(x) The inclusion of state or federal permits in the
application shall not foreclose the City of Cleveland Development
and Engineering Services Department from imposing additional
development requirements and conditions commensurate with this
ordinance.
(xi) The owner of record of the proposed development shall
sign the application, or the applicant must provide certification
from the owner of record providing authorization to act as the
owner's agent.
(b) Each application shall be accompanied by;
Change 17, July 23, 2018 18-84
(i) A performance bond in the form of a letter of credit,
performance surety, or performance bond valued at the cost of
providing as-built drawings in conformance with § 18-305(9);
(ii) A SWPPP satisfying the provisions of § 18-306;
(iii) A fully executed agreement to provide "as-built
drawings" of the stormwater infrastructure associated with the
proposed development and permanent site stabilization in post
construction pursuant to the requirements of § 18-307;
(iv) A post construction-landscape plan satisfying the
provisions of § 18-308, if applicable.
(5) Land disturbance permit application review procedures. (a) The
City of Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department
shall review each application for a land disturbance permit to determine
conformance with the provisions of this ordinance upon submittal of all
documents and plans required under § 18-305(4). Within ten (10)
standard working days after receiving a completed land disturbance
permit application and the plans required by § 18-305(4), the engineering
division of the City of Cleveland Development and Engineering Services
Department shall provide one (1) of the following responses in written
form:
(i) Approval of the permit application;
(ii) Approval of the permit application, subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure the objectives
of this ordinance, and issue the permit subject to these conditions;
or
(iii) Denial of the permit application, indicating the
reason(s) for the denial.
(b) If the City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Services Department has granted conditional approval of the permit, the
applicant shall submit a revised SWPPP reflecting the revisions
associated with conditional approval prior to the issuance of a land
disturbance permit.
(c) If the application for the land disturbance permit is denied,
the applicant may request a meeting with the director of development
and engineering services in an effort to resolve issues pertaining to the
permit denial. If issues related to the land disturbance permit denial
cannot be resolved, the applicant may appeal the matter to the
stormwater regulations board pursuant to the procedures of § 18-313.
(6) Permit duration. Land disturbance permits shall expire and
become null and void if substantial work authorized by such permit has not
commenced within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of issuance, and
conducted in accordance with an approved SWPPP.
(7) Notice of construction and permit monitoring requirements. The
applicant shall notify the City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Change 17, July 23, 2018 18-85
Services Department Stormwater Coordinator ten (10) standard working days
prior to the commencement of land disturbance activity approved in conjunction
with a land disturbance permit and an approved stormwater pollution
prevention plan. Quality assurance of erosion prevention and sediment controls
shall be done by performing site assessment at a construction site. The site
assessment shall be conducted at each outfall involving drainage totaling ten
(10) or more acres or five (5) or more acres if draining to an impaired or
exceptional quality waters, within a month of construction commencing at each
portion of the site that drains the qualifying acreage of such portion of the site.
Site assessments must be performed in accordance with the current
Construction General Permit (CGP). The applicant for a land disturbance permit
shall provide erosion and sediment control site inspections on a frequency of two
(2) inspections per week and following each rain event of one-half inch (1/2") or
greater in accordance with an approved stormwater pollution prevention plan
and with the current CGP. The applicant shall provide qualified contractors to
perform such inspections in accordance with the MS4 Phase II NPDES program
of the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. The City of
Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department Stormwater
Coordinator shall make available to the applicant inspection reporting forms
that shall be submitted by the applicant monthly to the stormwater coordinator,
and received no later than the tenth (10th) day of each month. The inspection
forms shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
(a) The date and location of the inspection;
(b) Indicate if the land disturbance activity is being conducted
in accordance with the approved stormwater pollution prevention plan;
(c) Variations from the approved construction specifications;
(d) Observed violations that existed and remedial action taken.
(8) Land disturbance permit fees and inspections. Each application for
a land disturbance permit shall be accompanied by payment of land disturbance
permit fees. The following fees shall apply to the issuance of a land disturbance
permit that qualifies as a land disturbance activity regulated in accordance with
40 CFR 122.26 and pursuant to § 18-305(1):
Land Disturbance Permit Fees
Residential lot-single family residence
(less than one acre) $20.00
Multi-unit residential, commercial, and industrial development:
Less than 1 acre $50.00
Equal to or greater than 1 acre and less
than 5 acres $250.00
Equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than
20 acres $1,000.00
Equal to or greater than 20 acres and less than
50 acres $3,000.00
Change 17, July 23, 2018 18-86
Equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than
150 acres $6,000.00
Equal to or greater than 150 acres $10,000.00
Note: All primary operators must submit an NOI for CGP coverage. There are
two types of Primary Operators (Initial and Subsequent). Initial primary
operators are those that submit a SWPPP for the entire proposed larger common
plan of development or sale. Their fee is determined by the acreage of the site.
The one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee category applies to subsequent primary
operators. This fee is to cover administrative costs associated with updating and
tracking permit coverage for subsequent primary operators.
For Construction General Permit (CGP) Activities that exceed one (1) year
under general permit coverage the following fees will be applied
Equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than
5 acres $125.00
Equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than
20 acres $500.00
Equal to or greater than 20 acres and less than
50 acres $1,000.00
Equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than
150 acres $2,000.00
Equal to or greater than 150 acres $3,750.00
For sites that require an inspection and maintenance agreement the registration
fee is twelve dollars ($12.00) for the first two (2) sheets and five dollars ($5.00)
for each additional sheet.
Water quality fee-303d watershed
In addition to the land disturbance permit fee, a water quality impact fee
of eighty-five dollars ($85.00) shall apply to the applicants of a land
disturbance permit subject to MS4 Phase II 303d oversight mandated by
the City of Cleveland NPDES permit issued by the Tennessee
Department of Environment and Conservation including,
pre-construction conferences, monthly inspections, and associated
administrative reporting. Land disturbance activity associated with the
development of individual parcels to accommodate a single-family
residential structure that is part of a larger common plan of development
(residential subdivision), which was constructed in accordance with an
approved SWPPP shall be exempt from the water quality impact fee
associated with development in a 303d watershed.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 18-87
(9) Performance bonds. The applicant for a land disturbance permit
shall submit:
(a) Performance bond. A performance bond shall be submitted
prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit, which may be in the
form of an irrevocable letter of credit, performance security, with a value
consisting of the total estimated cost of providing as-built drawings and
post construction stabilization in accordance with § 18-306. The applicant
shall provide a cost estimate to provide the as-built drawing and
landscape components of post construction. The written estimate must
bear the seal of a civil engineer licensed in the State of Tennessee, which
shall be subject to acceptance, amendment or rejection by the city
engineer. Alternatively, the city engineer shall reserve the right to
calculate the cost of providing the post construction elements of § 18-307.
(b) Release of bond. The performance bond shall be released
upon satisfactory submission of as-built plans and post construction
stabilization of the development in accordance with § 18-307, upon
written certification by a civil engineer stipulating that the private
stormwater facilities and infrastructure associated with the development
was built in accordance with the approved SWPPP satisfying § 18-306,
and the approved site plan pursuant to title 14, chapter 2, subsection 6.2
of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cleveland. Provisions for a partial
pro-rata release of the performance security or bond will be subject to
review based upon satisfactory completion at various stages of
development, subject to approval by the city engineer. (as added by Ord.
#2004-41, Nov. 2004, amended by Ord. #2005-38, Oct. 2005, replaced by
Ord. #2015-06, March 2015, and amended by Ord. #2017-20, July 2017)
18-306. Stormwater pollution prevention plan design standards.
(1) Stormwater quality best management practices manual.
(a) Adoption. The City of Cleveland adopts as its stormwater
quality Best Management Practices (BMP) manual the following
publications, which are incorporated by reference in this ordinance as
fully set out herein verbatim:
(i) "Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation Sediment and Erosion Control Handbook," or
(ii) "Tennessee Permanent Stormwater Management and
Design Guidance Manual," or
(iii) The Nashville-Davidson County Metro Stormwater
Management Manual (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP)
MANUAL - Volume 4) also known as the MS4 BMP Manual; most
current edition.
(b) Alternative specifications may be utilized upon review and
approval by the city engineer.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-88
(2) Land development. This section shall be applicable to all land
development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision
applications, land disturbance applications and grading applications. These
standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one
(1) or more of the following criteria:
(a) New development or redevelopment that involves land
development activities of one (1) acre or more;
(b) Projects or developments of less than one (1) acre of total
land disturbance may also be required to obtain authorization under this
ordinance if:
(i) The City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Services Department has determined that the stormwater
discharge from a site is causing, contributing to, or is likely to
contribute to a violation of a state water quality standard;
(ii) The City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Services Department has determined that the stormwater
discharge is, or is likely to be a significant contributor of pollutants
to waters of the state;
(iii) Changes in state or federal rules require sites of less
than one (1) acre that are not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale to obtain a stormwater permit;
(iv) Any new development or redevelopment, regardless
of size, that is defined by the City of Cleveland Development and
Engineering Services Department to be a hotspot land use; or
(v) Minimum applicability criteria set forth in item (a)
above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of
development, even multiple, that is part of a separate and distinct
land development activity that may take place at different times
on different schedules.
Note: Any discharge of stormwater or other fluid to an improved sinkhole
or other injection well, as defined, must be authorized by permit or rule
as a Class V underground injection well under the provisions of
Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation (TDEC) Rules,
chapter 1200-4-6.
(3) Submittal of a copy of the NOC, SWPPP and NOT to the local MS4.
Permittees who discharge stormwater through an NPDES-permitted Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) who are not exempted in section 1.4.5
(permit coverage through qualifying local program) of the Construction General
Permit (CGP) must provide proof of coverage under the Construction General
Permit (CGP); submit a copy of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP); and at project completion, a copy of the signed Notice of Termination
(NOT) to the City of Cleveland Development and Engineering Services
Department. Permitting status of all permittees covered (or previously covered)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-89
under this general permit as well as the most current list of all MS4 permits is
available at the TDEC's data viewer web site.
Copies of additional applicable local, state or federal permits (i.e.: ARAP,
etc.) must also be provided upon request. If requested, these permits must be
provided before the issuance of any land disturbance permit or the equivalent.
In the event the City of Cleveland becomes a Qualified Local Program
(QLP) the following will apply:
(a) The SWPPP is required for obtaining QLP permit coverage
for sites with a disturbed area greater than one (1) acre. A SWPPP shall
present in detail the best management practices that will be employed to
minimize erosion and control sedimentation.
(b) The plan shall be sealed in accordance with the Tennessee
Construction General Permit.
(c) Best management practices presented in the plan shall
conform to the requirements found in the Tennessee Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook, and shall meet or exceed the requirements
of the Tennessee Construction General Permit.
(d) The plan shall include measures to protect legally protected
state or federally listed threatened or endangered aquatic fauna or flora
or critical habitat (if applicable).
(e) The plan submitted shall be subject to any additional
requirements set forth in the city's subdivision regulations, zoning
ordinance, erosion and sediment control policy and any other applicable
city regulations.
(f) Riparian buffer zones shall meet the requirements both in
accordance with the Tennessee Construction General Permit and with the
buffer zone requirements of this ordinance.
(g) Construction of the site in accordance with the approved
plan must commence within one (1) year from the approval date of the
stormwater pollution prevention plan, or the stormwater pollution
prevention plan will become null and void and the plan must be
resubmitted for approval.
(h) Stormwater pollution prevention plans shall include the
components required by the Tennessee Construction General Permit and
any other information deemed necessary by the stormwater coordinator.
(4) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for construction
stormwater management. The applicant must prepare a stormwater pollution
prevention plan for all construction activities that complies with subsections (5)
- (7) below and with the SWPPP requirements in the Construction General
Permit (CGP). The purpose of this plan is to identify construction/contractor
activities that could cause pollutants in the stormwater, and to describe
measures or practices to control these pollutants during project construction.
Additional requirements for discharges into impaired or exceptional Tennessee
waters that are set forth in the Tennessee Construction General Permit shall be
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-90
implemented for all priority construction activities. The stormwater coordinator,
at his or her discretion, may require BMPs that conform to a higher than
minimum standard for priority construction activities, or for exceptional
Tennessee waters or where deemed necessary.
(5) Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
(a) Topographic base map: A topographic base is required with
a scale of not less than 1" = 100' that extends a minimum of one hundred
feet (100') beyond the limits of the proposed development and shall
include:
(i) Existing surface water including, but not limited to,
streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, sink holes, spring heads,
wetlands;
(ii) Nearest existing upstream and downstream drainage
structures with the information such as type, size, and invert
elevations of the structures;
(iii) Existing and proposed contours at two foot (2')
intervals with reference datum mean sea level;
(iv) Proposed stormwater conveyance systems, pipes,
culverts, drainage channels, detention facilities, drainage swales,
wetlands, berms, drainage structures, inlets, and manholes.
Provide, as applicable, the invert elevations, top of structure
elevations for structures, spot elevations, and percent grade for the
drainage system.
(v) Design location of proposed stormwater storage
facilities or conveyances including drainage channels, including
sumps, basins, channels, culverts, ponds, storm, drains, and drop
inlets;
(vi) Current land use including all existing structures,
locations of utilities, roads, and easements;
(vii) Existing natural and artificial features;
(viii) Proposed land use with a tabulation of the percentage
of surface area utilized for each ancillary use, show drainage
patterns, locations of utilities, locations of roads and easements,
and provide the limits of clearing and grading;
(ix) Proposed structural and non-structural best
management practices;
(x) Existing and proposed building pad elevation(s) and
roadway elevations if building construction is proposed;
(xi) A written description of the site plan and justification
of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required;
(xii) Plans and specifications for the proposed stormwater
system, retaining walls, cribbing, planting, erosion control devices,
whether temporary or permanent, to be constructed in conjunction
with, or as a part of the proposed work shall be required, with a
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-91
map delineating the watershed and a statement explaining the
amount of estimated runoff used to determine the design
characteristics of any drainage device. The upstream watershed
shall be considered in design calculations. If warranted,
downstream stormwater system improvements may also be
required to abate adverse impacts to existing infrastructure or
structures.
(xiii) Upon request a no-rise certificate shall be required by
the city engineer that is prepared in accordance with FEMA
standards. The City of Cleveland has defined the one-hundred
(100) year flood event as the base flood.
(b) Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design
storms utilizing accepted engineering principles and practices. These
calculations must show that the proposed stormwater management
measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance
with this ordinance and meet the requirements of the city engineer. Such
calculations shall include:
(i) A description of the design storm frequency, duration,
and intensity where applicable;
(ii) Time of concentration;
(iii) Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients including
assumed soil moisture conditions;
(iv) Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each
watershed area;
(v) Infiltration rates, where applicable;
(vi) Stormwater conveyance system capacities;
(vii) Flow velocities;
(viii) Rate and volume of runoff data for the design storms
events referenced in the best managements practices manual
§ 18-306(1);
(ix) Documentation of sources for all computation
methods and field test results.
(x) Stormwater discharges from new development and
redevelopment sites must be managed such that post development
hydrology does not exceed the pre development hydrology at the
site.
(c) Affidavit. When fragile, complex, or hazardous areas are
present, including but not limited to, unstable slopes, uncontrolled fill,
federal jurisdictional wetlands, or sinkholes, the city engineer or
stormwater coordinator may require an affidavit executed by the owner
and engineering representative that may include:
(i) Compaction report where a site is proposed to be filled
and used for a building pad or roadway;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-92
(ii) Soil engineering report, including data regarding the
nature, distribution, strength of existing soils, conclusions, and
recommendations for earthwork procedures;
(iii) Geology report, including a description of site geology,
conclusions, and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic
conditions on the proposed development.
(d) Soils information. If a stormwater best management practice
is dependent on the hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall
be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil
pit profiles and soil survey reports.
(e) Buffer zone (§ 18-303(6)). A water quality buffer zone is
required along all perennial and intermittent streams, and wetlands.
The stream buffer zone will be clearly identified on proposed site plans
and SWPPPs. A stream buffer area will be delineated on a proposed
development with field stakes established at fifty foot (50') intervals on
each side of the stream, channel or wetland. The stream buffer area
metes and bounds shall be shown on the submitted plan. The stream
buffer zone area will remain intact, with no removal of vegetation,
including upper and lower story vegetative canopy, during all phases of
construction, unless otherwise approved in conjunction with recreational
uses identified in the SWPPP or subdivision plat. The stream buffer zone
will be segregated land disturbance activities conducted in accordance
with an approved SWPPP. The identification of streams and wetlands
shall be included in the SWPPP and determinations shall be performed
by a qualified hydrologic professional.
(f) Buffer zone requirements. (i) "Construction" applies to all
streams adjacent to construction sites, with an exception for
streams designated as impaired or Exceptional Tennessee waters,
as designated by the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation. A thirty foot (30') natural riparian buffer zone
adjacent to all streams at the construction site shall be preserved,
to the maximum extent practicable, during construction activities
at the site. The water quality buffer zone is required to protect
waters of the state located within or immediately adjacent to the
boundaries of the project, as identified using methodology from
standard operating procedures for hydrologic determinations (see
rules to implement a certification program for qualified hydrologic
professionals, Tennessee Rules chapter 0400-40-17). Buffer zones
are not primary sediment control measures and should not be
relied on as such. Rehabilitation and enhancement of a natural
buffer zone is allowed, if necessary, for improvement of its
effectiveness of protection of the waters of the state. The zone
requirement only applies to new construction sites. The riparian
buffer zone should be preserved between the top of stream bank
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-93
and the disturbed construction area. The thirty feet (30') criterion
for the width of the buffer zone can be established on an average
width basis at a project, as long as the minimum width of the
buffer zone is more than fifteen feet (15') at any measured location.
(ii) A sixty foot (60') natural riparian buffer zone adjacent
to the receiving stream designated as impaired or exceptional
Tennessee waters shall be preserved, to the maximum extent
practicable, during construction activities at the site. The water
quality buffer zone is required to protect waters of the state (e.g.,
perennial and intermittent streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands)
located within or immediately adjacent to the boundaries of the
project, as identified on a seven and one-half (7.5) minute USGS
quadrangle map, or as determined by the director. Buffer zones are
not sediment control measures and should not be relied upon as
primary sediment control measures. Rehabilitation and
enhancement of a natural buffer zone is allowed, if necessary, for
improvement of its effectiveness of protection of the waters of the
state. The buffer zone requirement only applies to new
construction sites. The riparian buffer zone should be established
between the top of stream bank and the disturbed construction
area. The sixty foot (60') criterion for the width of the buffer zone
can be established on an average width basis at a project, as long
as the minimum width of the buffer zone is more than thirty feet
(30') at any measured location.
(iii) "Permanent" new development and significant
redevelopment sites are required to preserve water quality buffers
along waters within the MS4. Buffers shall be clearly marked on
site development plans, land disturbance permit applications,
and/or concept plans. Buffer width depends on the size of a
drainage area. Streams or other waters with drainage areas less
than one (1) square mile will require buffer widths of thirty feet
(30') minimum. Streams or other waters with drainage areas
greater than one (1) square mile will require buffer widths of sixty
feet (60') minimum. The sixty feet (60') criterion for the width of
the buffer zone can be established on an average width basis at a
project, as long as the minimum width of the buffer zone is more
than thirty feet (30') at any measured location.
(g) Maintenance agreement stormwater storage facilities. The
developer or owner of real property that is served by an on-site or off-site
stormwater management facility, including stormwater storage facilities,
shall be responsible for maintenance, repair, and operation during site
development. The developer's responsibility will terminate after a two (2)
year period from the issuance of a land disturbance permit upon
satisfying two (2) conditions:
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-94
! Successful completion of post construction in accordance
with §§ 18-307 and 18-308, and
! The sale or transfer of ownership of fifty-one percent (51%)
of all parcels in the platted subdivision.
As a precondition to any plat approval by the planning commission, all
subdivision plats shall contain a "stormwater facility maintenance
agreement," which shall include the provisions for future maintenance of
the stormwater storage facility. As a general rule, this verbiage
contained on the plat shall designate that all lot owners in the platted
subdivision shall have an easement interest in the stormwater storage
facilities for water runoff from all lots in the subdivision. This easement
interest shall be designated upon the recorded plat. Private stormwater
storage facilities shall be shown on the final recorded plat. Private
stormwater facilities shall include but are not limited to stormwater
storage facilities, such as detention and retention ponds, structural and
non-structural stormwater treatment facilities and open channel
conveyances that are not located within public right-of-ways. The future
maintenance, repair and operation of the private stormwater facilities
shall be the responsibility of all subdivision lot owners of record of those
lots shown on the recorded plat. In the event, a subdivision is developed
in phases then all subsequently developed lots in the subdivision shall
share the same easement as those lot owners shown on the initial plat
and/or plats. It being the intent that all lot owners in any particular
subdivision; whether in the initial or any later phase shall share equally
in the easement rights in and to the stormwater storage facilities as well
as sharing equally in the future maintenance and upkeep of the
stormwater storage facilities. As an additional requirement to the
approval of any plat, there shall be a stormwater storage basin easement
shown on any recorded plat that contains a storm water detention basin.
This stormwater detention basin easement shall be a twenty foot (20')
access easement. This easement is for the purpose of allowing city
engineering personnel, stormwater inspectors, grading equipment
operators, storm water monitoring personnel and/or other necessary
personnel to investigate, inspect, repair and/ or maintain the detention
basin or stormwater quality structure as needed to determine proper
functioning, need for maintenance, maintenance and/or other necessary
repairs and/or situations that may occur in times of emergency or urgent
conditions. This twenty foot (20') access easement shall be shown on the
recorded plat and shall be provided to and from stormwater detention
basins and shall abut on a public right-of-way for at least twenty feet (20')
and must be easily traversable by potential grading equipment
(bulldozers and/ or back hoes) as well as those individuals noted above.
This twenty foot (20') stormwater detention basin access easement area
shall not contain any buildings or structures, large trees or heavy
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-95
shrubbery, utility poles, manholes, overhead utility lines without
adequate clearance, deep ditches or channels and/or any other structures
or items causing the stormwater detention basin to be inaccessible.
However, the property owner may plant small shrubs of little or no value
that can be easily removed or cleared. The property owner may also place
small fences in the area that can be easily removed; ideally any fence
contained in this easement area shall contain a gate through the fence.
Any structure located upon the stormwater detention basin access
easement area must be portable and quickly and easily removable. The
City of Cleveland shall not be responsible for damage to any structure,
utilities or vegetation located within this stormwater detention basin
access easement area. The City of Cleveland and/or its designated
officials shall have access over and across this stormwater detention
basin easement as they deem the same necessary to inspect and /or
maintain the stormwater detention facility. The City of Cleveland shall
not be responsible for the repair or replacement of structures, utilities
and/or vegetation located upon the stormwater detention basin access
easement area. This stormwater detention basin easement area is
normally intended for heavy equipment access rather than ordinary
passenger vehicle access. A city stormwater inspector will normally gain
access to the detention basin or water quality facility while parking
nearby.
(i) Division of tract into parcels for resale. For larger
common plans of development, each parcel or lot served by a
private stormwater storage facility shall have equivalent or
proportioned easement ownership in stormwater facilities. This
ownership of each private stormwater facility shall be equally
appropriated by the recorded plat to each parcel of the larger
common plan of development. Maintenance of private stormwater
facilities serving multiple parcels shall be the cumulative
responsibility of each parcel owner of record of any platted tract or
lot in the subdivision. The final recorded subdivision plat shall
reflect the easement ownership for each parcel in a larger common
plan of development, whether residential, commercial, or
industrial. The applicant for a land disturbance permit or owner
or record shall present a final plat prior to recording as a final
document that designates easement ownership of stormwater
facilities to each parcel prior to recording as an official recorded
plat in the Bradley County Register of Deeds.
(ii) Single tract of land. The maintenance of private
stormwater facilities constructed in conjunction with development
on a single tract shall be the responsibility of the owner by record.
The final recorded plat shall identify all private stormwater
storage facilities on the same parcel as the associated structure.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-96
(iii) The maintenance agreement shall:
(A) Provide for maintenance of stormwater
facilities in accordance with § 18-306(1);
(B) If private stormwater facilities are not properly
maintained as set out herein, then the City of Cleveland
shall require the subdivision parcel owners of record served
to perform the maintenance and repair at the expense of
parcel owners served by said facilities. The city reserves the
right to conduct repair(s) of stormwater storage facilities, or
may cause to be repaired, and to assess a lien on each
individual subdivision parcel owners of record served by the
private stormwater facilities. The maintenance agreement
shall also provide that the City of Cleveland will be
compensated for all expenses associated with performing
the maintenance and repair of private stormwater storage
facilities, including legal expenses, court costs and/or other
expenses incurred in the repair and any associated legal
action associated therewith. In the event legal action is
deemed necessary by the City of Cleveland and in the event
a judgment is rendered on behalf of the City of Cleveland,
then the city shall be authorized to issue a lien against each
subdivision parcel owner of record, which lien shall be a lien
on their respected properties and/ or interests in the
property.
(6) Sediment and erosion control plan. The sediment and erosion
control plan shall satisfy best management practices adopted in § 18-306(1), and
NPDES rules promulgated by the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation.
(7) Sediment and erosion control plan requirements. The applicant
must prepare a sediment and erosion control plan for all land disturbance
activities regulated in accordance with § 18-304(1). The sediment and erosion
control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and
sedimentation resulting from land disturbing activity and incorporate BMPs
appropriate to site conditions. The length and complexity of the plan is to be
commensurate with the land disturbance area, topography, and potential for
off-site damage. The plan shall bear the seal of a registered professional
engineer licensed in the State of Tennessee, and conform to standard adopted
in § 18-305(1), and NPDES rules promulgated by the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation:
(a) Project description - briefly describe the intended project and
proposed land disturbing activity including number of units and
structures to be constructed and infrastructure required;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-97
(b) A topographic map with contour intervals of two feet (2') or
less showing present conditions and proposed contours resulting from
land disturbing activity;
(c) All existing drainage ways, including intermittent and
wet-weather. Include any designated floodways or flood plains;
(d) A general description of existing land cover. Individual trees
and shrubs do not need to be identified;
(e) Stands of existing trees as they are to be preserved upon
project completion, specifying their general location on the property.
Differentiation shall be made between existing trees to be preserved,
trees to be removed and proposed planted trees. Tree protection
measures must be identified, and the diameter of the area involved must
also be identified on the plan and shown to scale. Information shall be
supplied concerning the proposed destruction of exceptional and historic
trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist. Complete landscape
plans may be submitted separately. The plan must include the sequence
of implementation for tree protection measures;
(f) Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading, and filling;
(g) Approximate flows of existing stormwater leaving any
portion of the site;
(h) A general description of existing soil types and
characteristics and any anticipated soil erosion and sedimentation
problems resulting from existing characteristics;
(i) Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and
sedimentation control improvements;
(j) Proposed drainage network;
(k) Proposed drain tile or waterway sizes;
(l) Approximate flows leaving site after construction and
incorporating water run-off mitigation measures. The evaluation must
include projected effects on property adjoining the site and on existing
drainage facilities and systems. The plan must address the adequacy of
outfalls from the development, when water is concentrated, what is the
capacity of waterways, if any, accepting stormwater off-site; and what
measures, including infiltration, sheeting into buffers, that are going to
be used to prevent the scouring of waterways and drainage areas off-site,
etc;
(m) The projected sequence of work represented by the grading,
drainage and sedimentation and erosion control plans as related to other
major items of construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation
and including the construction of any sediment basins or retention
facilities or any other structural BMPs;
(n) Specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and
sedimentation run-off. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control
measures used, stabilization measures including vegetation and
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-98
non-vegetation measures, both temporary and permanent, will be
detailed. Detailed construction notes and a maintenance schedule shall
be included for all control measures in the plan;
(o) Specific details shall be provided for the construction of rock
pads, wash down pads, and settling basins for controlling erosion; road
access points, eliminating or keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets
and public ways at a level acceptable. Soil, sediment, and debris brought
onto streets and public ways must be removed by the end of the work day
by machine, broom or shovel. Failure to remove the sediment, soil or
debris shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance;
(p) Proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and
identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures or
development on the site;
(q) A description of on-site measures to be taken to recharge
surface water into the ground water system through infiltration;
(r) Specific remediation measures of how litter, construction
debris, concrete truck washout, and construction chemicals exposed to
stormwater shall be picked up prior to anticipated storm events or before
being carried off of the site by wind (e.g., forecasted by local weather
reports), or otherwise prevented from becoming a pollutant source for
stormwater discharges (e.g., screening outfalls, daily pick-up, etc.). After
use, materials used for erosion prevention and sediment control (such as
silt fence) should be removed or otherwise prevented from becoming a
pollutant source for stormwater discharges.
(8) Retaining wall requirements. (a) Retaining walls located on
private property shall be the responsibility of the applicant(s). The
applicant(s) shall ensure that the retaining wall is properly constructed.
The applicant(s) shall be responsible for maintenance and repairs of all
retaining walls on their property. Applicants are not allowed to construct
retaining walls of any size within public right-of-way or in areas that will
be dedicated for public right-of-way.
To obtain a land disturbance permit for construction of retaining
walls four feet (4') or taller on private property, the following information
must be submitted to the engineering division:
(i) A plan sheet that includes existing and proposed
contours of the wall, top elevation of the wall, drainage features,
buildings, property lines, proposed wall locations, any public
easements, parking facilities and streets.
(ii) A typical wall section showing wall and footing
dimensions, backfill slopes, finished grade elevations, steel
reinforcement details, weephole locations, and subsurface drainage
systems.
(iii) Engineering calculations for the design of the wall,
noting all assumptions such as concrete and steel reinforcement
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-99
strengths, soil parameters, surcharges, bearing pressures, safety
factors for bearing capacity, overturning and sliding. The
minimum required factors of safety are: bearing capacity = 3.0,
overturning = 2.0, and sliding = 1.5.
(iv) All retaining wall plans, profiles, cross sections and
calculations shall be prepared and sealed by a registered
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of
Tennessee. The professional engineer must have sufficient
education and experience to design a retaining wall that ensures
the safety of the general public. The professional engineer shall
also have complete control of all aspects of the design and
preparation of plans and calculations. Approval of necessary plans
and calculations will not transfer responsibility of the retaining
wall design to the City of Cleveland.
(b) The professional engineer shall be responsible for all aspects
of the retaining wall design. The use of standard designs from reputable
manufacturers or from TDOT standard details are allowable and
encouraged, but the professional engineer that stamps the drawings and
computations are responsible for the retaining wall design. Inadequate
information from geotechnical investigations and reports will not excuse
the engineer's responsibility or liability.
(9) General design performance criteria for permanent stormwater
management: The provisions of this subsection, § 18-306(9) shall become
effective from and after January 1, 2020.
The following performance criteria shall be addressed for permanent
stormwater management at all development sites:
(a) Site design standards for all new and redevelopment require,
in combination or alone, management measures shall be designed in
accordance with the Tennessee Permanent Stormwater Management and
Design Guidance Manual, built and maintained to infiltrate,
evapotranspire, harvest and/or use, at a minimum, the first inch, or
known as the first flush, of every rainfall event preceded by seventy-two
(72) hours of no measurable precipitation. This first inch of rainfall must
be one hundred percent (100%) managed with no discharge to surface
waters.
(b) Limitations to the application of runoff reduction
requirements include, but are not limited to:
(i) Where a potential for introducing pollutants into the
groundwater exists, unless pretreatment is provided;
(ii) Where pre-existing soil contamination is present in
areas subject to contact with infiltrated runoff;
(iii) Presence of sinkholes or other karst features.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-100
(c) Pre-development infiltrative capacity of soils at the site
must be taken into account in selection of runoff reduction management
measures.
(d) Incentive standards for re-developed sites: a ten percent
(10%) reduction in the volume of rainfall to be managed for any of the
following types of development. Such credits are additive such that a
maximum reduction of fifty percent (50%) of the standard in the
paragraph above is possible for a project that meets all five (5) criteria:
(i) Redevelopment;
(ii) Brownfield redevelopment;
(iii) High density (>7 units per acre);
(iv) Vertical density, (Floor to Area Ratio (FAR) of 2 or
>18 units per acre); and
(v) Mixed use and transit oriented development (within
one-half (1/2) mile of transit).
(e) For projects that cannot meet one hundred percent (100%)
of the runoff reduction requirement unless subject to the incentive
standards, the remainder of the stipulated first flush amount of rainfall
must be treated prior to discharge with a technology documented to
remove eighty percent (80%) Total Suspended Solids (TSS) unless an
alternative provided under this ordinance is approved. The treatment
technology must be designed, installed and maintained to continue to
meet this performance standard.
(f) For projects that cannot meet one hundred percent (100%)
of the runoff reduction requirements, the City of Cleveland Development
and Engineering Services Department may allow runoff reduction
measures to be implemented at another location within the same USGS
twelve (12) digit Hydrologic Unit Code (HUC) as the original project.
Off-site mitigation must be a minimum of 1.5 times the amount of water
not managed on site. The off-site mitigation location (or alternative
location outside the twelve (12) digit HUC) and runoff reduction
measures must be approved by the City of Cleveland Development and
Engineering Services Department. The City of Cleveland Development
and Engineering Services Department shall identify priority areas within
the watershed in which mitigation projects can be completed. The City of
Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department must
create an inventory of appropriate mitigation projects, and develop
appropriate institutional standards and management systems to value,
evaluate and track transactions. Mitigation can be used for retrofit or
redevelopment projects, but should be avoided in areas of new
development.
(g) To protect stream channels from degradation, specific
channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the MS4
BMP manual.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-101
(h) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive
resources (i.e., cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches,
recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional
performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater
management practices.
(i) Stormwater discharges from hot spots may require the
application of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention
practices. In addition, stormwater from a hot spot land use may not be
infiltrated.
(j) Prior to or during the site design process, applicants for land
disturbance permits shall consult with the City of Cleveland
Development and Engineering Services Department to determine if they
are subject to additional stormwater design requirements.
(k) The calculations for determining peak flows as found in
§ 18-306(12) shall be used for sizing all stormwater facilities.
(10) Permanent stormwater management plan requirements. The
stormwater management plan shall include sufficient information to allow the
City of Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department to
evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential
impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the
water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures
proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. To accomplish
this goal the stormwater management plan shall include the following:
(a) Topographic base map: Topographic base map of the site
which extends a minimum of one hundred feet (100') beyond the limits of
the proposed development and indicates:
(i) Existing surface water drainage including streams,
ponds, culverts, ditches, sink holes, wetlands; and the type, size,
elevation, etc., of nearest upstream and downstream drainage
structures;
(ii) Current land use including all existing structures,
locations of utilities, roads, and easements;
(iii) All other existing significant natural and artificial
features;
(iv) Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage
of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns;
locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing
and grading.
(b) Proposed structural and non-structural BMPs;
(c) A written description of the site plan and justification of
proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required;
(d) Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design
storms specified in the MS4 BMP manual. These calculations must show
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-102
that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of
controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this chapter and the
guidelines of the MS4 BMP manual. Such calculations shall include:
(i) A description of the design storm frequency, duration,
and intensity where applicable;
(ii) Time of concentration;
(iii) Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients including
assumed soil moisture conditions;
(iv) Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each
watershed area;
(v) Infiltration rates, where applicable;
(vi) Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other
stormwater conveyance capacities;
(vii) Flow velocities;
(viii) Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for
the design storms referenced in the MS4 BMP manual; and
(ix) Documentation of sources for all computation
methods and field test results.
(e) Soils information: If a stormwater management control
measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration
basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be
based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports.
The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be
determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure.
(11) Maintenance and repair plan: The design and planning of all
permanent stormwater management facilities shall include detailed
maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued performance.
These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management
facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training
necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness
of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional
maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan.
(12) Minimum design standards - stormwater conveyance system.
Stormwater conveyance systems including, but not limited to, open ditches,
pipes, culverts, catch basins, drop inlets, and bridges shall be incorporated in
the SWPPP in conjunction with minimum standards prescribed in this
ordinance, and shall be designed by a civil engineer licensed in the State of
Tennessee. Stormwater facilities constructed in conjunction with a proposed
development or property improvements shall be an integral component of a
SWPPP that shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer prior to
issuance of a land disturbance permit. Stormwater hydrology and hydraulic
calculations shall accompany the SWPPP and site plan.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-103
The stormwater conveyance system design shall satisfy the minimum
design standards:
(a) Erosion, sedimentation, and stormwater control measures,
pipes, structures, and devices shall be planned, designed, constructed,
operated and maintained so as to provide effective soil erosion and
stormwater control from the peak runoff rates. The stormwater system,
excluding stormwater detention ponds, water quality control facilities
and sinkholes, shall be designed to accommodate a ten (10) year return
frequency twenty-four (24) hour duration storm, except for those facilities
which would flood public roadway classified by the Tennessee
Department of Transportation as a collector or arterials. Where
warranted by local controlling factors, an alternative storm frequency
shall be required;
(b) In conjunction with Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) requirements, stormwater receiving inlets shall not
restrict the flow of floodwaters or increase flood heights. Stormwater
culverts shall be designed for a one hundred (100) year flood frequency,
when such culvert is located in a one hundred (100) year floodplain.
Transportation facilities classified as a collector or arterial by the
Tennessee Department of Transportation facility inventory shall utilize
a fifty (50) year flood frequency for stormwater culvert design, and a ten
(10) year flood frequency shall be utilized for local transportation
facilities. Although roadway overtopping will be allowed for ten (10) year
and fifty (50) year floods, the design shall be such that damage will not
occur to the roadway or adjacent properties during a one hundred (100)
year flood;
(c) Stormwater swales shall be designed utilizing acceptable
engineering principles and practices to accommodate a one hundred (100)
year storm event and the design shall demonstrate that the stormwater
swale at full capacity will not result in structural flooding of adjacent
buildings and structures;
(d) Stormwater site runoff calculations shall be developed
utilizing the rational formula or the Natural Resource Conservation
Service (NRCS, formerly the Soil Conservation Service) TR-55 method for
watersheds of fifty (50) acres or less. For watersheds greater than fifty
(50) acres, but less than two thousand (2,000) acres, the NRCS TR-55
method shall be utilized. For watersheds greater than two-thousand
(2,000) acres, the flood frequency methodology utilized by the US Army
Corps of Engineers shall be employed in the stormwater runoff
calculations;
(e) The minimum culvert size shall be fifteen inch (15") inside
diameter with a maximum velocity not to exceed fifteen feet (15') per
second. The maximum allowable slope of a culvert shall be fifteen
percent (15%) without pipe restraining methods utilized in the design
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-104
and construction. Energy dissipaters shall be provided at the outlet end
of all culverts;
(f) Stormwater discharges and conveyances originating from
storage facilities including, but not limited to, detention basin(s) must be
routed to an existing natural or manmade stormwater channel.
Hydraulic calculations utilizing the methodology of § 18-306(12)(d) shall
demonstrate that the capacity of the receiving stormwater channel will
accommodate a two (2) year and ten (10) year design flood event. The
hydraulic calculations and stormwater runoff computations must extend
at a minimum to the second downstream roadway crossing, or to a
blue-line stream appearing on a United States Geological Society (USGS)
map. Routing calculations must be extended further downstream, if the
city engineer or his representative has reasonable concern of adverse
downstream impacts to public infrastructure or property;
(g) Stormwater drainage culverts shall be installed on a
uniform grade and with a compacted base. In the event rock is
encountered in the culvert trench, the rock shall be removed four inches
(4") below the site plan grade. Stormwater culverts shall be installed
with the spigot end directed as the flow inlet with joints established
utilizing manufacture's specifications, at a sufficient depth below the
surface to ensure the culvert will not collapse, and in conjunction with
specifications applicable to the product. The minimum depth of a culvert
below a roadbed surface shall be one foot (1'). Roadway cross drains shall
be of a minimum length to collect stormwater from the full roadway
width, including shoulders and side slopes;
(h) All stormwater conveyance structures, pipes, or culverts,
located under roadways shall incorporate end walls, headwalls, concrete
aprons, concrete wing walls, and/or rip-rap rock as end treatment, as
necessary, to prevent erosion;
(i) The designer shall incorporate stormwater collection
structures to capture runoff from paved surfaces in all sag locations and
other depressed areas to ensure positive drainage. Collection structures
should be spaced so that the spread (width of stormwater) in roadway
areas to collect the design flow shall not exceed six feet (6');
(j) Inlet capacity at sags shall include provisions for debris
blockage by providing twice the required operational flow. Where inlet
conditions control the amount of flow that can pass through the culvert,
improved inlets can greatly increase the hydraulic performance of a
culvert and shall be required at the discretion of the city engineer;
(k) Stormwater collection structures, manholes, and junction
boxes shall consist of prefabricated reinforced concrete structures, cast
in-place, or an approved equivalent. Stormwater collection or inlet
structures shall conform to Tennessee Department of Transportation
standards;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-105
(l) Open stormwater conveyance channels, trenches, or ditches
incorporated in the SWPPP shall include stabilization in accordance with
§ 18-306(1) to abate erosion within the channel;
(m) When necessary for proper stormwater conveyance, inlet and
outlet ditches shall be provided at drainage structures. Minimum
drainage easements shall be provided for residential subdivision
developments in accordance with the Cleveland Subdivision Regulations,
section 4.08B, and incorporated on side and rear parcel lines. Where at
all possible, primary stormwater conveyances shall be incorporated at the
rear of the lot lines and not parallel to the roadway to avoid having
oversized stormwater structures under driveway;
(n) Plans and specifications for all retaining walls, cribbing,
planting, anti-erosion devices, or other protective devices, whether
temporary or permanent, to be constructed in conjunction with or as a
part of the proposed development shall be included in the SWPPP.
Retaining walls shall meet the requirements specified in § 18-306(8).
(13) Stormwater detention design - minimum standards. In the interest
of public safety and stormwater quality, stormwater detention or retention shall
be integrated into the SWPPPs to abate increased peak stormwater runoff. The
primary criteria in evaluating SWPPPs and site designs shall be the comparison
of pre-development site runoff and post-development site runoff. Other
evaluation processes shall include an assessment of potential increase in
stormwater flood height, the frequency of flooding, and the proximity to any
structures. The SWPPP shall utilize pervious areas for detention, stormwater
treatment, allow infiltration of stormwater runoff, and comply with the
following criteria:
(a) Stormwater storage facilities with one inch (1") first flush
water quality treatment shall be required for development meeting the
following conditions:
(i) Commercial, industrial, educational, institutional and
recreational developments consisting of one (1) acre or more of
disturbed area;
(ii) Commercial, industrial, educational, institutional and
recreational developments consisting of less than one (1) acre, that
is part of a larger common plan of development;
(iii) Any project such as new development, re-development
or property improvements which includes the addition of one-half
(1/2) acre or greater of impervious area;
(iv) Residential development of four (4) acres or greater
being developed.
(b) The one inch (1") first flush amount of rainfall must be
treated prior to discharge with a technology documented to remove eighty
percent (80%) Total Suspended Solids (TSS) unless an alternative
provided under this ordinance is approved. The treatment technology
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-106
must be designed, installed and maintained to continue to meet this
performance standard.
(c) When a proposed development or re-development does not
exceed the criteria listed in § 18-306(13)(a), the city engineer shall have
the authority to require stormwater storage detention or retention with
first flush water quality treatment to prevent downstream flooding and
damage.
(d) All development or re-development meeting the criteria
listed in § 18-306(13)(a) shall control the peak stormwater flow rates of
the site stormwater discharges associated with design storms specified in
§ 18-306(13)(f)(i) and reduce the post construction stormwater runoff to
pre-construction levels. All site development or re-development shall
provide first flush discharge treatment or an acceptable alternative in
accordance with stormwater quality standards.
(e) The stormwater detention or retention storage requirements
may be waived or modified if the following occurs:
(i) The peak runoff discharge from the site is mitigated
by a regional detention stormwater facility or by off-site detention
banking.
(ii) The applicant(s) licensed civil engineer shall
demonstrate that installing the required on-site stormwater
storage facility(s) is unwarranted, would not increase the potential
for flooding hazards, and would not be in the best interest of the
City of Cleveland. Hydrologic and hydraulic computations shall be
submitted that utilizes accepted engineering practices to support
such a conclusion. The primary occurrence of such conditions
typically involves direct stormwater discharges into a main stream
such as South Mouse Creek, Little Chatata, Candies Creek, and
Fillauer Branch without flowing through a named creek or stream,
through a public drainage system, or across a downstream
property boundary, and is located in the very lowest downstream
reaches of that watershed. It shall be determined by acceptable
engineering principles and practices that post development
stormwater should be released quickly to avoid the peak discharge
timing for the entire watershed and not increase the peak runoff
rate for storm events identified in the design standards for storage
in § 18-306(13)(f)(i). The hydrologic analysis for such
demonstration shall include more than one representative
downstream location for comparing hydrographs. Even if
stormwater detention is waived for the above situation, the site
development must provide first flush treatment or an acceptable
alternative in order to protect water quality.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-107
(f) Detention structure design criteria. Standards governing
drainage detention control shall comply with the following standards and
specifications:
(i) All stormwater detention structures must detain the
post development peak flow rates for two (2) year, five (5) year, ten
(10) year, and twenty-five (25) year within a twenty-four (24) hour
design storm frequency to discharge at or below pre-development
peak flow rates and pass a one hundred (100) year storm without
damage to the facility or adjacent property.
(ii) The required hydrologic and hydraulic computations
shall be in accordance with Natural Resource Conservation Service
(NRCS), formerly the Soil Conservation Service; unit hydrograph
procedures using Antecedent Moisture Condition (AMC) II curve
numbers and Type II rainfall distribution. All post development
conditions must be routed to the maximum extent possible at time
intervals of one-tenth (0.1 hour) through the detention pond
utilizing hand calculations or computer models;
(iii) If hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant
greater control than that provided by the minimum control
requirements, the city engineer shall impose any requirements
deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff
in the interest of public safety;
(iv) The civil engineer representing the owner or
developer is charged with determining the predevelopment
conditions, including the curve number. If the engineer cannot
determine the predevelopment conditions, then a maximum
pre-development curve number of seventy (70) may be used to
compute the predevelopment flow and satisfy the requirement. If
the downstream system extending from the site to the second
existing road crossing or blue line stream is examined and found
to be adequate to carry the two (2) and ten (10) year storm events
for a twenty-four (24) hour storm event, the requirement for
detention for areas of redevelopment may be waived;
(v) Typical stormwater detention or storage facilities are
dry detention basins, wet detention basins, retention basins, and
constructed wetlands. All detention computations must use NRCS
design methods with Type II twenty-four (24) hour storm and
average antecedent moisture conditions;
(vi) Detention facilities shall be designed and graded to
allow access for maintenance personnel, maintenance vehicles, and
equipment. The SWPPP shall incorporate a permanent drainage
easement to provide access for future maintenance or repair, which
shall be designated on the final recorded plat.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-108
(vii) The detention pond design shall incorporate a trash
rack or trash collection appurtenance. (as added by Ord. #2004-41,
Nov. 2004, amended by Ord. #2005-38, Oct. 2005, replaced by Ord.
#2015-06, March 2015, and amended by Ord. #2016-09, April 2016,
and Ord. #2017-20, July 2017)
18-307. Permanent stormwater management: operation,
maintenance, and inspection. (1) As built plans. All persons or entities
designated as having a valid land disturbance permit are required to submit
actual as-built plans developed from field survey data at the post construction
phase. Two (2) benchmarks of public record referenced to Tennessee State Plane
Coordinates shall be identified on the as-built plans. The as-built plans shall
include all stormwater management facilities, and conveyances, roadways, and
private stormwater storage facilities located on-site. The plan must show the
final (actual) design specifications for all stormwater structures and roadway
gutters and shall include a description of:
(a) Structure materials,
(b) Invert elevations,
(c) Structure dimensions shall include inside pipe diameter(s),
(d) Slope of stormwater conveyances and pipes, and the stream
buffer metes and bounds.
The stream buffer zone area will remain in tact, with no removal of
vegetation, including upper and lower story vegetative canopy, during all phases
of construction,. The as-built drawings must also include infrastructure to be
accepted by the City of Cleveland and constructed as part of the development
and/or redevelopment, including but not limited to curb and gutters, edge of
pavement, and stormwater facilities. The as-built drawings must bear the seal
by a civil engineer or registered licensed surveyor in the State of Tennessee and
submitted to the engineering division of the City of Cleveland Development and
Engineering Services Department in hard copy and electronic format compatible
with AutoCAD or Micro station. A final post inspection will be conducted by the
engineering division of the City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Services Department prior to the release of the performance security or
performance bond. The engineering division shall have the discretion to adopt
provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance surety or
performance bond on the completion of various stages of development. The
performance value of mapping shall be held in abeyance until as-built drawings
required under this provision are submitted and approved by the engineering
division. In addition, occupation permits shall not be granted until corrections
to all BMPs have been made and accepted by the city.
(2) Landscaping and stabilization requirements. (a) Any area of land
from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or
wholly cleared by development activities shall stabilize. Stabilization
measures shall be initiated as soon as possible in portions of the site
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-109
where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased.
Temporary or permanent soil stabilization at the construction site (or a
phase of the project) must be completed not later than fifteen (15) days
after the construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily
or permanently ceased. In the following situations, temporary
stabilization measures are not required:
(i) Where the initiation of stabilization measures is
precluded by snow cover or frozen ground conditions or adverse
soggy ground conditions, stabilization measures shall be initiated
as soon as practicable; or
(ii) Where construction activity on a portion of the site is
temporarily ceased, and earth disturbing activities will be resumed
within fifteen (15) days.
(b) Permanent stabilization with perennial vegetation (using
native herbaceous and woody plants where practicable) or other
permanently stable, non-eroding surface shall replace any temporary
measures as soon as practicable. Unpacked gravel containing fines (silt
and clay sized particles) or crusher runs will not be considered a
non-eroding surface.
(c) The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts:
(i) Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial
cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its
equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time
as the cover crop is established over ninety percent (90%) of the
seeded area.
(ii) Replanting with native woody and herbaceous
vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or
its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the
plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion.
(iii) Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a
minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the cover crop
throughout the year immediately following revegetation.
Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the
minimum seventy-five percent (75%) survival for one (1) year is
achieved.
(iv) In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping
plan must be submitted with the final design describing the
vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at
a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not
only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will
be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and
what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative
cover is preserved.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-110
(3) Inspection of stormwater management facilities. Periodic
inspections of facilities shall be performed, documented, and reported in
accordance with this chapter, as detailed in § 18-309.
(4) Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties
responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management
facility shall make records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of
all maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at
least three (3) years. These records shall be made available to the city during
inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
(5) Failure to meet or maintain design or maintenance standards. If
a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance standards
required for stormwater facilities under this chapter, the city, after reasonable
notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by
performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition.
In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to
public safety or public health, the city shall notify in writing the party
responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Upon
receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have thirty (30) days to effect
maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. In the event that
corrective action is not undertaken within that time, the city may take
necessary corrective action. The cost of any action by the city under this section
shall be charged to the responsible party. (as added by Ord. #2004-41, Nov.
2004, amended by Ord. #2005-38, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2015-06,
March 2015)
18-308. Post construction landscaping. (1) When required. A post
construction stabilization and landscape plan shall be required for:
(a) Proposed development requiring a land disturbance permit
under the provisions of § 18-305(1) with a land use designation or
proposed land use of industrial, commercial, or multi-unit residential
structures with a cumulative living area of five-thousand (5,000) square
feet, or greater.
(b) Redevelopment and property improvements.
(i) Existing industrial, commercial, or multi-unit
residential structures that are expanded by fifty-percent (50%), or
greater;
(ii) The addition of parking spaces to serve an existing
industrial, commercial, or multi-unit residential structure where
the existing parking area is increased by twenty-five percent
(25%), or greater.
(2) Exemptions. The following land disturbance activity or
development is exempt from the post construction landscape plan requirement
of § 18-308. An exemption of the post construction landscape provisions of
§ 18-308 does not constitute an exemption from the remaining provisions of this
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-111
ordinance; such remaining provisions shall apply to all land disturbance activity
identified in § 18-305(1) in accordance with the State of Tennessee NPDES MS4
Phase II Stormwater Permit issued to the City of Cleveland.
The following land disturbance activities are exempt from the provisions
of § 18-308:
(a) Exempt from obtaining a land disturbance permit under the
provisions of § 18-305(2);
(b) Single family residential parcels that are a part of a larger
common plan of development (larger tract divided into parcels). Land
disturbance permits in accordance with § 18-305(1) shall be required for
parcels of a larger common plan of development in accordance with
NPDES MS4 Phase II requirements;
(c) Development in the Central Business District (CBD) zoning
district.
(3) Landscape plan requirements. The applicant for a land
disturbance permit shall submit a post construction landscape plan in
accordance with § 18-308(1). The landscape plan shall be developed by a
professional in accordance with rules promulgated by the State of Tennessee
Board of Architectural and Engineering Examiners, the landscape plan shall be
prepared by a qualified registrant.
The landscape plan shall contain the following:
(a) Plant schedule. The plant schedule shall contain:
(i) Quantity of plant material;
(ii) Common and botanical name of plant material;
(iii) Size and spacing of landscape materials at time of
planting;
(iv) General plant comments;
(v) Plant materials located in the public right-of-way;
(vi) Location and description of landscape improvements,
including perimeter landscaping, landscaping within parking lots,
and buffer zones if the parking area is two (2) or more acres, (the
description shall include the size of the parking area and the
actual percentage of the parking area used for landscaping);
(vii) Planting and installation details to ensure
conformance with all required standards; and
(viii) Irrigation system details.
(4) Landscape plan review procedures. (a) The landscape plan will be
reviewed by the Urban Forester in accordance with the provisions of
§ 18-305(5).
(b) Alternative landscaping plan. Recognizing the need for
diversified methods of landscaping, the applicant for a land disturbance
permit may submit an alternative methods or materials to the urban
forester to determine if the proposed alternative satisfies the provisions
of this ordinance;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-112
(c) Memorial tree fund. If an alternative landscape plan is not
feasible as determined by the urban forester, and the applicant for a land
disturbance permit is unable to achieve the intent of the landscape plan,
the applicant may achieve the necessary equivalency in off-site
landscaping in conjunction with the memorial tree fund. The mitigation
or exchange ratio shall be 2:1 calculated at the current fair market value
to purchase plant materials, planting, and maintenance. Payments
received for mitigation or off-site landscaping shall be deposited in the
memorial tree fund and shall be expended solely to landscape public
properties and right-of-ways.
(5) Landscape plan standards. (a) A landscape plan shall include at
a minimum:
(i) Plant materials approved by the urban forester;
(ii) Shade trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half
inches (1 1/2") in caliper, ornamental trees be a minimum of one
and one-half inches (1 1/2") in caliper, and evergreen trees shall be
a minimum of six feet (6') in height;
(iii) The owner shall ensure that planting areas, i.e.. tree
pits, hedge trenches, and shrub beds are excavated appropriately.
Soil within the planting areas should be reasonably free of rock,
debris, inorganic compositions and chemical residues. Plants shall
rest on a well compacted surface;
(iv) Existing trees shall be preserved whenever feasible.
(v) Planting Areas shall be mulched to a thickness of
three to four inch (3" - 4") in depth and consist of bark, pine
needles, or other suitable materials to cover the planting areas,
remaining landscape areas shall be in grass or ground cover;
(vi) Trees and shrubs shall not be located within a
dedicated utility easement, whether private or public utilities.
(vii) Landscape plans shall not include plant materials on
the undesirable plant list. The urban forester and/or the
department of community development shall provide the
undesirable plant list.
(b) Perimeter landscaping. (i) Planting yards are required
around the perimeter or an equivalent area of a development, with
the exclusion egress for vehicles or pedestrians. Traffic
considerations shall be paramount in perimeter landscaping. A
planting yard shall be a minimum width of:
(A) Five feet (5') for a parcel with a total area of
two (2) acres or less,
(B) Eight feet (8') for a parcel with a total area of
two (2) acres, or greater.
The width of perimeter planting yard may range from zero
percent (0%) to two-hundred percent (200%) of the required
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-113
minimum width along the perimeter, but the average width of the
perimeter planting yard shall be at least the required minimum.
(ii) Plantings yards shall be placed along the front, side
and rear property lines, with traffic and safety considerations
being paramount. A property bounded by two (2) or more public
right-of-ways has two (2) or more front yards;
(iii) Planting yards shall contain a number of shade trees
equivalent to one (1) shade tree for each forty (40) linear feet of
perimeter, excluding any vehicular access way. Ornamental trees
may be substituted for up to forty percent (40%) of otherwise
required shade trees. Shade trees shall not be planted under
overhead utility lines. Landscaping trees shall be distributed
along property lines; however, distribution is to be in accordance
with design considerations particular to the site, such as screening,
traffic site distance, safety, and aesthetics. In order to achieve
equity in the number of shade trees required for development
occurring on sites with equivalent areas, but with different
perimeter lengths, the number of shade trees required for each
forty feet (40') of perimeter shall not exceed what would have been
required had the site been a perfect square.
(iv) Planting yards shall consist of diverse species of trees
satisfying spacing criteria cited in this part, and shall incorporate
shrubs at equal intervals planted between perimeter trees, subject
to approval of the urban forester. One (1) tree species shall not
comprise more than sixty percent (60%) of the total number of
trees provided;
(v) In the case of a larger common plan of industrial,
commercial, or multi-unit residential structures resulting in
multiple parcel of the same zoning classification, perimeter
landscaping shall be limited to the larger tract prior to dividing
into parcels.
(c) Landscaping parking areas - proposed development.
Proposed parking areas shall be effectively landscape islands with trees
and shrubs to reduce adverse impacts of peak stormwater runoff from
impervious areas. Development of lots of record in existence prior to the
effective date of this chapter which are being developed so as to be
required to provide twenty (20) or fewer parking spaces, and which are
not otherwise part of a larger common plan of development, are exempt
from the parking area landscaping requirements of this subsection.
(i) Proposed parking areas shall incorporate landscape
islands to consist of a minimum of four percent (4%) of the total
impervious area, exclusive of the building footprint area.
(ii) Proposed parking areas with a single access aisle
shall be designed and constructed with landscape islands dividing
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-114
rows of parking spaces at increments of twenty (20) spaces.
Off-street parking areas with multiple access aisles shall be
designed and constructed with landscape islands dividing at least
every twelve (12) parking spaces in a row. Landscape islands shall
have a minimum width of eight feet (8') and shall have a minimum
depth equal to the depth of the adjacent parking stall(s).
Landscape island spacing criteria notwithstanding, the greater of
five (5) or twenty percent (20%) of the required landscape islands
may be combined with other islands or otherwise located around
the parking lot or on its perimeter when necessary to accommodate
other design considerations including, but not limited to, the
location of handicapped parking, fire lanes, loading zones, and
other site features. Each landscape island shall have at least one
(1) shade tree, except that an ornamental tree is to be substituted
for the shade tree underneath an overhead power line, and three
(3) shrubs.
(iii) Landscape islands shall be constructed to include a
continuous curbing perimeter, and shall be back-filled with topsoil
to a depth of eighteen inches (18") and shall be free of rock, debris,
inorganic compositions, and chemical residues detrimental to plant
life.
(iv) The landscape requirements for parking lots are in
addition to the requirements for buffer zones and perimeter
landscaping.
(d) Landscape requirements for existing parking areas:
(i) In parking areas subject to § 18-308(1)(b) trees shall
be planted at the rate of one (1) shade tree per twelve (12) parking
spaces;
(ii) Trees shall be located within or adjacent to parking
areas as tree islands, medians, at the end of parking bays, traffic
delineators, or between rows or parking spaces in a manner;
(iii) The landscape requirements for parking lots are in
addition to the requirements for buffer zones and perimeter
landscaping.
(6) Irrigation requirement. The post construction landscape plan shall
identify irrigation measures to satisfy survival rate requirements.
(a) Landscaping materials installed in accordance with an
approved landscape plan shall be watered by one (1) of the following
methods:
(i) An above ground or under ground irrigation system;
or
(ii) A hose attachment, within one hundred feet (100') of
all landscaping.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-115
(b) Landscape irrigation water shall supplement rainfall at a
rate of one inch (1") per week during the growing seasons. Slow release
(i.e. "treegators") bags are recommended for supplemental watering.
(7) Landscape installation. Landscaping materials shall be installed
in accordance with widely accepted professional planting procedures. Landscape
materials, which fail to satisfy the minimum requirements or standards of this
ordinance at the time of installation, shall be removed and replaced with
acceptable materials.
(8) Maintenance requirements - warranty. The applicant shall
warranty plant material survival of ninety-percent (90%) for a two (2) year
period consistent with an approved landscape plan. (as added by Ord. #2004-41,
Nov. 2004, amended by Ord. #2005-38, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord.
#2015-06, March 2015)
18-309. Existing locations and ongoing developments. (1) On-site
stormwater management facilities maintenance agreement:
(a) Where the stormwater facility is located on property that is
subject to a development agreement, and the development agreement
provides for a permanent stormwater maintenance agreement that runs
with the land, the owners of property must execute an inspection and
maintenance agreement that shall operate as a deed restriction binding
on the current property owners and all subsequent property owners and
their lessees and assigns, including but not limited to, homeowner
associations or other groups or entities.
(b) The maintenance agreement shall:
(i) Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair
of the stormwater facility to the owners of the property upon which
the facility is located and be recorded as such on the plat for the
property by appropriate notation.
(ii) Provide for a periodic inspection by the property
owners in accordance with the requirements of subsection (v) below
for the purpose of documenting maintenance and repair needs and
to ensure compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. The
property owners will arrange for this inspection to be conducted by
a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State
of Tennessee, who will submit a signed written report of the
inspection to the City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Services Department. It shall also grant permission to the city to
enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the
stormwater facility to ensure that it is being properly maintained.
(iii) Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair
needs include, but are not limited to: the removal of silt, litter and
other debris, the cutting of grass, cutting and vegetation removal,
and the replacement of landscape vegetation, in detention and
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-116
retention basins, and inlets and drainage pipes and any other
stormwater facilities. It shall also provide that the property owners
shall be responsible for additional maintenance and repair needs
consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the MS4 BMP
manual.
(iv) Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed
in a timely manner, on a schedule to be determined by the City of
Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department.
(v) Provide that if the property is not maintained or
repaired within the prescribed schedule, the City of Cleveland
Development and Engineering Services Department shall perform
the maintenance and repair at its expense, and bill the same to the
property owner. The maintenance agreement shall also provide
that the City of Cleveland Development and Engineering Services
Department's cost of performing the maintenance shall be a lien
against the property.
(2) Existing problem locations - no maintenance agreement. (a) The
City of Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department
shall in writing notify the owners of existing locations and developments
of specific drainage, erosion or sediment problems affecting or caused by
such locations and developments, and the specific actions required to
correct those problems. The notice shall also specify a reasonable time for
compliance. Discharges from existing BMPs that have not been
maintained and/or inspected in accordance with this ordinance shall be
regarded as illicit.
(b) Inspection of existing facilities. The city may, to the extent
authorized by state and federal law, enter and inspect private property
for the purpose of determining if there are illicit non-stormwater
discharges, and to establish inspection programs to verify that all
stormwater management facilities are functioning within design limits.
These inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis,
including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections;
inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations;
inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical
sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of
businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual
discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type
which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of the
city's NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other
agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records;
sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water
in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other BMPs.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-117
(3) Owner/operator inspections - generally. The owners and/or the
operators of stormwater management practices shall:
(a) Perform routine inspections to ensure that the BMPs are
properly functioning. These inspections shall be conducted on an annual
basis, at a minimum. These inspections shall be conducted by a person
familiar with control measures implemented at a site. Owners or
operators shall maintain documentation of these inspections. The City of
Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department may
require submittal of this documentation.
(b) Perform comprehensive inspection of all stormwater
management facilities and practices. These inspections shall be conducted
once every five (5) years, at a minimum. Such inspections must be
conducted by either a professional engineer or landscape architect,
licensed in the State of Tennessee. Complete inspection reports for these
five year inspections shall include:
(i) Facility type,
(ii) Inspection date,
(iii) Latitude and longitude and nearest street address,
(iv) BMP owner information (e.g. name, address, phone
number, fax, and email),
(v) A description of BMP condition including: vegetation
and soils; inlet and outlet channels and structures; embankments,
slopes, and safety benches; spillways, weirs, and other control
structures; and any sediment and debris accumulation,
(vi) Photographic documentation of BMPs, and
(vii) Specific maintenance items or violations that need to
be corrected by the BMP owner along with deadlines and
reinspection dates.
(c) Owners or operators shall maintain documentation of these
inspections. The City of Cleveland Development and Engineering
Services Department may require submittal of this documentation.
(4) Requirements for all existing locations and ongoing developments.
The following requirements shall apply to all locations and development at
which land disturbing activities have occurred previous to the enactment of this
ordinance:
(a) Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the
standards and guidelines specified in § 18-307(2)(c)(i), (ii), (iii) and on a
schedule acceptable to the City of Cleveland Development and
Engineering Services Department.
(b) Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate
vegetation and/or retaining walls constructed.
(c) Drainage ways shall be properly covered in vegetation or
secured with rip-rap, channel lining, etc., to prevent erosion.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-118
(d) Trash, junk, rubbish, etc. shall be cleared from drainage
ways.
(e) Stormwater runoff shall, at the discretion of the City of
Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department be
controlled to the maximum extent practicable to prevent its pollution.
Such control measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(i) Ponds
(A) Detention pond
(B) Extended detention pond
(C) Wet pond
(D) Alternative storage measures
(ii) Constructed wetlands
(iii) Infiltration systems
(A) Infiltration/percolation trench
(B) Infiltration basin
(C) Drainage (recharge) well
(D) Porous pavement
(iv) Filtering systems
(A) Catch basin inserts/media filter
(B) Sand filter
(C) Filter/absorption bed
(D) Filter and buffer strips
(v) Open channel
(A) Swale
(5) Corrections of problems subject to appeal. Corrective measures
imposed by the stormwater coordinator under this section are subject to appeals
process under § 18-313. (as added by Ord. #2004-41, Nov. 2004, amended by
Ord. #2005-38, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2015-06, March 2015)
18-310. Illicit discharges. (1) General. This section shall apply to all
water generated on developed or undeveloped land entering the municipality's
separate storm sewer system.
(2) Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall introduce or cause
to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge
that is not composed entirely of stormwater. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm
sewer system is prohibited except as described as follows:
Uncontaminated discharges from the following sources:
(a) Water line flushing or other potable water sources,
(b) Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with potable water,
(c) Diverted stream flows,
(d) Rising ground water,
(e) Groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-119
(f) Pumped groundwater,
(g) Foundation or footing drains,
(h) Crawl space pumps,
(i) Air conditioning condensation,
(j) Springs,
(k) Non-commercial washing of vehicles,
(l) Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
(m) Swimming pools (if dechlorinated-typically less than one
PPM chlorine),
(n) Fire fighting activities, and
(o) Dye testing conducted in conjunction with the operation of
water distribution and wastewater utilities.
(3) Prohibition of illicit connections. (a) The construction, use,
maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the separate
municipal storm sewer system is prohibited.
(b) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
(4) Reduction of stormwater pollutants. Any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may
be required to implement, at the person's expense, the BMPs necessary to
prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm
sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section.
(5) Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law,
as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in, illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, or the municipal separate
storm sewer system, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a
release of hazardous materials the person shall immediately notify emergency
response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the
event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the person shall notify the City
of Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department Stormwater
Division in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be entered in a telephone log
maintained by the City of Cleveland Development and Engineering Services
Department Stormwater Division. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-120
and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained
in accordance with NPDES requirements for the facility, or in accordance with
the Tennessee Water Quality Control Act and/or any subsequent revisions as a
matter of law. (as added by Ord. #2004-41, Nov. 2004, amended by Ord.
#2005-38, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2015-06, March 2015)
18-311. Enforcement and compliance. (1) Enforcement authority.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this ordinance or
conduct operations that violate the terms of the Tennessee Water Quality
Control Act 69-3-101. Under the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 68-221-1106, violations will be subject to enforcement action. City of
Cleveland Development and Engineering Services Department are authorized
under the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-221-1106 to conduct
administrative enforcement and shall have the authority to issue notices of
violation and citations.
(2) Notification of violation. (a) Written notice. Whenever the
stormwater coordinator or the building official, or designees of,
determines that any permittee or any other person discharging
stormwater has violated or is violating a provision of this ordinance, a
permit, or order issued hereunder, the stormwater coordinator or the
building official, or designees of, may serve upon such person written
notice of the violation. Within ten (10) days of this notice, an explanation
of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the
stormwater coordinator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the
discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt
of the notice of violation.
(b) Consent orders. The stormwater coordinator with approval
or concurrence of the development and engineering services director is
empowered to execute consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include
specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance
within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall
have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant
to subsections (d) and (e) below.
(c) Show cause hearing. The stormwater coordinator may order
any person who violates this ordinance or permit or order issued
hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. Notice shall be served on the person specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons
for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why this
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-121
meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least five (5) days prior to the hearing.
(d) Compliance order. When the stormwater coordinator finds
that any person has violated or continues to violate this ordinance or a
permit or order issued hereunder, the stormwater engineer may issue an
order to the violator directing that, following a specific time period,
adequate structures, devices, be installed or procedures implemented and
properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as
might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
noncompliance, including the installation of structures and devices,
self-monitoring, and management practices.
(e) Cease and desist orders. When the stormwater coordinator
finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this ordinance
or any permit or order issued hereunder, the stormwater engineer may
issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those
persons in noncompliance to:
(i) Comply forthwith; or
(ii) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action
as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and terminating the
discharge. (as added by Ord. #2004-41, Nov. 2004, amended by
Ord. #2005-38, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2015-06, March
2015)
18-312. Penalties. (1) Violations. Any person who shall commit any
act declared unlawful under this ordinance, who violates any provision of this
ordinance, who violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this
ordinance, or who fails or refuses to comply with any lawful communication or
notice to abate or take corrective action by the stormwater coordinator shall be
guilty of a civil offense.
(2) Penalties. Under the authority provided in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 68-221-1106, the municipality declares that any person violating
the provisions of this ordinance may be assessed a civil penalty by
administrative order signed by the development and engineering services
director of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) per day for each day of violation. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate violation
(3) Measuring civil penalties. In assessing a civil penalty, the
development and engineering services director with recommendations from the
stormwater coordinator shall consider:
(a) The harm done to the public health or the environment,
including the severity of the discharge and its effect upon public
stormwater facilities and upon the quality and quantity of the receiving
waters;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-122
(b) Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial
economic deterrent to the illegal activity;
(c) The economic benefit gained by the violator;
(d) The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this
violation and the effectiveness of action taken by the violator to cease the
violation;
(e) Damages to the city, including compensation for the damage
or destruction of public stormwater facilities, and also including any
penalties, costs and attorneys' fees incurred by the city as a result of the
illegal activity, as well as the expenses involved in enforcing this
ordinance and the costs involved in rectifying any damages;
(f) The amount of penalty established by ordinance or
resolution for specific categories of violations, if any;
(g) The technical and economic reasonableness of reducing or
eliminating the discharge;
(h) The cause of the discharge or violation;
(i) Any equities of the situation, which outweigh the benefit of
imposing any penalty or damage assessment.
(4) Schedule of civil penalties and enforcement protocol. The
stormwater regulations board may establish by regulation a schedule of the
amount of civil penalties which can be assessed by the development and
engineering services director for certain specific violations or categories of
violations. The stormwater regulations board may also establish by regulation
an enforcement protocol in order to assure fair and just enforcement to all
parties involved and to provide adequate guidance to stormwater field
personnel.
(5) Recovery of damages and costs. In addition to the civil penalty in
§ 18-312(2) above, the City of Cleveland may recover;
(a) All damages proximately caused by the violator to the
municipality, which may include any reasonable expenses incurred in
investigating violations of, and attorney's fees and expenses in
enforcement procedures associated with this ordinance, or any other
actual damages caused by the violation.
(b) The costs of the municipality's maintenance of stormwater
facilities when the user of such facilities fails to maintain them as
required by this ordinance.
(6) Other remedies. The City of Cleveland may institute civil
proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking monetary damages
for any damages caused to publicly owned stormwater facilities by any person,
or to seek injunctive or other equitable relief to enforce compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance or to enforce compliance with any consent order of
the development and engineering services director, the stormwater coordinator,
or the stormwater regulations board.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-123
(7) Remedies cumulative. The remedies set forth in this section shall
be cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action that one
(1) or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted.
(8) Failure to appeal civil penalties or damage assessments. If an
appeal to the stormwater regulations board is not filed within thirty (30) days
after the date that a civil penalty or damage assessment has been served in any
manner allowed by law, the violator shall be deemed to have consented to the
civil penalty or damage assessment, and it shall become final. Whenever a
damage assessment or civil penalty has become final because of a failure to
appeal, and it has not been paid, the city may apply to the appropriate chancery
court for a judgment and seek execution of the judgment in any manner allowed
by law. The chancery court, in such proceeding, shall treat the failure to appeal
such damage assessment or civil penalty as a confession of judgment as provided
in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-221-1106. (as added by Ord. #2004-41, Nov.
2004, amended by Ord. #2005-38, Oct. 2005, and Ord. #2006-25, July 2006, and
replaced by Ord. #2015-06, March 2015)
18-313. Stormwater regulations board and administrative
appeals. (1) Board established. There is hereby established a board of five (5)
members to be known as the "Stormwater Regulations Board."
(2) Composition; terms; filling vacancies. The five (5) members of this
board shall be appointed by the city council. The city council shall appoint
members with the following qualifications: one (1) environmental engineer,
environmental scientist, or environmental technician, one (1) attorney, one (1)
person employed or retired from an industrial or commercial establishment
regulated by this article, and two (2) persons that shall not have any particular
qualifications, but to the extent practical shall be selected to maintain diversity
on the board. Initial appointments are to be made for staggered terms as
follows: two (2) seats for a term of one (1) year; two (2) seats for a term of two (2)
years; and one (1) seat for a term of three (3) years. Subsequent appointments
to each seat are to be for terms of four (4) years. All members shall serve until
their successor is appointed and all members shall serve at the pleasure of the
city council. A member of the stormwater regulations board may be removed
from the board at any time by a majority vote of the city council when it is
demonstrated that such board member has a pattern of repeated absences from
board meetings, or when such board member exhibits disregard for controlling
state and federal laws and local ordinances, or when such board member fails
to declare a conflict of interest in a given case and votes on the case. In the
event of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a member to fill the unexpired
term. The board members shall serve without compensation, but shall receive
actual expenses incurred in attending meetings of the board and the
performance of any duties as members of the board.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-124
(3) General duties of the board. The board shall have the following
duties and powers in addition to any other duties or responsibilities conferred
upon the board by this ordinance.
(a) To recommend from time to time to the city council that it
amend or modify the provisions of this ordinance;
(b) To hold hearings upon appeals from orders or actions of the
stormwater coordinator, the development and engineering services
director, or building official as may be provided under any provision of
this ordinance;
(c) To hold hearings relating to the suspension, revocation, or
modification of a stormwater discharge permit and issue appropriate
orders relating thereto;
(d) To hold hearings relating to an appeal concerning any civil
penalty imposed under this ordinance;
(e) To hold such other hearings as may be required in the
administration of this ordinance and to make such determinations and
issue such orders as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
ordinance;
(f) To request assistance from any officer, agent, or employee
of the city and to obtain such information or other assistance as the board
might need;
(g) The board acting through its chairperson shall have the
power to issue subpoenas requiring attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of documentary evidence relevant to any
matter properly heard by the board; and
(h) The chairperson or vice chairperson shall be authorized to
administer oaths to those persons giving testimony before the board.
(4) Election of officers; meetings; and quorum. The following
constitutes rules and procedure for the stormwater regulations board. The
board may adopt such other rules and procedures as the board deems
appropriate provided that such rules are consistent with procedures described
herein.
(a) Election of officers. The board shall elect from among its
own members a chairperson, and a vice-chairperson. Secretarial services
shall be provided by the City of Cleveland in a manner to be prescribed
by the city manager.
(b) Initial meeting. Within thirty (30) days of the initial
appointment of the board members, the board shall hold an initial
meeting. At the initial meeting the board will elect officers as provided
by this ordinance and review the general duties of the board identified in
§ 18-313(3).
(c) Regular meetings. Regular meetings shall be held at a time
and place chosen by the stormwater regulations board. The board shall
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-125
hold regular semiannual meetings and called meetings as the board may
find necessary.
(d) Called meetings. The chairperson or vice-chairperson or any
two (2) members may schedule a called meeting of the stormwater
regulations board as deemed necessary provided that advance notice is
given to each board member at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the
commencement of the called meeting.
(e) Public notice of regular meetings. Public notice of regular
meetings shall be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation at
least five (5) days in advance of the meeting with a general description of
the agenda.
(f) Open meetings. All meeting of the board shall be open to the
public.
(g) Conduct of meetings. The board shall generally conduct
meetings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order.
(h) Quorum and voting. The presence of three (3) members of
the stormwater regulations board shall constitute a quorum. If the
chairperson and vice-chairperson are absent from the meeting in which
there is a quorum, the members present shall elect from among the board
members present a chairperson of the meeting. If only three (3) members
are present and one (1) cannot vote due to a conflict of interest on a
particular item, the remaining two members shall constitute a quorum
for the purpose of that item. In the event of a tie vote on any motion, the
motion shall fail. A motion shall have passed upon the affirmative vote
of a majority of the quorum of board members present and voting.
(5) Variances. (a) General. The stormwater regulations board may
grant a variance from the requirements of this ordinance which would not
result in the violation of any state or federal law or stormwater
regulation consistent with the NPDES permit issued to the City of
Cleveland, and if exceptional circumstances applicable to the site exist
such that strict adherence to the provisions of this ordinance will result
in unnecessary hardship and will not result in a condition contrary to the
intent of the ordinance.
(b) Conditions for a variance. The minimum requirements for
stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written
request of the applicant, provided that at least one (1) of the following
conditions applies and the applicant can satisfy § 18-312(5)(c):
(i) It can be demonstrated that the proposed variance is
not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this ordinance.
(ii) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site
management of stormwater discharges have been established in a
SWPPP that has been approved by the city engineer.
(iii) Provisions are established to manage stormwater by
an off-site facility. The off-site facility must be in place and
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-126
designed to provide the level of stormwater control that is equal to
or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices.
Further, the facility must be operated and maintained by an entity
that is legally obligated to continue the operation and maintenance
of the facility.
(c) Downstream damage and adverse impact prohibited. In
order to receive a variance, the applicant must demonstrate utilizing
sound engineering principals that the issuance of a variance will not lead
to any of the following conditions downstream:
(i) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and
other structures;
(ii) Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
(iii) Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or
siltation;
(iv) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life
or property.
(d) Variance request. The following procedures and information
will be required prior to the stormwater regulations board's consideration
of a variance.
(i) A written petition for a variance shall be required and
shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons, with
supporting data, and provide specifics regarding valid reasons a
variance should be granted. The petition shall include all
information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance and shall
be filed with the stormwater coordinator.
(ii) The stormwater coordinator shall conduct a review of
the request for a variance within ten (10) working days after
receipt and may either support the petition or may object to the
petition. If the stormwater coordinator objects to the variance, the
stormwater coordinator shall state the reasons.
(iii) Once the stormwater coordinator's review is complete
or the ten (10) days for review have expired, the petition shall be
subject to board action at the next regularly scheduled meeting or
at a called meeting.
(6) Administrative appeals. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 68-221-1106(d), any person aggrieved by the imposition of an administrative
civil penalty or damage assessment as provided by this ordinance may appeal
said administrative civil penalty or damage assessment to the stormwater
regulations board. Any person or entity aggrieved by any order or
determination issued under this ordinance may appeal said order or
determination to the stormwater regulations board who shall review the order
or determination reviewed under the provisions of this section.
(a) Appeals must be in writing. All appeals must be in writing
and filed with the stormwater coordinator and with the board
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-127
chairperson. The appeal shall set forth with particularity the action or
inaction complained of and the relief sought by the person filing said
appeal. The chairperson may call a special board meeting upon the filing
of such appeal. As such special meeting, the board may in its discretion
suspend or stay the operation of any civil penalty, damage assessment,
order or determination until such time as the board has conducted a
public hearing on the appeal.
(b) Deadline for appeal. All appeals must be filed within thirty
(30) days after the civil penalty or damage assessment is served in any
manner authorized by law. An appeal of any other order or determination
issued under this ordinance shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the
effective date of the order or determination.
(c) Public hearing. Upon the receipt of an appeal to the
stormwater regulations board, the board shall hold a public hearing
within thirty (30) days. Five (5) days prior notice of the time, date, and
location of said hearing shall be published in a daily newspaper of general
circulation. Ten (10) days notice by registered mail or certified mail
(return receipt requested) shall also be provided to the appealing party.
This notice of hearing shall be sent to the address provided by the
appealing party at the time of the filing of the appeal.
(d) Record of appeal hearing. At any such hearing, all
testimony presented shall be under oath or upon solemn affirmation in
lieu of oath. The board shall make a record of such hearing, but the same
need not be a verbatim record. Any party coming before the board shall
have the right to have such hearing recorded stenographically at their
expense, but in such event the record need not be transcribed unless any
party seeks judicial review of the order or action of the board by common
law writ of certiorari, and in such event the party seeking such judicial
review shall pay for the transcript and provide the board with the
original of the transcript so that it may be certified to the court.
(e) Subpoenas. The chairperson may issue subpoenas requiring
attendance and testimony of witnesses or the production of evidence, or
both. A written request for the issuance of a subpoena must be filed with
the chairperson by no later than seven (7) days prior to the scheduled
hearing date. The written request for a subpoena must set forth the name
and address of the party to be subpoenaed and it must identify with
particularity any evidence to be produced by the witness. If a request for
the issuance of a subpoena is timely, the chairperson shall issue the
subpoena if the witness is a city resident. If the chairperson issues a
subpoena, the same shall be delivered to the chief of police for service by
any police officer of the city. If the witness does not reside in the city, the
chairperson shall mail a written notice to the witness requesting that the
witness attend the hearing.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-128
(f) Depositions. Upon agreement of all parties, the testimony
of any person may be taken by deposition or written interrogatories.
Unless otherwise agreed, the deposition shall be taken in a manner
consistent with rules 26 through 33 of the Tennessee Rules of Civil
Procedure, with the chairperson to rule on such matters as would require
a ruling by the court under such rules.
(g) Hearing procedure. The appealing party at a public hearing
shall first call that party's witnesses; to be followed by witnesses called
by other parties, to be followed by any witnesses that the board may
desire to call. Rebuttal witnesses shall be called in the same order. The
chairman shall rule on any evidentiary questions arising during such
hearing and shall make such other rulings as may be necessary or
advisable to facilitate an orderly hearing subject to approval of the board.
The board, the stormwater engineer, his or her representative, and all
parties shall have the right to examine any witness. The board shall not
be bound by the rules of evidence applicable to legal proceedings.
(h) Appeals from a decision of the stormwater regulations board.
If a party is not satisfied with the decision of the stormwater regulations
board, they may appeal the decision of the stormwater regulations board
pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, title 27, chapter
8. If an appeal of the decision of the stormwater regulations board is not
filed within the time allowed by law, the party shall be deemed to have
consented to the decision of the stormwater regulations board, and it
shall become final. Whenever a damage assessment or civil penalty has
become final because of a failure to appeal and it remains unpaid, the city
may apply to the appropriate chancery court for a judgment and seek
execution of the judgment in any manner allowed by law. The chancery
court, in such proceeding, shall treat the failure to appeal such damage
assessment or civil penalty as a confession of judgment as provided in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-221-1106. (as added by Ord. #2005-38,
Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2015-06, March 2015)
18-314. Appendix. (1) As-built agreement form.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-129
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-130
(as added by Ord. #2015-06, March 2015)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-131
CHAPTER 4
STORMWATER UTILITY ORDINANCE
SECTION
18-401. Legislative findings and policy.
18-402. Creation of stormwater utility and stormwater management fund.
18-403. Definitions.
18-404. Funding of stormwater utility.
18-405. Stormwater management fund.
18-406. Operating budget.
18-407. Stormwater user's fees established.
18-408. Single Family Unit (SFU).
18-409. Base rate.
18-410. Property classification for stormwater user's fee.
18-411. Payment of stormwater user's fee.
18-412. Billing procedures, delinquent bills and penalties for late payment.
18-413. Stormwater fee adjustments and credits.
18-414. [Deleted.]
18-401. Legislative findings and policy. The city council finds,
determines and declares that the stormwater system which provides for the
collection, treatment, storage and disposal of stormwater provides benefits and
services to all developed property within the incorporated city limits. Such
benefits include, but are not limited to: the provision of adequate systems of
collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and release of stormwater; the
reduction of hazards to property and life resulting from stormwater runoff;
improvements in general health and welfare through reduction of undesirable
stormwater conditions; and improvements to the water quality in the
stormwater and surface water system and its receiving waters. (as added by
Ord. #2014-26, June 2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June 2015)
18-402. Creation of stormwater utility and stormwater
management fund. To achieve the purposes of the Federal Clean Water Act
and Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-221-1101 et seq., there is created a
stormwater utility and a stormwater enterprise fund known as the Cleveland
Stormwater Management Fund to fund the stormwater utility in and for the city
within development and engineering services. The stormwater utility, pursuant
to the policy that may be established by the city council and under the general
supervision and control of the city manager, through the department of
development and engineering services, with the participation and assistance of
other city departments, may:
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-132
(1) Administer the acquisition of property for and the design,
construction, maintenance and operation of the stormwater utility system,
including capital improvements designated in the capital improvement program;
(2) Administer and enforce this ordinance and all regulations and
procedures adopted relating to the design, construction, maintenance,
rehabilitation, operation and alteration of the utility stormwater system,
including, but not limited to, the quantity, quality and/or velocity of the
stormwater conveyed thereby;
(3) Advise the city council and other city departments on matters
relating to the utility;
(4) Prepare and revise a comprehensive drainage plan for adoption by
the city council;
(5) Review plans and approve or deny, inspect and accept extensions
and connections to the system;
(6) Enforce regulations to protect and maintain water quality and
quantity within the system in compliance with water quality standards
established by state, regional and/or federal agencies as now adopted or
hereafter amended; or
(7) Annually analyze the cost of services and benefits provided, and the
system and structure of fees, charges, civil penalties and other revenues of the
utility. (as added by Ord. #2014-26, June 2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-13,
June 2015)
18-403. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply: Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and
the plural shall include the singular; words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense. Words not defined in this section will be construed to
have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest
edition of Webster's Dictionary.
(1) "Base rate" means the stormwater user's fee for a single-family unit
in the city.
(2) "Bonds" means revenue bonds, notes, loans or any other debt
obligations issued or incurred to finance the costs of construction.
(3) "Construction" means the erection, building, acquisition, alteration,
reconstruction, improvement or extension of stormwater facilities; preliminary
planning to determine the economic and engineering feasibility of stormwater
facilities; the engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal and economic
investigations and studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings,
specifications, procedures, and other action necessary in the construction of
stormwater facilities; and the inspection and supervision of the construction of
stormwater facilities.
(4) "Costs of construction" means costs reasonably incurred in
connection with providing capital improvements related to stormwater facilities
or any portion thereof, including but not limited to the costs of:
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-133
(a) Acquisition of all property, real or personal, and all interests
in connection therewith including all rights-of-way and easements
therefor,
(b) Physical construction, installation and testing, including the
costs of labor, services, materials, supplies and utility services used in
connection therewith,
(c) Architectural, engineering, legal and other professional
services,
(d) Insurance premiums taken out and maintained during
construction, to the extent not paid for by a contractor, for construction
and installation,
(e) Any taxes or other charges which become due during
construction,
(f) Expenses incurred by the City of Cleveland or on its behalf
with its approval in seeking to enforce any remedy against any contractor
or sub-contractor in respect of any default under a contract relating to
construction,
(g) Principal of and interest of any bonds, and
(h) Miscellaneous expenses incidental thereto.
(5) "Debt service" means, with respect to any particular fiscal year and
any particular series of bonds, an amount equal to the sum of:
(a) All interest payable on such bonds during such fiscal year,
plus
(b) Any principal installments of such bonds during such fiscal
year.
(6) "Developed property" means real property which has been altered
from its natural state by the creation or addition of impervious areas, by the
addition of any buildings, structures, pavement or other improvements.
(7) "Dwelling" or "dwelling unit" means a building or a portion thereof
occupied for residential purposes.
(8) "Fee(s)" or "stormwater user's fee(s)" means the charge established
by ordinance, and levied on owners or users of parcels or pieces of real property
to fund the costs of stormwater management and of operating, maintaining, and
improving the stormwater system in the city. The stormwater user's fees are in
addition to any other fee that the city has the right to charge under any other
rule or regulation of the city.
(9) "Fiscal year" means July 1 of a calendar year to June 30 of the next
calendar year, both inclusive.
(10) "Impervious surface" means a surface which substantially reduces
and/or prevents absorption of stormwater into the ground.
(11) "Impervious surface area" means the number of square feet of
horizontal surface covered by buildings, and other impervious surfaces. All
building measurements shall be made between exterior faces of walls,
foundations, columns or other means of support or enclosure.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-134
(12) "Non-single-family residential property" means land that is zoned,
developed or used solely as residential land, including, but not limited to,
duplexes, townhouses, apartments, condominiums, mobile homes, mobile home
parks, mixed use buildings and other multi-unit residential developments, or
any other lands upon which there are residential structures that contain more
than one (1) dwelling unit.
(13) "Other developed property" means developed property other than
single-family residential property. Such property includes, but not be limited
to, commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots, hospitals, schools,
recreational and cultural facilities, hotels, offices, churches, and mixed use
property.
(14) "Property" means real property.
(15) "Property owner" means the property owner of record as listed in
the county's assessment roll. A property owner includes any individual,
corporation, firm, partnership, or group of individuals acting as a unit, and any
trustee, receiver, or personal representative.
(16) "Single family residential property" means a developed property
which serves the primary purpose of providing one (1) detached dwelling unit
for one (1) family or housekeeping unit, but this does include single wide mobile
homes, even if attached to the land or there is only one (1) unit on the property.
(17) "Single-Family Unit" or "SFU" means the average square footage
of the impervious surface area for a single-family residential property
determined pursuant to this ordinance.
(18) "Stormwater" means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface
runoff, street wash waters related to street cleaning or maintenance,
infiltration, and drainage.
(19) "Stormwater facilities" or "stormwater flood control facilities"
means all natural and manmade conveyances and structures for which the
partial or full purpose or use is to convey surface water within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the city. This includes all natural conveyances for which the city
has assumed a level of maintenance responsibility, to which the city has made
improvements, against the flooding of which the city must make provision to
protect public and private property, or for which the city is accountable under
federal or state regulations for protecting the water quality within its
jurisdictional boundaries.
(20) "Stormwater management" means the planning, acquisition,
design, construction, regulation, improvement, repair, rehabilitation,
maintenance, and operation of property, facilities and programs relating to
water, flood plains, flood control, grading, erosion, conservation, riparian buffers
and sediment control.
(21) "Stormwater management fund" or "fund" means the fund created
by this ordinance to operate, maintain, and improve the city's stormwater
system.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-135
(22) "Surface water" includes waters upon the surface of the earth in
bounds created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams,
other water courses, lakes and reservoirs.
(23) "User(s)" means for developed non-exempt property the person
listed as receiving utility service or, if there is no such service or person listed,
the property owner. It may also mean the property owner of property with
multiple utility service accounts on such property . (as added by Ord. #2014-26,
June 2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June 2015)
18-404. Funding of stormwater utility. Revenue sources for the
stormwater utility's activities may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Stormwater user's fees.
(2) Civil penalties and damage assessments imposed for or arising
from the violation of the city's stormwater management ordinance.
(3) Stormwater permit and inspection fees.
(4) Bonds or other debt services.
(5) Other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local, and
private grants, or revolving funds, and from the Local Government Public
Obligations Act of 1986 (Tennessee Code Annotated, title 9, chapter 21).
To the extent that the stormwater user fees collected are insufficient to
fund the stormwater management program and its components, the cost of the
same may be paid from such city funds as may be determined by the city council.
(as added by Ord. #2014-26, June 2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June
2015)
18-405. Stormwater management fund. All revenues generated by
or on behalf of the stormwater utility shall be deposited in a stormwater
management fund and used exclusively for the stormwater utility. (as added by
Ord. #2014-26, June 2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June 2015)
18-406. Operating budget. The city council will adopt an operating
budget for the stormwater utility each fiscal year. The operating budget will set
forth for such fiscal year the estimated revenues and the estimated costs for the
management, acquisition, operations and maintenance, extension and
replacement and debt service of the stormwater utility. (as added by Ord.
#2014-26, June 2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June 2015)
18-407. Stormwater user's fees established. There will be imposed
on each and every developed property in the city, except exempt property, a
stormwater user's fee, which will be set from time to time by ordinance. Prior
to establishing or amending the fees, the city will advertise its intent to do so by
publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least thirty
(30) days in advance of the meeting of the city council at which the fees are
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-136
considered for adoption or amendment. (as added by Ord. #2014-26, June 2014,
and replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June 2015)
18-408. Single-Family Unit (SFU). (1) There is established, for
purposes of calculating the stormwater user's fees, the single-family unit (SFU).
(2) The SFU is the average square footage of the impervious surface
area of a single-family residential property, measured as three thousand eight
hundred thirty (3,830) square feet.
(3) The SFU may be changed by the city council from time to time by
amending its ordinance.
(4) The city council will have the discretion to determine the source of
the data from which the SFU is established, taking into consideration the
general acceptance and use of such source on the part of other stormwater
systems, and the reliability and general accuracy of the source. The city council
will have the discretion to determine the impervious surface area of other
developed property through property tax assessor's rolls or site examination,
mapping information, aerial photographs, and other reliable information. (as
added by Ord. #2014-26, June 2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June 2015)
18-409. Base rate. The city council shall, by ordinance, establish the
base rate for the stormwater user's fee. The base rate will be calculated to
insure adequate revenues to fund the costs of stormwater management and to
provide for the acquisition, operation, maintenance, rehabilitation and capital
improvements of the stormwater system in the city. The base rates is set forth
in of this ordinance (#2015-13) as three dollars twenty-five cents ($3.25) per
SFU per month. (as added by Ord. #2014-26, June 2014, and replaced by Ord.
#2015-13, June 2015)
18-410. Property classification for stormwater user's fee. For
purposes of determining the stormwater user's fee, all property in the city is
classified into one (1) of the following classes:
(1) Single-family residential property fee. The city council finds that
the monthly stormwater management fees for single-family residential property
will be based on the mean amount of impervious surface on a single-family
residential lot in the city, which is known as an SFU. There will be a tier
system for single-family residential properties based on the amount of
impervious surface of single-family residential property. Each property will be
placed into one (1) of the following tiers and charged according to the values in
the table below:
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-137
Description Monthly Fee
Rate - Single Family Residential Property Charge per Dwelling Unit
Tier (square foot)
0 to 1,775
1,776 to 5,900
5,901 and beyond
50% of base rate or $1.65 per month
100% of base rate or $3.25 per month
150% of base rate or $4.90 per month
(2) Non-single-family residential property fee. For non-single-family
residential property, each property will be classified into four (4)
sub-classifications to determine the monthly stormwater management fees. The
charge for each dwelling unit for these property types are defined in the table
below:
Description Monthly Fee
Rate - Non-Single-Family
Residential Property
Charge per Dwelling Unit
Subcategory
Duplex/Triplex/Quadplex
Apartments (5 + units)
Town Homes
Mobile Homes
50% of base rate or $1.65 per month
40% of base rate or $1.30 per month
40% of base rate or $1.30 per month
70% of base rate or $2.30 per month
(3) Other developed property fee. The fee for developed property that
is not single-family residential or non-single-family residential property in the
city will be the base rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing
the total impervious area (square feet) of the property by one (1) SFU, rounded
to the nearest tenth. But the minimum value shall not be less than one (1)
single-family unit unless otherwise designated.
(4) Exempt property. The following property is exempt from the
stormwater user's fee:
(a) Property which stormwater runoff is not discharged into or
through the stormwater flood control facilities, or both, of the city;
(b) Owners and/or operators of agricultural property, in the city,
upon which the owner and/or operator conducts activities that enable the
owner and/or operator to satisfy the requirements of a qualified farmer
or nurseryman, as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-6-207.
(c) Undeveloped property that is not altered from its natural
state.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-138
(d) Developed property with less than five hundred (500) total
square feet of impervious surface area per individual lot.
(e) Improved public transportation ways, including public
streets, roads, sidewalks, mobility paths, greenways and trails, airport
runways, and internal roads within public facilities which have been
conveyed to the city and are used by the general public for motor vehicle
transportation.
(f) Railroad tracks, provided, however, railroad stations,
maintenance buildings or other developed land will not be exempt from
stormwater user fees. (as added by Ord. #2014-26, June 2014, and
replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June 2015)
18-411. Payment of stormwater user's fees. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, stormwater user's fees for a non-exempt property that
receives utility service will be sent to the person named on the account, who
shall be responsible for the payment of such fees. For developed property having
no utility service the stormwater user's fees will be sent to the property owner,
who shall be responsible for the payment of such fees. Where multiple utility
service accounts exist on a single property, the stormwater user's fees may, for
good cause shown at the discretion of the city, be sent to the property owner,
who shall be responsible for the payment of such fees. (as added by Ord.
#2014-26, June 2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June 2015)
18-412. Billing procedures, delinquent bills and penalties for late
payment. (1) The stormwater user's fee must be set at a rate, and collected
on a schedule, established by ordinance.
(2) Stormwater user's fees will be paid to Cleveland Utilities (acting
as the collection agency for the city) by any method allowed by Cleveland
Utilities and shall become delinquent after the due date shown on the bill. If a
customer does not have water service or sewer service with Cleveland Utilities,
the city may bill the owner of such property directly through a separate billing
process. Such bills are subject to the same delinquency policy established
herein.
(3) Stormwater user's fees shall be subject to a late payment penalty.
The late payment penalty shall be applied in the same manner as Cleveland
Utilities' rules and regulations as it relates to utility bills. The city shall be
entitled to recover attorney's fees incurred in collecting delinquent stormwater
user's fees. Any charge due under this ordinance which shall not be paid may
be recovered at law by the city.
(4) Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-221-1107(b), the city,
through its agent Cleveland Utilities, may provide for the discontinuance of
water utility service to stormwater users who fail or refuse to pay stormwater
user fees, including the right not to accept payment of the water utility bill from
any user without receiving at the same time payment of any stormwater fees
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-139
owed by such user and not to re-establish utility services until such time as all
past due stormwater fees owed by such user have been paid and/or the user has
performed all acts and discharged all obligations required by this ordinance.
(5) Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-221-1112, each bill
for stormwater user's fees will contain the following statement in bold:
THIS FEE HAS BEEN MANDATED BY CONGRESS.
(as added by Ord. #2014-26, June 2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June
2015)
18-413. Stormwater fee adjustments and credits. (1) Adjustments
may be requested for errors or omissions on the customer's stormwater user fee.
Request for adjustment due to error or oversight of the stormwater user's fee
must be submitted to the city within thirty (30) days from the date of the last
bill containing the customer's stormwater user fee. Any appeal for adjustment
shall be filed in writing and shall state the grounds for the appeal. The director
of development and engineering services may request additional information
from the appealing party. Adjustments will be determined on the basis of the
number of dwelling units or amount of impervious surface area on the property.
The director of development and engineering services shall notify the appealing
party in writing of his decision. Adjustments can also be made by the city should
the city identify an error or oversight, provided the city notifies the customer in
advance of the adjustment.
(2) The city will provide a system of credits to reduce stormwater user
fees for properties on which stormwater control measures substantially
mitigates the peak discharge, runoff volume and/or runoff pollution flowing from
such properties or substantially decreases the city's cost of maintaining the
stormwater management system. The development and engineering services
department will develop written procedures to implement the credit system. No
credit will be authorized until the city council approves such written policies to
implement the system of credits; a copy of the approved procedures will be on
file with the development and engineering services department. The procedures
may allow credits retroactively for no more than one (1) past year. Any
reimbursement granted due to a credit will be reimbursed through the utility
billing system. Credits cannot exceed the stormwater utility charge for the
customer. Nothing herein will prevent the city council from modifying the
adopted system of credits, and such modifications may apply to holders of
existing credits.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a
municipality shall not refund an overpayment or collect amounts owed to the
municipality as a result of an underpayment of any charge or fee imposed for
stormwater if such overpayment, or underpayment is more than thirty-six (36)
months past the date payment was first due. (as added by Ord. #2014-26, June
2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-13, June 2015)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 18-140
18-414. [Deleted.] (as added by Ord. #2014-26, June 2014, and deleted
by Ord. #2015-13, June 2015)
19-1
1The agreements dated July 14, 1993, are of record in the office of the city
clerk. There is an agreement between Cleveland Electric System and
Southeastern Cable Company, Inc., for the cable company to attach wires to
poles of the electric system.
TITLE 19
ELECTRICITY AND GAS
CHAPTER
1. ELECTRICITY
2. GAS.
CHAPTER 1
ELECTRICITY
SECTION
19-101. To be furnished by Cleveland Utilities and Volunteer Electric
Cooperative.
19-101. To be furnished by Cleveland Utilities and Volunteer
Electric Cooperative. Electricity shall be provided to the City of Cleveland
and its inhabitants by Cleveland Utilities and by the Volunteer Electric
Cooperative as provided in appropriate agreements. The rights, powers, duties,
and obligations of the City of Cleveland and its inhabitants, are stated in the
agreements between the parties.1
19-2
1The agreement granting gas service to the city by Chattanooga Gas
Company is in Appendix B at the end of this municipal code.
CHAPTER 2
GAS
SECTION
19-201. To be furnished under franchise.
19-201. To be furnished under franchise. Gas service shall be
furnished for the City of Cleveland and its inhabitants by the Chattanooga Gas
Company. The rights, powers, duties, and obligations of the City of Cleveland,
its inhabitants, and the grantee of the franchise shall be clearly stated in the
written franchise agreement which shall be binding on all parties concerned.1
(1981 Code, § 13-401)
Change 15, August 11, 2014 20-1
TITLE 20
MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER
1. SCHOOLS--IN GENERAL.
2. BOARD OF EDUCATION.
3. SUPERINTENDENT OF CITY SCHOOLS.
4. CUSTODIAN OF SCHOOL FUND.
5. SHADE TREES.
6. PARKS AND CEMETERIES.
7. WATERVILLE GOLF COURSE.
8. FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS.
9. ALARM SYSTEM REGULATIONS.
10. DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED AND LOST PERSONAL PROPERTY.
11. OPEN BURNING.
12. WRECKERS AND TOWING SERVICES.
13. CODE OF ETHICS.
14. MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.
CHAPTER 1
SCHOOLS--IN GENERAL
SECTION
20-101. Persons entitled to go to schools; when suspension authorized.
20-101. Persons entitled to go to schools; when suspension
authorized. All children residing within the corporate limits of the city within
the scholastic age are entitled to the benefit of the free schools of the city as
prescribed by law, but the city board of education may expel or suspend such
students, as in its judgment may seem right or necessary, for disobedience or
insubordination. Children residing outside the corporate limits of the city may
be admitted to the benefits of the schools of the city upon the payment in
advance of such tuition fees as the board of education may prescribe; such fees
to be paid to the city clerk and custodian of the school fund, and to be collected
by such person as the board of education may direct. (1981 Code, § 20-1,
modified)
20-2
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF EDUCATION
SECTION
20-201. Created.
20-202. Powers.
20-203. To meet, qualify and elect a chairman who shall have various duties.
20-204. General duties.
20-205. Members to comply with and enforce state laws and regulations.
20-206. May establish night schools and middle and senior high schools.
20-207. To prescribe rules and regulations for schools.
20-208. To provide reports to the city council.
20-209. Subject to supervision of the city council.
20-210. No member to be personally interested in any school contract.
20-211. No member to participate in incurring debts beyond income.
20-212. Unlawful to hire unqualified teachers.
20-201. Created. (1) There is hereby created a city Board of Education
consisting of seven (7) members, all residing within the corporate limits of the
city. One (1) shall be elected from each of the five (5) districts established for
the election of city council members. The other two (2) shall be elected from the
city at large. The term of office shall be for four (4) years, and shall be
staggered. All elections of school board members shall be non-partisan, and
conducted at the same time and date as the regular election for city council
members. Members shall take office at the first regular board meeting in
September, following their election. Any member moving out of the district he
represents can no longer serve on the board as the district representative. Any
member moving out of the city limits can no longer serve on the board as an atlarge
member. Any vacancy on the board shall be filled by the city council, until
the next scheduled election, at which time a replacement shall be elected to
serve any remainder of the unexpired term. All board members shall receive
compensation at the same salary that is paid to the city council members and
be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of school board duties.
(2) At the city election in August, 1996, three of the school board
members shall be elected for four-year terms. Those members shall be one atlarge,
and members representing Districts #1 and 2. The candidate with the
highest number of votes in each contest shall be elected. Thereafter, these three
seats shall be elected every four years. The four most recently appointed
members shall continue to serve on the board until the other four seats are
voted upon in August, 1998.
(3) At the city election in August, 1998, the other four school board
members shall be elected for four-year terms. Those members shall be one at20-
3
large, and members representing Districts #3, 4, and 5. The candidate with the
highest number of votes in each contest shall be elected. Thereafter, these four
seats shall be elected every four years. (Ord. of Sept. 1995, as amended by Ord.
of 11/13/2000)
20-202. Powers. The board of education shall have full power as
trustees and directors to manage and control the public schools of the city; to
elect or employ a superintendent of city schools; to hire principals, teachers,
janitors, truant officers and other necessary employees; and to prescribe all
needful rules and regulations. (1981 Code, § 20-17)
20-203. To meet, qualify and elect a chairman who shall have
various duties. It shall be the duty of the city board of education to hold such
regular or special meetings as it may deem necessary. After election such board
members shall qualify by taking an oath faithfully to perform the duties of their
office and shall then organize by electing one of their number as chairman of
such board. It shall be the duty of the chairman to countersign all warrants
issued by the superintendent of city schools an authorized by the city board of
education; to preside at all meetings of such board of education; to appoint all
committees authorized by such board; to visit and inspect all school property in
the city from time to time; to make such general recommendations to such board
as he may deem for the best interest of the schools; to call special meetings of
the city board of education whenever in his judgement the interests of the public
schools require it or when requested by a majority of the board; and to sign any
and all contracts authorized by such board of education. (1981 Code, § 20-18,
modified)
20-204. General duties. It shall be the duty of the board of education
to elect all principals and teachers, to fix their salaries; to locate, build, repair,
furnish and keep in sanitary condition all school houses; to furnish grounds and
equipment; to fix all salaries and wages; to employ a truant officer and janitors
and such other persons as may be necessary to take care of the school property
and carry on the educational interests of the city; to take care of, manage and
control all school property; to buy or sell all school supplies, equipment,
furniture and fixtures deemed necessary; provided that, the purchase or sale of
all supplies, furniture, fixtures and materials of all and every kind shall be
made through a purchasing committee, which committee shall be appointed by
the chairman; and it is expressly provided that all expenditures for building
purposes, repairs, school supplies, furniture, etc., amounting to one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or more shall be let on competitive bids. It shall also be the
duty of such board to consider and approve all school building plans; to approve
or disapprove any proposed expansion or enlargement of the educational system;
to determine or approve the annual budget of expenditures for school purposes;
to establish the length of the school year; to advise the superintendent upon the
20-4
course of study and to adopt the proper courses; to require and consider reports
of the superintendent concerning the progress of the schools; to pass upon all
recommendations of the superintendent; and to act as a court of final appeal for
teachers, principals and school patrons in matters decided adversely to such
teacher, principals or patrons by the superintendent. (1981 Code, § 20-19,
modified)
20-205. Members to comply with and enforce state laws and
regulations. It is expressly made the duty of each member of the board of
education to comply with the school laws of the state in the management and
control of the public schools of the city; and such board shall require the city
superintendent of schools and all school teachers to comply with all the schools
laws of the state and with the rules and regulations of the state board of
education. (1981 Code, § 20-20)
20-206. May establish night schools and middle and senior high
schools. The city board of education is authorized to establish and maintain
night schools in which persons who are fifteen (15) or more years of age may be
enrolled and taught. Such night schools, when established, shall be a part of the
free common school system of the city and may be maintained out of the city
school fund at the discretion of the board of education. Such board of education
is also authorized to establish middle or senior high schools, or both, when
required, at the discretion of such board. (1981 Code, § 20-21, modified)
20-207. To prescribe rules and regulations for schools. The board
of education shall prescribe the rules and system of government of the school,
and shall take all such other and further action as it may deem necessary to
place the school system of the city on a sound basis, as required by the state
board of education for all elementary schools. (1981 Code, § 20-22)
20-208. To provide reports to the city council. It shall be the duty
of the city board of education through its chairman and secretary to provide
monthly reports to the city council, showing the receipts and expenditures of
such board of education for the respective months ending before such dates, and
such other reports as may be requested by the city council. At a special meeting
in April of the city council, such board of education shall make a written
itemized report or budget of the amount of money that will be required to run
the schools of the city efficiently for the ensuing year and particularly showing
the amount of money necessary to be appropriated by the city council to defray
the legitimate and necessary expenses thereof. (1981 Code, § 20-23, modified)
20-209. Subject to supervision of the city council. The city board
of education created shall be subject to the advice, direction and supervision of
the city council and the schools and school system of the city are under the
20-5
control of the city council acting by and through the city board of education.
(1981 Code, § 20-24, modified)
20-210. No member to be personally interested in any school
contract. No member of the board of education shall contract with such board
for any school supplies materials, furniture, fixtures, erections or repairs of any
school buildings, etc. (1981 Code, § 20-25)
20-211. No member to participate in incurring debts beyond
income. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a forfeiture of his office for
any member of the board of education to participate in incurring debts beyond
the legitimate school income for any particular school year. (1981 Code, § 20-26)
20-212. Unlawful to hire unqualified teachers. It is unlawful for the
board of education to employ any person as a teacher in the schools of the city
who does not possess the qualifications prescribed by law for teachers. (1981
Code, § 20-27)
20-6
CHAPTER 3
SUPERINTENDENT OF CITY SCHOOLS
SECTION
20-301. To be elected by board of education; general duties.
20-302. Additional duties.
20-303. Not to be personally interested in any school contract.
20-304. Not to hire unqualified teacher.
20-301. To be elected by board of education; general duties. The
board of education shall elect a superintendent of city schools and fix his
compensation. He shall possess all the qualifications prescribed by the state
board of education for school superintendents for cities the size of this city. Such
superintendent of city schools shall be the executive officer of the city board of
education. It shall be his duty to attend all meetings of the board; to act as ex
officio secretary of such board; and to make such recommendations as he deems
for the best interests of the city public schools. (1981 Code, § 20-41)
20-302. Additional duties. It shall also be the duty of the city
superintendent of schools:
(1) To keep a record of all of his official acts in a well-bound book to be
provided for that purpose.
(2) To issue all warrants authorized by the city board of education for
expenditures from the public school fund and to sign the same, together with the
chairman of the board.
(3) To keep a well-bound book in which he shall enter a record of all
warrants issued and countersigned, showing the amount of each warrant, to
whom issued, for what purpose, and to which school; and said city
superintendent shall include in his monthly reports to the city council a full,
clear and succinct statement of all warrants so signed by him.
(4) To keep in well-bound books to be provided by the city board of
education, a full and accurate record of such meeting of the board and an
account of all financial transactions. Such books shall be kept in his office.
Upon the expiration of the superintendent's term of office, all books and records
shall be delivered to his successor or to the chairman of the board of education.
(5) To keep on file in his office all contracts with school teachers
together with either the original or a copy of each teacher's state certificate; and
he shall not permit the employment of any person as a teacher who does not
possess the qualifications prescribed by law for teachers.
(6) To cause to be taken an enumeration or census of the scholastic
population of the city, at the time and in the manner prescribed by law, and to
cause the same to be filed with the county superintendent of school and such
20-7
other officials as may be prescribed by law, the compensation of such census
takers to be fixed by the board of education.
(7) Subject to the supervision and approval of the board of education:
(a) To act as executive officer of the school board and, generally,
to direct all employees connected with the schools.
(b) To have supervision of the public schools of the city and their
organization and classification.
(c) To plan and develop, with the aid of the principals and
teachers, courses of study, and to arrange daily programs of study,
instruction and recreation.
(d) To make such rules and regulations for the management and
government of the schools as he and the teachers may deem necessary
and proper.
(e) To elect and approve textbooks, apparatus and educational
supplies.
(f) To investigate applicants for positions in the schools, and to
recommend and nominate teachers for election by the board of education.
(g) To assign and transfer teachers and to recommend the
reelection or dismissal of teachers.
(h) To fix times and prescribe modes of regular examinations;
to supervise the promotion and classification of pupils; and to classify
applicants for admission to the schools.
(i) To see that registers and all other necessary records are
properly kept.
(j) To hold teachers' meetings as often as he thinks advisable,
for the discussion of methods of teaching, and matters pertaining to the
daily program, discipline, examination and other school subjects.
(k) To promote effective teamwork among teachers, and to effect
harmony and interest in all school work.
(l) To employ temporary or substitute teachers in cases of
sickness or inability of regular teachers.
(m) To suspend pupils when necessary.
(n) To have general supervision over the janitors' work and see
that it is properly done.
(o) To keep the board of education informed of the progress,
needs and conditions of the schools; to suggest means for improvements;
and to make such reports as the board may require.
(p) To attend all meetings of the board of education.
(q) In cases of vacancies occurring in the teaching staff, to
appoint teachers to fill such vacancies, subject to approval by the board
at its next regular or called meeting.
(r) To perform such other duties as may be required of him by
the city board of education; and to comply with all the requirements of
law and all the rules and regulations of the state board of education
20-8
pertaining to this city in the operation of its public schools. (1981 Code,
§ 20-42, modified)
20-303. Not to be personally interested in any school contract. The
superintendent of the city schools shall not contract with the board of education
for any school supplies, materials, furniture, fixtures, erection or repairs of any
school buildings. (1981 Code, § 20-43)
20-304. Not to hire unqualified teacher. It is unlawful for the city
school superintendent to recommend for employment any person as teacher in
the schools of the city who does not possess the qualifications prescribed by law
for teachers. (1981 Code, § 20-44, modified)
20-9
CHAPTER 4
CUSTODIAN OF SCHOOL FUND
SECTION
20-401. Bond.
20-402. Duties.
20-401. Bond. The city clerk as custodian of the school fund shall enter
into bond to be approved by the board in such sum as state law or the board
shall require for the faithful discharge of his duties and to account for all
moneys that come into his hands. (1981 Code, § 20-61, modified)
20-402. Duties. The custodian of the school fund shall disburse any or
all school funds belonging to the corporation on the order of the school board.
He shall keep in a book for that purpose a correct account of all receipts and
disbursements and make with the board an accurate settlement of all his
transactions at the close of each month and of each fiscal year. (1981 Code,
§ 20-62, modified)
20-10
CHAPTER 5
SHADE TREES
SECTION
20-501. Purpose and intent.
20-502. Definitions.
20-503. Administration; shade tree board.
20-504. Protection of existing trees.
20-505. Tree maintenance.
20-506. Removal of healthy public and street trees.
20-507. Planting and replacement.
20-508. Landmark tree.
20-509. Interference with municipal forester.
20-510. Penalties.
20-501. Purpose and intent. (1) The purposes of this chapter are to
promote the health, safety and public welfare in the City of Cleveland, and
consistent with forestry policy and practice for urban areas promulgated by the
Division of Forestry of the State of Tennessee:
(a) To encourage the planting of trees in the City of Cleveland;
(b) To encourage the maintenance and protection of existing
trees; and
(c) To encourage the removal of undesirable or diseased trees.
(2) The standards herein are hereby established in order to lessen air
pollution, to promote clean air quality by increasing dust filtration, to reduce
noise, heat, and glare, to prevent soil erosion, to improve surface drainage and
minimize flooding, to ensure that activities in one area do not adversely affect
activities within adjacent areas, to emphasize the importance of trees as a visual
screen, to beautify and enhance improved and undeveloped land, to maintain
the ambience of the city, to ensure that tree planting and removal does not
reduce property values, and to minimize the cost of construction and
maintenance of drainage systems necessitated by the increased flow and
diversion of surface waters. (1981 Code, § 22.5-21, as replaced by Ord. of Nov.
25, 1996)
20-502. Definitions. (1) "City" shall mean the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee.
(2) "Crownspread" - the distance from the ends of branches on one side
of the tree, through the trunk, to the ends of the branches on the other side.
(3) "Drip line" - all points directly underneath the end of the branches.
(4) "Line clearance" - removal of limbs and branches growing within
a set distance of electrical distribution lines.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-11
(5) "Private tree" - a tree growing in an area owned by a private
individual, business or commercial establishment, company, or industry, private
institution, or other area not owned by government entities.
(6) "Proper pruning method" - selective removal and thinning of the
upper portions of the tree using natural target techniques, taking into account
the natural structure of the tree.
(7) "Pruning" - selective removal and thinning of the upper portions of
the tree taking into account the shape and natural structure of the tree.
(8) "Public tree" - a tree growing in an area owned by the community,
including parks, public buildings, schools, hospitals, and other areas to which
the public has free access.
(9) "Public utility" - that section of local government in charge of
electrical distribution in the community and having responsibility for keeping
distribution lines free of hazards, including trees.
(10) "Shrub" - a woody plant with a multiple stem capable of growing
to a height of up to fifteen (15) feet.
(11) "Street tree" - a tree growing within a public right-of-way along a
street, in a median or the greenway.
(12) "Topping" - arbitrary removal of various portions of the tree,
thereby leaving stubs, with no regard for the natural structure of the tree.
(13) "Tree" - a woody plant, at least one (1) inch in diameter, with a
single trunk, or multiple trunk capable of growing to a height of fifteen (15) feet
or more.
(14) "Utility tree" - a tree that will contact any utility structure. (1981
Code, § 22.5-22, as amended by Ord. of March 1993, as replaced by Ord. of Nov.
25, 1996, and amended by Ord. #2015-14, July 2015)
20-503. Administration; shade tree board. The shade tree board
shall be responsible for carrying out the tree ordinance:
(1) Creation and establishment of a city shade tree board. There is
hereby created and established the Cleveland Shade Tree Board which shall be
composed of nine (9) members appointed by the mayor and approved by the city
council. Five (5) members shall be appointed for two-year terms, and four (4)
members shall be appointed for one-year terms. At the end of one year, four (4)
members shall be appointed to two-year terms to replace those members whose
terms have expired; and thereafter all members shall be appointed for two-year
terms. All members of the shade tree board shall be citizens and residents of
the city. One member shall be a member of the city planning commission; one
shall be a city council member; one member shall be a private developer; one
member shall be a representative of the public utility; one member shall be a
representative of Main Street-Cleveland; and four (4) members shall be from the
community at large.
(2) Compensation. Members of the board shall serve without
compensation.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-12
(3) Duties and responsibilities. The duties of the tree board shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) Develop and administer a master tree plan for the city
subject to review by the city transportation director;
(b) Develop and review, as necessary, recommend policies to
carry out the intent of this chapter;
(c) Assist in coordinating tree-related activities;
(d) Coordinate publicity concerning trees and tree programs;
(e) Conduct an Arbor Day ceremony;
(f) Provide tree information to the community;
(g) Maintain a recommended tree list for the community;
(h) Recognize groups and individuals completing tree projects;
(i) Coordinate donations of trees or money to purchase trees;
(j) Hear citizen concerns regarding tree problems during
scheduled meetings; and
(k) Perform other tree-related duties and opportunities that
arise from time to time.
(4) Operation. The board shall choose its own officers, make its own
rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
(5) Review by city council. The city council shall have the right to
review the conduct and acts of the shade tree board. Any person may appeal
from any ruling of the shade tree board to the city council who may hear the
matter and make a final decision. Such appeal shall be made within ten (10)
days after the ruling of the shade tree board and shall be filed in the office of the
city clerk. An appeal shall stay the ruling of the shade tree board until a
decision is made by the city council. (1981 Code, § 22.5-23, modified, as replaced
by Ord. of Nov. 25, 1996)
20-504. Protection of existing trees. (1)(a) No person shall plant,
spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut aboveground or otherwise
disturb any tree or shrub by digging, boring, removal, concrete
constructions, etc., on any public right-of-way or municipal property
without first filing an application and obtaining a permit.
(b) The forester shall issue the permits as are required by this
chapter.
(c) The forester shall issue the permit provided for in this
chapter if, in the forester's judgement, the proposed work is desirable and
the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory
nature. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration,
and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and
in the manner described.
(d) Applications. (i) Applications for permits must be made
forty-eight hours in advance of the time the work is to be started.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-13
(ii) Content. The application shall contain, but shall not
be limited to the following:
(A) The number of trees and shrubs to be planted,
and the location, variety and method of planting;
(B) The scope of work, including description of
pruning, spraying, trimming, fertilizing, etc.;
(C) Assurance. The written agreement of each
person who applies for such permit that said person will
comply with the requirements, regulations and standards of
this chapter;
(D) The time schedule for the proposed work; and
(E) Such other information as the forester deems
necessary for the protection of the public.
(iii) Applications for permits may be made by telephone.
(iv) Tree locations will be staked at urban foresters
discretion.
(2)(a) All trees on public rights-of-way near any excavation or
construction work shall be guarded with a substantial fence, frame, or
box not more than 30 inches high and eight feet square, or a barrier a
distance in feet from the tree equal to the distance of the trunk in inches
at 4.5 feet above the ground, whichever is greater, and all building
material, dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier.
(b) No person shall excavate any tunnels, trenches, or lay any
drive within a radius of ten feet from any public tree without first
obtaining a permit.
(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to utility
companies, their agents, employees or subcontractors, providing the
forester has participated in a preconstruction meeting, except to the
extent that the forester judges it necessary to so regulate excavations
within a radius of five feet from a public tree for such operations.
(d) Grade changes and trenching within the crown spread (ends
of branches) of public trees should be conducted in such a way as to
minimize root system damage. Owners of private trees are encouraged
to consult the tree board before proceeding with these activities.
(3) As it pertains to commercial and residential development, the city
maintains that it is in the best interest of all concerned to save as many existing
trees as practical to maintain the ambience of our city.
(4) The public utility shall keep the board informed of all tree
trimming activities of street trees and will advise them of all trees that must be
removed before removal except in the case of emergency or special
circumstances. (1981 Code, § 22.5-24, modified, as replaced by Ord. of Nov. 25,
1996)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-14
20-505. Tree maintenance. (1) Tree topping of all public trees is
prohibited, except as the first stage of tree removal, and topping of private trees
is strongly discouraged.
(2) Obstruction of view - Pruning. (a) It is the duty of any person
owning or occupying real property on any street where there are trees or
shrubs to prune those trees and shrubs in such a manner that they will
not obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street or alley
intersection.
(b) The normal minimum clearance of any overhanging portion
of trees shall be ten feet over sidewalks and fourteen feet over all streets,
unless in the judgement of the urban forester and city transportation
director, additional clearance is necessary for traffic safety, a higher
minimum may be required.
(3) Tree maintenance may include pruning, fertilizing, watering, insect
and diseases control or other tree care activities. The city shall take
responsibility for those maintenance activities needed to keep the public trees
reasonably healthy and minimize the risk of hazard trees could cause to
residents and visitors of the city. Determination of maintenance needs will be
made by the tree board following the recommendation of the urban forester.
Tree care may be accomplished by trained city personnel or by contract with
qualified commercial tree care companies, under the direction of the urban
forester.
(4) Care and maintenance of private trees are encouraged to minimize
safety hazards to people and the health risk to other trees in the community.
The tree board will provide information in a timely manner to residents about
all aspects of tree care including the latest techniques and procedures currently
being practiced.
(5) Tree pruning in the vicinity of power lines shall be undertaken by
the public utility to assure the supply of electricity to its customers. Drop crotch
pruning and pruning to laterals are the recognized methods. Where practicable,
the utility shall undertake a program of replacing removed trees with
appropriate replacement tree species or cultivars recommended by the urban
forester.
(6) The standard tree pruning method will be branch collar pruning
as opposed to stubs or flush cuts. Large limbs and branches will be pre-cut
(3-cut method) to prevent excessive peeling of the bark, followed by cutting the
remaining stub.
(7) The tree board will recommend to the urban forester areas that
need to be pruned along streets and sidewalks. (1981 Code, § 22.5-21, as
replaced by Ord. of Nov. 25, 1996)
20-506. Tree removal. (1) Dead, diseased, and dying trees that pose a
safety or health risk to residents, utility lines, service lines or to other trees
shall be removed in a timely manner. This section will apply to public trees.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-15
The urban forester will make the risk determination. The appropriate
governmental department will be contacted with the recommendation that a
tree be removed. All tree removal will be through the urban forester who may
contract with the public utility for removal.
(2) Removal of healthy public and street trees. As used in this
subsection, the terms "public tree" and "street tree" are referencing those trees
defined in § 20-502, but must be five inches (5") in diameter with that required
diameter being measured four and one half feet (4 1/2') above ground level in
order to qualify for the following procedures. Those public and street trees not
meeting the five inch (5") diameter requirements shall be removed at the
discretion of the urban forester.
It is the purpose of this subsection that no healthy public or street trees
equal to or greater than five inches (5") in diameter with that required diameter
being measured four and one half feet (4 1/2') above ground level shall be
removed by the city, its staff, or any individual before executing the following
process:
(a) The urban forester, or his/her designee, shall take pictures
of the healthy public or street tree(s) that is/are proposed to be removed,
and they shall be placed on the city's website along with the address
and/or approximate location of the tree(s). A notice of the date, time, and
location of the respective shade tree board meeting and discussion shall
be placed alongside the pictures.
(b) As the aforementioned notice is placed on the internet, the
urban forester, or his/her designee, must also send a copy of the pictures
and the location of the tree(s) to each member of the shade tree board via
e-mail.
(c) In addition to the publicized pictures, public notice, and
shade tree board notice, the urban forester, or his/her designee, must
place a non-permanent "X" on the tree(s) proposed to be removed and post
a sign with a phone number and the urban forester's e-mail address in
close proximity to the physical location of the tree stating that the tree
may be removed. The shade tree board shall approve the format, size, and
information included on this public notice sign, and the approved sign
shall be uniformly used by the urban forester in posting the notice. The
urban forester shall regularly monitor and keep record of all persons
communicating their questions, comments, and concerns. These
comments and e-mails shall be provided by the urban forester to all
members of the shade tree board via e-mail.
(d) If the previous steps are taken, then the shade tree board
will commence discussion and action upon the city's request to remove the
healthy public or street tree(s) at the next regular scheduled meeting.
The shade tree board may decide to hold a specially called meeting before
the next regular scheduled meeting, provided that it is at least fifteen
(15) days after all notices and pictures are placed on the city's website,
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-16
sent to the board members, and posted in the physical location of the
tree(s). This shall provide ample time for citizens to comment on the
scenario to the urban forester and the shade tree board.
(e) If the shade tree board approves the urban forester's request
for removal of the healthy public or street tree(s) at the next meeting,
then the city shall proceed to remove the tree(s). However, should the
shade tree board deny the urban forester's request, then the decision may
be appealed pursuant to § 20-503(5).
(f) Should an emergency arise that would provide necessary
means to remove one (1) or more healthy public or street tree(s), the City
of Cleveland shall have the authority to remove the tree(s) without
following the previously mentioned procedures. However, the urban
forester shall communicate via e-mail the circumstances justifying the
emergency removal to all members of the shade tree board.
(g) The removal process set forth in (2) is not applicable to the
removal of healthy public trees and healthy street shade trees located in
or on the Spring Branch Industrial Park Property (tax identification
number 055, parcel 046.00, and more specifically described in the deed
recorded in book 2143, page 640 in the Register of Deeds office of Bradley
County) and the remaining property in the Cleveland/Bradley Industrial
Park (tax identification number 065, parcels 015.15 and 015.13). Removal
of any public trees located in or on these parcels are hereby exempted
from the removal process described in (2), and public trees on this parcel
may be removed without the approval of the shade tree board or the city
council. (1981 Code, § 22.5-22, as replaced by Ord. of Nov. 25, 1996, and
amended by Ord. #2015-14, July 2015 and Ord. #2015-31, Nov. 2015)
20-507. Planting and replacement. The city shall replace all public
or street trees that require removal including, but not limited to, trees requiring
removal by reason of disease or storm damage. If it is undesirable at the
location of removal, then a new location for replanting will be determined by the
tree board. Each tree removed must be replaced on a one-to-one basis. Spacing
of trees shall be determined by the forester according to local conditions, the
species, cultivars, or varieties used, their mature height, spread and form.
Generally, all large trees shall be planted forty feet on-center; medium-sized
trees shall be planted approximately thirty-five feet on-center; and all small
trees shall be planted approximately twenty-five feet on-center. No tree shall
be planted closer than thirty feet from street intersections and no closer than
fifteen feet from driveways and alleys and no closer than ten feet to utility poles
and fire hydrants under normal circumstances.
(1) Size. Unless otherwise specified by the tree board, all medium to
large cultivars and varieties shall comply with the American Association of
Nurserymen standards and be at least one and one-fourth (1¼) to one and
one-half (1½) inches in diameter six (6) inches above ground level, and at least
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-17
eight (8) to ten (10) feet in height when planted. The crown shall be in good
balance with the trunk. All small deciduous tree species and their cultivars or
varieties shall be at least five (5) to six (6) feet or more in height and have six
(6) or more branches.
(2) Tree removal to ground level is considered part of the tree removal
process (0 to 6 inches from the soil is considered ground level). (1981 Code,
§ 22.5-27, as replaced by Ord. of Nov. 25, 1996)
20-508. Landmark tree. The shade tree board will compose a list of any
public trees which qualify as a "landmark tree". A tree may qualify as a
landmark tree at the determination of the city shade tree board. The tree board
shall use criteria such as rarity, old age, association with a historical event or
person, abnormality, or scenic enhancement. Private trees may also qualify as
a "landmark tree" the request of landowner. The tree board shall keep a list of
all landmark trees, both public and private. (1981 Code, § 22.5-28, as replaced
by Ord. of Nov. 25, 1996)
20-509. Interference with municipal forester. No person shall
hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the municipal forester or any of his
assistants while they are engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement
of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an
attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court
of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of
any property within the city. (as added by Ord. of Nov. 25, 1996)
20-510. Penalties. Any person violating this chapter shall be punished
as provided for in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cleveland. Each
subsequent day that any violation continues unabated shall constitute a
separate offense. (1981 Code, § 22.5-29, as replaced by Ord. of Nov. 25, 1996)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-18
CHAPTER 6
PARKS AND CEMETERIES
SECTION
20-601. Hours regulated.
20-602. Park rules and regulations.
20-603. Skate park rules and regulations.
20-601. Hours regulated. Except for unusual and unforeseen
emergencies, parks and cemeteries shall be open to the public every day of the
year during designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each
individual park or cemetery shall be as established by the parks and recreation
director and posted therein for public information. City parks, facilities and
cemeteries will be closed for public use during the hours posted on the signs in
each park or cemetery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the parks or facilities during
said hours except for public participation or attendance during activities or
events specifically authorized by the city manager. Any section or part of any
park or cemetery may be declared closed to the public by the administrator at
any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and
stated intervals, daily or otherwise, and either entirely or to merely certain uses,
as the administrator shall find reasonably necessary. The physical closing of the
parks or municipally owned cemeteries will be the responsibility of the parks
and recreation department. Cemeteries shall be closed from sunset to sunrise
each day. (1981 Code, § 14-184, as amended by Ord. #2003-33, Nov. 2003)
20-602. Park rules and regulations. (1) Definitions. As used in this
section the following definitions will apply:
(a) "Department." The Parks and Recreation Department of the
City of Cleveland.
(b) "Director." The Director of the Parks and Recreation
Department of the City of Cleveland, or his or her designee.
(c) "Park." Includes any city property currently or hereafter
used as a city park, including, but not limited to, Deer Park, Fletcher
Park, Johnston Park, Elrod Park, Mosby Park, Tinsley Park, and any
park located on or adjacent to a city school. As used in this chapter, the
word "park" also includes the greenway throughout the corporate limits
of the City of Cleveland.
(d) "Pavilion." Includes the pavilions located at Deer Park and
Tinsley Park.
(2) Rules and regulations. (a) No person shall ride, park or drive any
bicycle, motorcycle, motor vehicle, skate board, roller blade, roller skate,
land sailing device, horse or pony on, over or through any park or portion
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-19
of a park designated by signage as being restricted from such activities.
Parking of vehicles shall be limited to those areas specifically designated
for that purpose.
No person shall be permitted to hunt, capture, net or harm any
living creature or possess any device, weapon or item designated or
designed for such purposes in any park. However, to the extent allowed
by state law, individuals may fish within the creeks or streams or other
bodies of water that are located within a city park.
(b) No fire shall be built except in fireplaces or grills designed
for such purpose. All embers shall be disposed of in a proper manner.
(c) All animals brought to any park shall be properly restrained
on a leash or similar device not exceeding 8 feet in length. It is unlawful
to allow or permit any domestic animal to run at large in any park, or to
enter any lake, pond, fountain or stream therein. The owner or handler
of any animal shall also be responsible for the proper disposal of the
animal's waste. Any person with an animal in their possession at any
park shall be responsible for the conduct of the animal.
(d) No person shall engage in any activity that interferes with
the activities of those persons or groups who have obtained a special use
permit from the department.
(e) No person shall bring glass containers into a park.
(f) No person shall deposit any refuse or trash brought from
private property into receptacles located in a park. Nothing in this
subsection is intended to prohibit the disposal of refuse generated from
park use or activities, such as picnics, parties, barbeques, etc., so long as
all such refuse and waste is disposed of in receptacles provided for such
purpose.
(g) No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate or deface any
structure, statue, fountain, fence, railing, bench, shrub, tree or any other
property in any park.
(h) No person shall use, place or erect any sign, poster,
billboard, bulletin board, post, pole, or device of any kind for advertising
in any park; or attach any bill, poster or sign to any tree or structure
within any park without the prior written permission of the director.
(i) No person shall place or erect any text, trailer, amusement
device, or other similar structure in any park without the prior written
permission of the director.
(j) No person shall swim or bathe in any area not designated for
such purpose. Swimming shall be permitted in designated areas only.
All persons using designated swimming areas shall obey all posted rules
and/or the instructions of lifeguards and/or other department employees.
(k) No person shall wash any person, object or animal in any
stream, pond, lake or fountain that is located in or on any park.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-20
(l) No person shall possess, consume, dispense, convey, or give
away any alcoholic beverages, including beer, in any park. No person
shall bring any alcoholic beverages, including beer, into a park. However,
this section shall not be construed to prohibit the possession or
consumption of beer which is sold at the Waterville Golf Course.
(m) All sales, raffles or other fund-raising activities (including
sports tournaments) are expressly prohibited unless prior written
permission is obtained from the director.
(n) No person shall possess any firework, firecracker, explosive,
bow and arrow, BB gun or slingshot in any park without prior written
permission from the director.
(o) No person shall refuse to leave a park when directed to leave
by a department employee or officer of the Cleveland Police Department.
(p) No person shall play car stereos, radios, portable audio
equipment (including, but not limited to, tape players, CD players, or
boom boxes) so loudly that they interfere with normal conversations or
cause annoying vibrations at a distance of 75 feet or more.
(3) Priority of use. Activities and programs scheduled by the
department will have first priority for use of all parks and facilities, including
pavilions.
(4) Pavilion reservation. Individuals or groups which desire to reserve
a pavilion may be granted special use permits by the department but will be
subject to a permit fee. Special conditions of use will be established by the
department and noted on the permit. Individuals or groups who obtain a special
use permit must have the permit in their possession and be able to display it
upon demand at the time and place listed in the permit.
(5) Enforcement. The director, as well as members of the Cleveland
Police Department, shall, in conjunction with their other duties imposed by law,
enforce the provisions of this section.
(6) Ejection citation for violations. The director and members of the
Cleveland Police Department shall have the authority to eject from all parks any
person who violates any rule or regulation promulgated under this section.
Officers of the Cleveland Police Department are further authorized to issue
citations for any violation of any rule or regulation promulgated under this
section.
(7) Penalty. In addition to ejection, a violation of any provision of this
section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00 for each violation. (as
added by Ord. #2004-06, March 2004, and amended by Ord. #2010-14, May
2010, and Ord. #2010-21, June 2010)
20-603. Skate park rules and regulations. (1) Definitions. As used
in this section, the following definitions will apply:
(a) "Department." The Parks and Recreation Department of the
City of Cleveland.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-21
(b) "Director." The Director of the Parks and Recreation
Department of the City of Cleveland, or his or her designee.
(c) "Skate park" means the skate park located within Tinsley
Park.
(2) Rules and regulations. (a) The skate park is unsupervised.
However, department staff will be on site at irregular times. Skaters
must follow the directions of department staff or city police. No person
shall refuse to leave the skate park when directed to leave by the director,
department staff, or an officer of the Cleveland Police Department.
(b) Skaters are using the skate park at their own risk. There
is an inherent risk of injury in skating and participation in skate park
activities. Users of the skate park, by their participation, accept these
risks.
(c) No skater may use the skate park without first obtaining a
skate park sticker from the parks and recreation department. In order to
obtain a skate park sticker, the skater must sign a waiver form. If the
skater is a minor, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of the minor must
also execute the waiver. Waiver forms and stickers may be obtained from
the parks and recreation department during normal operating hours.
(d) The sticker must be placed on the skater's helmet and be
clearly visible at all times while the skater is using the skate park. No
one may use the skate park without wearing a helmet with the
appropriate sticker attached to their helmet.
(e) All skaters must wear appropriate safety equipment and
shoes at all times. All skaters must wear a helmet. Helmets must fit well
and must have the helmet straps securely fastened at all times.
Kneepads, wrist pads, and elbow pads are strongly recommended to be
used at all times.
(f) Only skateboards and in-line skates are permitted in the
skate park. Bicycles, scooters, mountain bikes and all other motorized
devices are prohibited. The department reserves the right to post times
for certain uses and to discontinue certain uses if necessary.
(g) Use or consumption of any of the following items is
prohibited at all times in the skate park: food, chewing gum, glass
containers, cigarettes or other tobacco products, alcohol, or drugs.
(h) Because rain, snow, or other moisture can make the skate
park surface slippery, the skate park is considered closed when the skate
park surface area is wet and/or during periods of inclement weather.
(i) The skate park is to be used as designed. No modifications
to the surface or features are allowed. No ramps, jumps, or obstacles may
be added within the skate park. No other items such as benches or tables
may be used as ramps or jumps in the skate park. No personally owned
ramps, boxes or other similar devices are allowed in the skate park.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-22
(j) Spectators are not permitted entry into the skate park area
unless they are wearing the required safety equipment, including a
helmet with a city-issued sticker. Spectators who enter the skate park
area are considered skaters and are subject to the same rules as skaters.
(k) Personal property is the responsibility of the skater and may
not be stored at the skate park.
(l) Profanity, foul language, recklessness and/or boisterous
behavior are prohibited in the skate park.
(m) Vandalism or defacing, including, but not limited to, graffiti,
stickers and tagging, is prohibited.
(n) Skating is prohibited on the Tinsley Park tennis courts,
sidewalks, steps, tables, or any other area of Tinsley Park outside of the
skate park fence.
(o) The skate park closes at dark. The skate park may not be
used after dark.
(p) Anytime the skate park fence is locked it is considered
closed. No person may use the skate park at any time when it is closed.
(q) Organized events require a special event permit from the
parks and recreation department.
(r) Skaters ten (10) and under must be accompanied by a parent
or guardian.
(s) Juveniles under eighteen (18) years old are not allowed on
any portion of the greenway between the house of 11:00 P.M. and 6:00
A.M. unless accompanied and supervised by a responsible adult. The city
shall post signs at each of the greenway trail entrances to notify the
public of this rule.
(3) Priority of use. Activities and programs scheduled by the
department will have first priority for use of the skate park.
(4) Skate park reservation. Individuals or groups which desire to
reserve the skate park may be granted special use permits by the department
but will be subject to a permit fee. Special conditions of use will be established
by the department and noted on the permit. Individuals or groups who obtain
a special use permit must have the permit in their possession and be able to
display it upon demand at the time and place listed in the permit.
(5) Enforcement. The director, the employees of the recreation
department, as well as members of the Cleveland Police Department, shall, in
conjunction with their other duties imposed by law, enforce the provisions of this
section.
(6) Penalties for violations of skate park rules. The director and
members of the Cleveland Police Department shall have the authority to eject
from the skate park any person who violates any skate park rule or regulation
under this section. Officers of the Cleveland Police Department are further
authorized to issue citations for any violation of any skate park rule or
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-23
regulation under this section. A skater may be issued a citation and ejected for
the same violation.
In addition to or in lieu of ejection from the skate park and/or the
issuance of a citation, the director, employees of the recreation department, and
officers of the Cleveland Police Department may also elect to, and are hereby
authorized to, utilize any or all of the following measures to deal with any
violation of the skate park rules and regulations:
(a) Verbal warning
(b) Incident report write-up
(c) Notification to parents or guardians if the skater is under
age eighteen (18).
(d) Suspension of skate park privileges for a specified time.
(7) Civil penalty for citations. If a citation is issued to a skater for a
violation of any provision of this section or any of the skate park rules, a skater,
or any other person found guilty of such violation in municipal court, shall be
assessed a civil penalty not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation,
plus court costs and litigation tax as otherwise specified in the Cleveland
Municipal Code.
(8) Compliance with other laws. These rules and regulations are in
addition to any other applicable city ordinances, including city park rules and
regulations under §§ 20-601 or 20-602, or any other applicable state and/or
federal laws. (as added by Ord. #2008-55, Aug. 2008, and amended by Ord.
#2015-16, July 2015)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-24
CHAPTER 7
WATERVILLE GOLF COURSE
SECTION
20-701. Parks and recreation director to oversee operations.
20-702. Use of fees.
20-703. [Deleted.]
20-704. Waterville Golf Course Advisory Committee.
20-705. Committee's annual review of operations and recommendations.
20-706. Discounts - senior golfers, junior golfers and promotional.
20-707. Use of private carts.
20-708. Prohibition on private coolers or containers.
20-709. Rates and fees to be set by resolution.
20-710. Reservation of right to lease or contract for management.
20-701. Parks and recreation director to oversee operations.
Waterville Golf Course is hereby declared to be a division of the Parks and
Recreation Department. The operation and maintenance of the course shall be
the responsibility of the parks and recreation director, under the general
direction of the city manager. (Ord. of Dec. 1995, as amended by Ord. of Dec.
1998, and Ord. #2008-51, Aug. 2008)
20-702. Use of fees. Rates and fees for various golf services shall be
used for costs associated with the course, including operating expenses,
replacement of golf carts and maintenance equipment, and all improvements to
the golf course, clubhouse, and appurtenant maintenance and storage facilities.
(Ord. of Dec. 1995, as replaced by Ord. #2005-47, Jan. 2006)
20-703. [Deleted.] (Ord. of Dec. 1995, as deleted by Ord. #2005-47, Jan.
2006)
20-704. Waterville Golf Course Advisory Committee. There is
hereby created the Waterville Golf Course Advisory Committee, consisting of
two city council members appointed by the city council, the city manager, and
three golfers having annual memberships at Waterville Golf Course at the time
of their election. The three golfers shall be elected by the vote of those golfers
holding annual memberships on the first day of January of each calendar year.
The election shall be held on the first Monday following the first day of January
of each calendar year, or the following day if the first Monday of January is a
legal holiday declared by the city council. The election shall be held at a time
and place set by the parks and recreation director. Voting by proxy will not be
allowed. The term for each golfer representative shall be for one year. There
shall be no limit to the number of terms a golfer representative may serve. In
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-25
the event of a vacancy occurring during the year, the other two golfer
representatives shall select another golfer representative from among the active
annual membership roster to fill the unexpired term. (Ord. of Dec. 1995, as
amended by Ord. of Dec. 1998, Ord. #2005-47, Jan. 2006, and Ord. #2008-51,
Aug. 2008)
20-705. Committee's annual review of operations and
recommendations. (1) By the last day of February of each year, the
Waterville Golf Course Advisory Committee shall have been called together by
the parks and recreation director, and shall have submitted written
recommendations to the director. The director shall consider these
recommendations for inclusion in the director's annual budget request to the city
manager. The city manager shall forward copies of the recommendations to the
mayor and city council as part of the annual budget process.
(2) The annual report on recommendations required in subsection
20-705(1) shall include the following:
(a) A thorough review of the financial condition of the course.
(b) A recommendation on the rate schedule for the next year.
(c) A recommendation on the capital improvements to the
course or clubhouse for the next fiscal year.
(d) A recommendation on the capital equipment to be purchased
in the next fiscal year.
(e) A recommendation on the number of annual memberships
to be authorized in the next calendar year, and whether they should be
limited by category.
(f) Any other recommendations which the committee believes
will enhance the operation of the course. (Ord. of Dec. 1995, as amended
by Ord. of Dec. 1998, Ord. #2005-47, Jan. 2006, and Ord. #2008-51, Aug.
2008)
20-706. Discounts - senior golfers, junior golfers and promotional.
It is the intent of this chapter that senior golfers (defined as those persons 62
years of age or older) and junior golfers (defined as those persons under 18) shall
be given a reasonable discount for some costs during non-peak usage times.
Discounts of twenty percent (20%) from the normal rates shall be established in
the rate schedule for senior golfers and junior golfers for both annual
memberships and weekday green fees. However, there shall be no senior golfer
or junior golfer discounts given for weekend or holiday green fees, trail fees, or
any cart rental fees. However, a non-cart owner, when riding with a private cart
owner, can be given a discount from the normal cart rental fee of up to twenty
percent (20%), provided that the discount is established in the rate schedule.
Promotional discounts may also be offered to golfers periodically if approved by
the parks and recreation director. Promotional discounts may include reduced
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-26
green fees so long as they are approved by the parks and recreation director.
(Ord. of Dec. 1995, as replaced by Ord. #2005-47, Jan. 2006)
20-707. Use of private carts. It is the intent of this chapter to
grandfather existing private carts currently stored at Waterville Golf Course,
but to discontinue any new private carts being stored or used on the course.
Therefore, only those golfers currently paying a cart storage fee as of November
18, 1995, shall be entitled to continue said cart use. That use can only continue
so long as the current cart owner(s) and permittee(s) continue to own his/her
existing golf cart. No additional dual ownerships and permits beyond those
existing on November 18, 1995, and paid in full, shall be allowed. No current
private cart owner and permittee may transfer, swap, sell, give, bequeath or in
any manner relinquish his grandfathered right to continue using his/her private
cart to any other person, firm, corporation or partnership. If any current cart
owner and permittee shall allow the owner's cart storage fee to become
delinquent for any reason, the owner shall immediately forfeit the right to
continue private cart usage. (Ord. of Dec. 1995, as amended by Ord. of Dec.
1998, Ord. #2005-47, Jan. 2006, and Ord. #2008-51, Aug. 2008)
20-708. Prohibition on private coolers or containers. The use of
private coolers or similar containers is hereby prohibited on the Waterville Golf
Course property. (Ord. of Dec. 1995, as amended by Ord. of Dec. 1998, replaced
by Ord. #2005-47, Jan. 2006, amended by Ord. #2008-51, Aug. 2008, and
replaced by Ord. #2010-14, May 2010)
20-709. Rates and fees to be set by resolution. The city council shall
establish and amend the rates and fees for the Waterville Golf Course by
resolution. The current rates and fees established by resolution shall be posted
in the pro shop in a conspicuous place at all times, and a copy kept in the office
of the parks and recreation director. (Ord. of Dec. 1995, as amended by Ord. of
Dec. 1998, and Ord. #2008-51, Aug. 2008)
20-710. Reservation of right to lease or contract for management.
Nothing herein shall preclude the city council from entering into a lease
agreement or a management contract pertaining to Waterville Golf Course. The
city council specifically reserves the right to enter into a lease agreement or
management contract in the future. (Ord. of Dec. 1995, as replaced by
Ord. #2005-47, Jan. 2006, and amended by Ord. #2008-51, Aug. 2008)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-27
CHAPTER 8
FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS
SECTION
20-801. Policy.
20-802. Definitions.
20-803. Unlawful practice.
20-804. Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.
20-805. Discrimination in the financing of housing.
20-806. Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services.
20-807. Exemption.
20-808. Administration.
20-809. Education and conciliation.
20-810. Enforcement.
20-811. Investigations; subpoenas; giving of evidence.
20-812. Enforcement by private persons.
20-801. Policy. It is the policy of the City of Cleveland to provide,
within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city. (Ord. of
Aug. 1995)
20-802. Definitions. (1) "Dwelling" means any building, structure, or
portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as
a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for
sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building,
structure, or portion thereof.
(2) "Family" includes a single individual.
(3) "Person" includes one or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual
companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations,
trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and judiciaries.
(4) "To rent" includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to
grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
(5) "Discriminatory housing practice" means an act that is unlawful
under §§ 20-804, 20-805 or 20-806. (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
20-803. Unlawful practice. Subject to the provisions of § 20-807(2), the
prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in
§ 20-804 shall apply to:
(1) All dwellings except as exempted by subsection (2).
(2) Nothing in § 20-804 shall apply to:
(a) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner:
Provided that such private individual owner does not own more than
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-28
three such single-family houses at any one time: Provided further that
in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private
individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or
who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the
exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one
such sale within any twenty-four month period: Provided further that
such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor
is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary
agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the
sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one
time: Provided further that the sale or rental of any such single-family
house shall be excepted from the application of this title only if such
house is sold or rented.
(i) without the use in any manner of the sale or rental
facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker,
agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or
agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person and
(ii) without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of
§ 20-804(3), but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other
such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the
title, or
(b) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies
one of such living quarters as his residence.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
(a) He has, within the preceding twelve months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein, or
(b) He has, within the preceding twelve months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing
sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein, or
(c) He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
20-804. Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. As made
applicable by § 20-803 and except as exempted by §§ 20-803(2) and 20-807, it
shall be unlawful:
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-29
(1) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any personal because of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, familial status or handicap.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, familial status or handicap.
(3) To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination
based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status or handicap,
or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
(4) To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, familial status or handicap that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
(5) For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, familial status or handicap.
(6) To refuse to permit, at the expense of the person with a disability,
reasonable modifications are necessary to afford that person full enjoyment of
the premises.
(7) To refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or service, when such accommodations are necessary to afford a
person with a disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. (Ord. of
Aug. 1995)
20-805. Discrimination in the financing of housing. It shall be
unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or
other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in
whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan
or other financial assistance to a person applying therefore for the purpose of
purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to
discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or
other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of
the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status or handicap of such
person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or
other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial
assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or
occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other
financial assistance is to be made or given: Provided, that nothing contained in
this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in
§ 20-803(2). (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-30
20-806. Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. It
shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation
in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers organization or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings,
or to discriminate against him in the terms of conditions of such access,
membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, familial status or handicap. (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
20-807. Exemption. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association, or society, or any non-profit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy
of dwelling which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national
origin, familial status or handicap. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit
a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary
purpose or purposes provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than
a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to
its members or from giving preference to its members. (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
20-808. Administration. (1) The authority and responsibility for
administering this Act shall be with the mayor.
(2) The mayor may delegate any of these functions, duties, and powers
to employees of the city or to boards of such employees, including functions,
duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing,
determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to any work,
business, or matter under this chapter. The mayor shall by rule prescribe such
rights of appeal from the decisions of his hearing examiners to other hearing
examiners or to other officer in the city, to boards of officers or to himself, as
shall be appropriate and in accordance with law.
(3) All executive departments and agencies shall administer their
programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with the
mayor to further such purposes. (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
20-809. Education and conciliation. Immediately after the enactment
of this chapter, the mayor shall commence such educational and conciliatory
activities as will further the purposes of this chapter. He shall call conferences
of persons in the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them
with the provisions of this chapter and his suggested means of implementing it,
and shall endeavor with their advise to work out programs of voluntary
compliance and of enforcement. (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-31
20-810. Enforcement. (1) Any person who claims to have been injured
by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter
"person aggrieved") may file a compliant with the Tennessee Human Rights
Commission. Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information
and be in such form as the Tennessee Human Rights Commission requires.
Upon receipt of such a complaint, the Tennessee Human Rights Commission
shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly
committed or is about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice.
Within thirty days after receiving a complaint, or within thirty days after the
expiration of any period of reference under subsection (3), the Tennessee Human
Rights Commission shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to
the person aggrieved whether he intends to resolve it. If the Tennessee Human
Rights Commission decides to resolve the complaints, he shall proceed to try to
eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by information
methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the
course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a
subsequent proceeding under this chapter without the written consent of the
persons concerned. Any employee of the Tennessee Human Rights Commission
who shall make public any information in violation of this provision shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year.
(2) A complaint under subsection (1) shall be filed within one hundred
and eighty days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred.
Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which the
allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be
reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer
to the complaint against him and with the leave of the Tennessee Human Rights
Commission, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair
to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall
be verified.
(3) If within thirty days after a complaint is filed with the Tennessee
Human Rights Commission has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance
with this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within thirty days thereafter, file
a complaint with the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development. The Tennessee Human Rights Commission will assist in this
filing.
(4) If the Tennessee Human Rights Commission has been unable to
obtain voluntary compliance within thirty days of the complaint, the person
aggrieved may, within thirty days hereafter commence a civil action in any
appropriate court, against the respondent named in the complaint, to enforce
the rights granted or protected by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to
the subject of the compliant. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing
practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-32
from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be
appropriate.
(5) In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of
proof shall be on the complaint.
(6) Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the
Tennessee Human Rights Commission shall immediately terminate all efforts
to obtain voluntary compliance. (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
20-811. Investigations; subpoenas; giving of evidence. (1) In
conducting an investigation, the Tennessee Human Rights Commission shall
have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals,
and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record, and
copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such
persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation:
Provided, however, that the Tennessee Human Rights Commission first
complies with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable
searches and seizures. The Tennessee Human Rights Commission may issue
subpoenas to compel his access to or the production of such materials, or the
appearance of such persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to
the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the
subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the
United States district court of the district in which the investigation is taking
place. The Tennessee Human Rights Commission may administer oaths.
(2) Upon written application to the Tennessee Human Rights
Commission, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable
number of subpoenas by and in the name of the Tennessee Human Rights
Commission to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as
subpoenas issued by the Tennessee Human Rights Commission himself.
Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the
name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at
his request.
(3) Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the Tennessee Human Rights
Commission shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are
witnesses in proceedings in United States district courts. Fees payable to the
witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be
paid by him.
(4) Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such
person may petition the Tennessee Human Rights Commission to revoke or
modify the subpoena. The Tennessee Human Rights Commission shall grant
the petition if he finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at
an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which
does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with
sufficient particularly the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be
unduly onerous, or for other good reason.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-33
(5) In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the Tennessee
Human Rights Commission or other person at whose request it was issued may
petition for its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in
which the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or
transacts business.
(6) Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or
to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other
evidence, if in his power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order
of the Tennessee Human Rights Commission shall be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. Any person who, with
intent thereby to mislead the Tennessee Human Rights Commission, shall make
or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report, account,
record, or other document submitted to the Tennessee Human Rights
Commission pursuant to his subpoena or other order, or shall willfully neglect
or fail to make or cause to be made full, true, and correct entries in such reports,
accounts, records, or other documents, or shall willfully mutilate, alter, or by
any other means falsify any documentary evidence, shall be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
(7) The Tennessee Human Right Commission Attorney shall conduct
all litigation in which the Tennessee Human Rights Commission participates as
a party or as amicus pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. of Aug. 1995)
20-812. Enforcement by private persons. (1) The rights granted by
§§ 20-803, 20-804, 20-805, and 20-806 may be enforced by civil actions in state
or local courts of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within
one hundred and eighty days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice
occurred: Provided, however, that the court shall continue such civil case
brought to this section or § 20-810(4) From time to time before bringing it to
trial or renting dwellings; or
(2) Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such
person or any other person or any class of persons from:
(a) Participating, without discrimination on account of race,
color, religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services,
organizations or facilities; or
(b) Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate, or
(3) Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such
citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons
to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion or
national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities, or
participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the
opportunity to so participate shall be fined not more than $1,000, or imprisoned
not more than one year, or both; and, if bodily injury results, shall be fined not
more than $10,000, or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if death
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-34
results, shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life. (Ord.
of Aug. 1995)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-35
CHAPTER 9
ALARM SYSTEM REGULATIONS
SECTION
20-901. Title.
20-902. Definitions.
20-903. Automatic telephone dialing alarm system.
20-904. Permit issuance and renewal.
20-905. Application requirements for an alarm permit.
20-906. Items required for an alarm system to qualify for an alarm permit.
20-907. False alarms.
20-908. Fee assessment.
20-909. Disconnection.
20-901. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "alarm ordinance".
20-902. Definitions. Unless it is apparent from the context that
another meaning is intended, the following words when used in this chapter
shall have the meaning herein:
(1) "Alarm system" means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or
electrical, arranged to signal the police and/or fire department that an
emergency exists or that the services of either or both those departments are
needed. "Alarm systems" shall also mean any alarm device which automatically
emits an audible, visual, or other response upon the occurrence of any hazard
or emergency and is intended to alert persons outside the building to the
existence of said hazard or emergency.
(2) "Alarm user" means the person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind in control of any building,
structure, or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained.
(3) "Alarm business" means the business of any individual,
partnership, corporation, or other entity engaged in selling, leasing,
maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any
alarm system or in causing any alarm system to be sold, leased, maintained,
serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed in or on any building,
structure, or facility.
(4) "Automatic telephone dialing alarm system" means any alarm
system which is a device which automatically or electronically transmits by
telephone or telephone line connected to the central dispatch facility a recorded
message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response; or a system
which, upon activation, connects to an answering service whose function it is to
transmit to the police and/or fire department a need for emergency response.
(5) "False alarm" means an alarm signal eliciting a response by the
police and/or fire department when a situation requiring a response by the police
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-36
and/or fire department does not in fact exist; but, this definition does not include
an alarm signal caused by unusual conditions of nature nor does it include other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user.
Also this definition does not include an alarm signal caused by situation that
may have brought under control prior to the arrival of the responding police
and/or fire department, that otherwise would have required a response.
(6) "Central dispatch facility" means the central communications
center designated by the city council to receive, route, and otherwise handle all
incoming police, fire or other emergency service communication traffic.
(7) "Answering service" refers to a telephone answering service
providing among its services the receiving on a continuous basis emergency
signals from alarm systems and thereafter relaying the message to the central
dispatch facility.
(8) "Permit year" means the portion of the calendar year remaining
after the date of issuance of a permit and all subsequent calendar years
thereafter that such permit may remain in effect.
20-903. Automatic telephone dialing alarm system. (1) It shall be
unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to sell, offer for sale, install,
maintain, lease, operate, or assist in the operation of an automatic telephone
dialing alarm system over any telephone lines exclusively used by the public to
directly request emergency service from the fire and/or police department. This
provision does not prohibit an audible alarm, or an alarm answered by an alarm
answering service which then contacts the city's central dispatch facility. All
alarms must meet the requirements of § 20-906.
(2) The electrical inspector, when he as knowledge of the unlawful
maintenance of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system installed or
operating in violation of this chapter shall, in writing, order the owner, operator,
or lessee to disconnect and cease operation of the system within 72 hours of
receipt of the order.
(3) Any automatic telephone dialing system installed unlawfully, as
set forth in this section, prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be
removed within 30 days.
20-904. Permit issuance and renewal. (1) The electrical inspector is
hereby authorized to grant a revocable alarm users permit to any alarm user
located in the city to operate, maintain, install, or modify a place or fire alarm
device, and no such device shall be operated unless such permit shall have first
been issued.
(2) A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at any
time by the electrical inspector upon the giving of ten (10) days notice in writing
by registered mail, to the permittee, sent to the address shown on the permit.
Violation of this chapter, following conviction thereof, shall constitute grounds
for revocation of the permit. The failure of the electrical inspector to revoke the
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-37
permit following the finding of the city court that there has been a violation of
this chapter, shall not be deemed a waiver of the right to revoke the permit.
(3) The electrical inspector shall charge a fee for the issuance of any
such permit, said fee being set and published from time to time as circumstances
require by resolution of the city council.
20-905. Application requirements for an alarm permit.
(1) Application for an alarm permit shall be made on forms1 provided
by the electrical inspector, and shall be accompanied by the fee as stipulated by
the city council. Forms shall include the following:
(a) The type of alarm system.
(b) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's
property to be serviced by the alarm, and the name, address and
telephone number of applicant's residence if different. If the applicant's
alarm is serviced by an alarm company, then the applicant shall also
include the name, address, and telephone number of that company.
(c) An emergency telephone number of the users and two
representatives to permit prompt notification of alarm calls and to assist
police and/or fire personnel in the inspection of the property.
(2) It is the applicant's responsibility to immediately notify the
electrical inspector in writing of any and all changes in the information on file
with the city regarding such permits. (as amended by Ord. of July 8, 1996)
20-906. Items required for an alarm system to qualify for an
alarm permit. (1) All alarm systems shall have a backup power supply that
will become effective in the event of a power failure or outage in the source of
electricity.
(2) All alarm systems will have an automatic reset which silences the
annunciator within thirty (30) minutes after activation.
(3) Any system installed on or after the effective date of this chapter
must comply with the requirements stipulated in this section. Preexisting
installations must comply with this section within six (6) months of the effective
date of this chapter. (as amended by Ord. of July 8, 1996)
20-907. False alarms. (1) Whenever a false alarm is activated in the
city, thereby requiring an emergency response to the location by police and/or
fire personnel, a police and/or fire officer on the scene of the activated alarm
shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as
indicated by the alarm system or whether in some way the alarm system
malfunctioned and thereby activated a false alarm.
1These forms are of record in the city clerk's office.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-38
(2) If the police or fire officer at the scene of the activated alarm
system determines the alarm to be false and no emergency seems necessary,
then said officer shall submit a report of the false alarm to the electrical
inspector, or his designee. A written notification of emergency response and
determination of the response shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm user at
the address noted on the permit or location where alarm was activated. The
permit holder upon receipt of the notification shall be entitled to a hearing
before the electrical inspector or his designee and permit holder desiring a
hearing shall request said hearing within ten (10) days of date of notification.
(3) The electrical inspector shall have the right to inspect any alarm
system on the premises to which response has been made and he may cause an
inspection of such system to be made at any reasonable time thereafter to
determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of this chapter.
(4) It shall be a violation of this chapter to intentionally cause a false
alarm, and any person who intentionally causes a false alarm shall be subject
to the penalty provisions hereof.
(5) There shall be provided to the alarm user, a ten-day grace period
during the initial installation of the alarm system.
(6) It shall be required and provided that any alarm business testing
or servicing any alarm system notify the police and/or fire departments and
instruct said departments of the location and times of said testing and servicing.
This section shall apply to any testing period after the initial installation period
has ceased. This section will not apply to the alarm user if prior notice of said
testing has been made to the respective departments as outlined in this section.
Any violation of this section herein will be assessed under the provisions
outlined in this chapter.
20-908. Fee assessment. It is hereby found and determined that more
than three (3) false alarms within a permit year are excessive and constitute a
public nuisance. Upon the activation of a fourth false alarm within a permit
year, the chief of police and the fire chief, or their designees, shall personally
meet with the alarm owner and encourage repair or replacement in order to
correct the problem. They shall also notify the owner that should the false
alarms continue, the matter will be referred to the city council for action.
The police chief and fire chief shall refer to the city manager the name of
any alarm owner who has had ten (10) false alarms in a permit year. The city
manager shall schedule a public hearing before the city council where both the
alarm owner and city officials can present information on why the problem is
continuing. Upon hearing all the information, and obtaining other information
as it deems appropriate, the city council may take whatever lawful action it
deems appropriate, up to fines and penalties or disconnection of the alarm,
within the limits imposed by state law.
The city clerk shall not bill or collect for any false alarm charge or fee
under the previous false alarm ordinance after December 31, 1997. Henceforth,
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-39
the city clerk shall bill only for charges stemming from the decisions of the city
council following a public hearing when ten (10) or more false alarms have
occurred in a permit year. (as amended by Ord. of July 8, 1996, and replaced by
Ord. of 3/23/98)
20-909. Disconnection. In the event that an alarm system emitting an
audible, visual, or other response which causes a disruption to neighbors cannot
be reset following attempts to notify the owner, any alarm company servicing
the premises, and both the individuals listed as capable of resetting the alarm,
the city shall have the right to take such action as may be necessary to
disconnect any such alarm. Any such disconnection shall require notification by
the city personnel disconnecting the alarm to the alarm owner informing the
owner of the reason for the disconnection. Said notice must be mailed by
certified mail within twenty-four (24) hours of the actual disconnection being
made. (as replaced by Ord. of July 8, 1996)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-40
CHAPTER 10
DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED AND LOST PERSONAL PROPERTY
SECTION
20-1001. Disposition of abandoned or lost currency.
20-1002. Disposition of personal property other than currency.
20-1003. General provisions.
20-1001. Disposition of abandoned or lost currency. (1) If lost or
abandoned currency comes into the possession of the City of Cleveland, the city
shall hold the currency to allow the city to investigate and attempt to ascertain
the lawful owner of the currency. If the lawful owner is identified, the currency
shall be returned to the owner. If an investigation fails to determine the lawful
owner of the currency, then the city shall comply with all requirements of state
law and any regulations of the state treasurer. If the state treasurer declines
in writing to accept such currency, then the city shall return the currency to the
individual or entity that turned the currency over to the city. If no individual
or entity turned the currency over to the city, or if such individual or entity
cannot be identified, or if the lost or abandoned currency is found by an officer
of the Cleveland Police Department while on duty, then the currency shall be
disposed of like any other personal property as provided for in § 20-1002.
(2) As used in this chapter, the term "currency" includes all legal
tender, cash, or coin.
(3) This chapter does not apply to currency seized or confiscated
pursuant to any state criminal statute. Such currency shall be disposed of
according to applicable state law. (as added by Ord. of Oct. 14, 1996)
20-1002. Disposition of personal property other than currency.
Upon compliance with all requirements of the Office of the State Treasurer and
all other applicable regulations, any personal property that is abandoned or lost
shall be disposed of according to the following rules:
(1) Any property deemed by the city clerk to be of nominal value,
twenty dollars ($20.00) or less, may be disposed of by the city clerk without the
necessity of payment to the city. All such items of nominal value may be
destroyed if not otherwise suitable for reuse. All items destroyed shall be
accounted for by certified inventory to be done by the chief of police or his
designee submitted to the city clerk. Said inventory shall be kept on record in
the office of the city clerk for a period of not less than five (5) years.
(2) For items of nominal value or those items of less than $500.00
value, the city clerk, upon recommendation of the chief of police, may dispose of
such property to the convenience of the city. This right includes, but is not
limited to, donating such property to a non-profit organization for use in the
community. The inventory list of such property shall be submitted to the city
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-41
clerk with written recommendation by the chief of police on an annual basis at
the same time the city's annual report is sent to the state treasurer. The city
clerk shall submit a detailed report of all such dispositions to the city council.
(3) All valuable personal property deemed by the city clerk in excess
of $500 value which is abandoned or lost and in the possession of the city may,
after having been held for a period of not less than ninety (90) days or as
otherwise required by state law, be sold at public auction or by competitive
sealed bids after having been advertised in a daily newspaper of general
circulation in this city, and after an investigation has been made to attempt to
ascertain the owner of the property. (as added by Ord. of Oct. 14, 1996)
20-1003. General provisions. (1) This chapter shall not apply to:
(a) property seized or confiscated in the enforcement of any tax
lien;
(b) any weapon confiscated by city law enforcement officials,
which shall be disposed of in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated
39-17-1317.
(c) any motor vehicle that is subject to disposition under any
applicable state law allowing forfeiture or seizure of such motor vehicle.
(2) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the City of Cleveland from
instituting an action in the nature of an interpleader to allow the city to comply
with the intent of this chapter and to avoid conflicting claims concerning the
right to possession or ownership of any lost or abandoned personal property,
including currency. (as added by Ord. of Oct. 14, 1996)
Change 17, July 23, 2018 20-42
CHAPTER 11
OPEN BURNING
SECTION
20-1101. Definitions.
20-1102. Open burning prohibited.
20-1103. Exceptions to prohibition on open burning.
20-1104. Authority to permit or prohibit open burning.
20-1105. Liability for damages and costs.
20-1106. Violation and penalty.
20-1101. Definitions. (1) "Open burning" is the burning of any matter
under such conditions that products of combustion are emitted directly into the
open atmosphere without passing directly through a stack. Open burning
includes, but is not limited to, fires located or burning in a pile on the ground,
a barrel, a fire pit, or other semi-enclosure. The use of an air curtain destructor
or air curtain incinerator is considered incineration and is not considered open
burning.
(2) "Person" is any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political
subdivision, an agency, authority, commission, or department of the United
States government, or of the State of Tennessee government; or any other legal
entity, or their legal representative, agent, or assigns.
(3) "Wood waste" is defined as any product which has not lost its basic
character as wood, such as bark, sawdust, chips and chemically untreated
lumber whose "disposition" by open burning is to solely get rid of or destroy.
Plant life of a herbaceous nature, such as leaves, whether attached, fallen,
and/or collected, evergreen needles, and grasses, are not considered "wood
waste". Additionally, manufactured lumber products, such as plywood,
fiberboard, particle board, and paneling, are not considered "wood waste."
Painted or artificially stained wood is not considered "wood waste." (as added
by Ord. of 12/10/2001, and replaced by Ord. #2007-46, Nov. 2007)
20-1102. Open burning prohibited. No persons shall cause, suffer,
allow or permit open burning within the city limits of the City of Cleveland,
except as set out in § 20-1103 entitled "Exceptions to prohibition on open
burning." (as added by Ord. of 12/10/2001, and replaced by Ord. #2007-46, Nov.
2007)
20-1103. Exceptions to prohibition on open burning. Open burning
may be conducted under the following specified exceptions. This grant of
exception shall in no way relieve the person responsible for such burning from
the consequences, damages, injuries or claims resulting from such burning. Any
Change 17, July 23, 2018 20-43
exception to the open burning prohibition granted by this section does not
relieve any person of the responsibility to obtain a permit which may be required
by any other federal or state agency, or of complying with other applicable legal
requirements, ordinances, or legal restrictions. In addition, the open burning
of tires and other rubber products, vinyl shingles and siding, other plastics,
asphalt shingles and other asphalt roofing materials, and/or asbestos containing
materials, is expressly prohibited and such materials shall not be included in
any open burning conducted under this section.
(1) Non-commercial fires used for cooking of food or for ceremonial,
recreational or comfort-heating purposes, including barbecues, campfires and
outdoor fireplaces. Fires permitted in this section may not create a nuisance for
others, as determined by the Cleveland Fire Department.
(2) Fires set by or at the direction of the Cleveland Fire Department
solely for training purposes.
(3) Fires consisting solely of vegetation grown on the property of the
burn site or fires disposing of "wood waste" solely for the disposition of such
wood waste shall only be conducted as follows:
(a) At least one (1) person shall be constantly present at the
burning during the entire time of the burn;
(b) Each burn shall not exceed forty-eight (48) hours in
duration;
(c) Burning shall not occur more than twice in any thirty (30)
day period; and
(d) The site of such burning is not nearer than one-half (½) mile
to an airport, hospital, nursing home, school, federal or state highway,
national reservation, national or state park, wildlife area, national or
state forest, and/or occupied structures except such structures as may be
located on the same property as the burning site.
(e) Priming materials used to facilitate such burning shall be
limited to #1 or #2 grade fuel oils.
(4) In addition, such burning may require an "air curtain destructor,"
or other fire department approved device if deemed necessary by the fire chief.
(5) Fires set at the direction of law enforcement agencies or courts
solely for the purpose of destruction of controlled substances and legend drugs
seized as contraband. Priming materials used to facilitate such burning shall be
limited to #1 or #2 grade fuel oils.
(6) Fires consisting solely of manufactured lumber products not
chemically treated to prevent insect or rot damage, but subject to the following
additional conditions:
(a) The site of such burning is not nearer than one-half (½) mile
to an airport, hospital, nursing home, school, federal or state highway,
national reservation, national or state park, wildlife area, national or
state forest, and/or occupied structures except such structures as may be
located on the same property as the burning site.
Change 17, July 23, 2018 20-44
(b) Priming materials used to facilitate such burning shall be
limited to #1 or #2 grade fuel oils.
(c) The person responsible for such burning must certify
compliance with the distance requirements by written statement. The
certification must include the types and amounts of materials projected
to be burned, and must be delivered to the State of Tennessee,
Department of Environment and Conservation/Division of Air Pollution
Control at the appropriate regional Environmental Field Office at least
ten (10) working days prior to commencing the burn.
(7) For any residential parcel of property located within the corporate
limits of the City of Cleveland where the residential parcel is ten (10) acres or
more in size and has a building located on the subject parcel with an appraised
value for tax purposes of at least twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), fires
consisting solely of vegetation grown on the property of the burn site or fires
disposing of "wood waste" solely for the disposition of such wood waste may be
conducted, but subject to all of the following limitations and conditions:
(a) At least one (1) person shall be constantly present at the
burning during the entire time of the burn.
(b) No burning under this subsection shall occur before 8:00
A.M. and all fires must be completely extinguished by no later than one
(1) hour before sunset.
(c) Burning under this subsection shall not occur more than
twice in any thirty (30) day period.
(d) Priming materials used to facilitate such burning shall be
limited to #1 or #2 grade fuel oils.
(e) Burning under this subsection shall be limited to no more
than a three hundred (300) cubic foot pile of vegetation or wood waste,
with the further limitation that the content of a burn pile should not
consist of predominantly trees that were felled by mechanical means.
(f) Burning under this subsection is only allowed on those
residential parcels of property that are ten (10) or more acres in size
which have a building located on the subject parcel with an appraised
value for tax purposes of at least twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00).
(g) For any burning under this subsection, a permit shall be
required from the fire department. All requests for fire department
issued permits require a forty-eight (48) hour notice in advance prior to
burning to allow ample time for inspection of the burning site. Burning
permits issued under this subsection shall be revoked and/or will not be
issued if the fire chief or his designee determines that the proposed
burning is likely to cause a safety issue for the public. (as added by Ord.
of 12/10/2001, replaced by Ord. #2007-46, Nov. 2007, amended by
Ord. #2008-33, June 2008, Ord. #2008-44, July 2008, and Ord. #2016-32,
Aug. 2016)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-45
20-1104. Authority to permit or prohibit open burning. The fire
chief or his designee has the authority to permit open burning where there is no
other practical, safe, and/or lawful method of disposal. The fire chief reserves
the right to require any person to cease or limit open burning if emissions from
the fires are deemed by the fire chief or his designee as jeopardizing public
health or welfare, creating a public nuisance or safety hazard, or likely to create
a potential safety hazard. The fire chief or his designee shall otherwise have the
authority to permit or prohibit open burning not specifically addressed in this
chapter. (as added by Ord. of 12/10/2001, and replaced by Ord. #2007-46, Nov.
2007)
20-1105. Liability for damages and costs. If the Cleveland Fire
Department responds to a fire caused by or that results from open burning and
the city uses equipment and/or personnel from the city public works department
and/or third parties to control and/or extinguish the fire, the person responsible
for the fire shall be subject to a civil action brought by the city in circuit court
to recover the city's damages and costs, including the cost of using city
equipment, incurred by the city to control or extinguish the fire. This remedy
is in addition to any civil penalty set forth in Section 20-1106. (as added by Ord.
of 12/10/2001, and replaced by Ord. #2007-46, Nov. 2007)
20-1106. Violation and penalty. In addition to any liability for
damages or costs set forth in § 20-1105, any person who violates this chapter
shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars
($50.00) for each violation. (as added by Ord. of 12/10/2001, and replaced by
Ord. #2007-46, Nov. 2007)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-46
CHAPTER 12
WRECKERS AND TOWING SERVICES
SECTION
20-1201. Purposes.
20-1202. Scope of chapter.
20-1203. Definitions.
20-1204. Establishment of wrecker class system and criteria for each class.
20-1205. Wrecker board.
20-1206. Permit required.
20-1207. Application for permits.
20-1208. Application and investigation fees, annual permit fees, annual
wrecker permit fees, expiration date and renewal of permits.
20-1209. Investigation of permit applicant and wreckers.
20-1210. Issuance or permits.
20-1211. Revocation of permit.
20-1212. Required equipment and standards for all wreckers.
20-1213. Required storage facilities and procedures for wreckers.
20-1214. Notification(s) given by wrecker permit holders.
20-1215. Insurance.
20-1216. Statement of charges for wreckers; written notice to vehicle owners
and operators; maximum charges for non-consensual tows
while operating on rotational call list.
20-1217. Additional rules and regulations for wrecker permit holders.
20-1218. Vehicles to be towed to place designated by owner or operator of
vehicle.
20-1219. Rotational call list - wreckers to go to scene of accident on call of
dispatcher or owner/operator only.
20-1220. Emergency towing and storage.
20-1221. Severability.
20-1201. Purposes. The purposes of this chapter are:
(1) To establish rules, regulations, standards and procedures for
wrecker operators who elect to apply to the City of Cleveland and receive a
permit and who are placed on a rotational call list to remove wrecked, disabled
or immobilized vehicles at the request or call of the city police department or
other department of the city, and;
(2) To establish a wrecker board to administer the provisions of this
chapter. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37,
Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, and Ord. #2014-11, April
2014)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-47
20-1202. Scope of chapter. The provisions of this chapter apply to all
towing or wrecker services provided by permit holders within the corporate
limits of the City of Cleveland when the wrecker is responding to calls for
service while on the rotational call list described in this chapter.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to wrecker or towing services
provided to the City of Cleveland for the towing of city owned vehicles.
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to require any wrecker
operator who is otherwise lawfully doing business within the City of Cleveland
to apply for a permit under the provisions of this chapter. Application to the city
for a permit under this chapter by a wrecker operator is voluntary. However, no
wrecker operator shall be issued a permit and placed on the rotational call list
described under this chapter unless the wrecker operator applies to the city for
a permit and agrees to be bound by and comply with the terms and conditions
of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by
Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, and Ord.
#2014-11, April 2014)
20-1203. Definitions. For purposes of this chapter the following words
and phrases shall have the following meanings:
(1) "Inside storage." The storing of a motor vehicle within an enclosed
building being used by the wrecker or towing operator as a place of business.
(2) "Normal business hours." The hours from 9:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.
except Saturdays, Sundays, and the following holidays: New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and
Christmas Day.
(3) "Owner's request." The right of the owner or person in charge of
any disabled or inoperative vehicle to request some responsible and reasonable
person, gratuitous bailee, or a bailee for hire of his or her choosing to take
charge and care of said vehicle.
(4) "Outside storage." The storing of a motor vehicle within a lot or
premises being used by the wrecker or towing operator as a place of business,
but not inside storage as described above.
(5) "Wrecker board." The wrecker board created to administer this
chapter.
(6) "Wrecker inspector." That officer or employee of the city
designated by the city manager as the person responsible for receiving
applications, conducting investigations of proposed wrecker operators, and
making recommendations to the wrecker board.
(7) "Wrecker operator, permit holder or towing operator." Any person
or entity engaged in the business of, or offering the services of, a wrecker or
towing service to remove wrecked or disabled vehicles under a rotational call
system at the request or call of the city police department or any other
department of the city, whereby motor vehicles (except those owned by the City
of Cleveland) are or may be towed or otherwise removed from one place to
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-48
another by the use of a motor vehicle adapted to and designed for that purpose.
Wrecker operator, permit holder, or towing operator includes all wrecker or
towing operators and vehicles permitted by the city under this chapter who
qualify to be placed on the rotation call list to respond to requests for towing of
vehicles and who are responding under the rotational call list. (as added by
Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced
by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1204. Establishment of wrecker class system and criteria for
each class. Four (4) distinct wrecker classes have been established. Each
towing vehicle shall only be listed in one (1) class, and the following criteria
must be met for each class for inclusion on the rotational call list:
(1) Class A. For towing passenger cars, pick-up trucks, small trailers,
etc. This classification also includes "wheel lift" type vehicle transporters.
(a) The tow truck chassis shall have a minimum manufacturer's
capacity of fourteen thousand pounds (14,000 lbs. GVWR);
(b) Individual boom capacity of not less than four (4) tons;
(c) Individual power winch pulling capacity of not less than four
(4) tons;
(d) A minimum of one hundred one hundred feet (100') of threeeights
inch (3/8"), or larger, cable on each drum;
(e) Wheel lift capable of picking up a passenger car or pick-up
truck;
(f) Belt-type cradle tow plate or tow sling to pick up vehicles,
and cradle or tow plate to be equipped with safety chain;
(g) Dollies are suggested, but not required; and
(h) Wheel lift: wreckers possessing equipment capable of lifting
the vehicle by the wheels only, with nothing touching the vehicle body.
(i) Wheel lift wreckers shall meet all Class A
requirements, excluding the belt-type cradle tow plate or tow sling.
(ii) Safety restraint straps (nylon straps with ratchets or
the equivalent), shall be provided to secure the towed vehicle's
tires into the wheel lift forks.
(2) Class B. For towing medium size trucks, trailers, etc.
(a) The tow truck chassis shall have a minimum manufacturer's
capacity of twenty-six thousand pounds (26,000 GVWR).
(b) Boom specifications:
(i) Double boom so constructed as to permit splitting;
each boom to operate independently or jointly; individual boom
capacity of no less than eight (8) tons and individual power winch
pulling capacity of not less than eight (8) tons; or
(ii) Single boom with no less than a sixteen (16) ton
capacity and a power winch pulling capacity of no less than sixteen
(16) tons;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-49
(c) Two hundred feet (200'), or more of seven-sixteenths inch
(7/16"), or larger, cable on each drum;
(d) Cradle tow plate or tow sling to pick up vehicle; cradle of tow
plate to be equipped with safety chain.
(3) Class C. For towing large trucks, road tractors and trailers.
(a) The tow truck chassis shall have a minimum manufacturers'
capacity of not less than thirty-five thousand pounds (35,000 G.V.W.R.);
(b) Boom Specifications:
(i) Double boom so constructed as to permit splitting;
each boom to operate independently or jointly; individual boom
capacity of no less than twelve and one-half (12-1/2) tons; or
(ii) Single boom with no less than a twenty-five (25) ton
capacity and a power winch pulling capacity of no less than
twenty-five (25) tons;
(iii) Two hundred feet (200') or more of nine-sixteenths
inch (9/16"), or larger, cable on each drum;
(c) Air brakes so constructed as to lock wheels automatically
upon failure;
(d) Only tandem axle trucks with two (2) live drive axles will be
accepted as Class C; and
(e) An under-reach capable of towing an eighty thousand pound
(80,000 lb.) tractor trailer combination.
(4) Class D. Vehicle transporters designed to tow or carry passenger
cars, pick-up trucks, small trailers, etc. This classification includes "car carrier"
or "rollback" type vehicle transporters.
(a) Car carrier vehicle transporters:
(i) The truck chassis shall have minimum
manufacturer's capacity of fourteen thousand pounds (14,000 lbs.
GVWR);
(ii) Lift cylinders:
(A) Two (2) with a minimum of three inch (3") bore
each; or
(B) One (1) with a minimum of five and one-half
inch (5-1/2") bore;
(iii) Individual power winch pulling capacity of not less
than four (4) tons;
(iv) Fifty feet (50') or more of three-eights inch (3/8") or
larger cable on winch drum;
(v) Two (2) safety chains for securing vehicle to carrier
bed;
(vi) Carrier bed shall be a minimum of sixteen feet (16')
in length and a minimum of eighty-four inches (84") in width
inside side rails;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-50
(vii) Cab protector, constructed of solid steel or aluminum,
that extends to a height of four feet (4') above the floor or to a
height at which it blocks the forward movement of the bumper of
the vehicle being towed; and
(viii) Straps with ratcheting capability that provide for the
transporting of motorcycles. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July
2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced by
Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, Ord. #2010-22, June 2010, and Ord.
#2014-11, April 2014)
20-1205. Wrecker board. (1) Board established. There is hereby
established a board of five (5) members to oversee and administer the terms of
this chapter, which board shall be referred to as the "wrecker board." In
addition to these five (5) members, the chief of police, or the chief's designee,
shall serve as a non-voting member of the wrecker board to provide input and
recommendations to the wrecker board from the police department. The chief
of police, or the chief's designee, shall attend all wrecker board meetings and
function as a liaison between the wrecker board and the Cleveland Police
Department.
(2) Composition; terms; filling vacancies. The five (5) members of this
board shall be appointed by the city council. Appointments to each seat are to
be for terms of five (5) years. All members shall serve until their successor is
appointed and all members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. A
member of the wrecker board may be removed from the board at any time by a
majority vote of the city council when it is demonstrated that such board
member has a pattern of repeated absences from board meetings, or when such
board member exhibits disregard for controlling state and federal laws and local
ordinances, or when such board member fails to declare a conflict of interest in
a given case and votes on the case. In the event of a vacancy, the city council
shall appoint a member to fill the unexpired term. The board members shall
serve without compensation, but shall receive actual expenses incurred in
attending meetings of the board and the performance of any duties as members
of the wrecker board.
Two (2) alternate members shall be appointed by the city council to the
wrecker board. One (1) shall be designated as the first alternate and the other
as the second alternate. The alternate members shall be appointed to a term of
five (5) years. In any meeting where both are present, but only one is necessary
to constitute a five (5) member board, the alternate shall exercise a vote, while
the second alternate will not.
(3) General duties of the wrecker board. The board shall have the
following duties and powers in addition to any other duties or responsibilities
conferred upon the board by this chapter.
(a) To recommend from time to time to the city council that it
amend or modify the provisions of this chapter;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-51
(b) To hold hearings relating to the suspension, revocation, or
modification of a permit and issue appropriate orders relating thereto;
(c) To hold such other hearings as may be required in the
administration of this chapter and to make such determinations and
issue such orders as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter;
(d) To request assistance from any officer, agent, or employee
of the city and to obtain such information or other assistance as the
wrecker board might need;
(e) The wrecker board, acting through its chairperson, shall
have the power to issue subpoenas requiring attendance and testimony
of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence relevant to any
matter properly heard by the board; and
(f) The chairperson or vice chairperson shall be authorized to
administer oaths to those persons giving testimony before the board.
(4) Election of officers; meetings; and quorum. The following rules and
procedures shall apply for the wrecker board. The board may adopt such other
rules and procedures as the board deems appropriate provided that such rules
are consistent with the procedures described herein.
(a) Election of officers. The board shall elect from among its own
members a chairperson, and a vice-chairperson who shall serve in that
capacity for one (1) year or until a successor shall be elected. Secretarial
services shall be provided by the City of Cleveland in a manner to be
prescribed by the city manager.
(b) Initial meeting. Within thirty (30) days of the initial
appointment of the board members, the board shall hold an initial
meeting. At the initial meeting, the board will elect officers as provided
by this chapter and review the general duties of the board. The first
meeting in each calendar year shall also be called the organizational
meeting, and the purpose of this meeting shall include the election and
installation of officers, and such other business that may need to come
before the meeting.
(c) Regular meetings. Regular meetings shall be held at a time
and place chosen by the wrecker board. The board shall hold regular
quarterly meetings and such additional called meetings as the board may
find necessary.
(d) Called meetings. The chairperson or vice-chairperson or any
two (2) members may schedule a called meeting of the wrecker board as
deemed necessary provided that advance notice is given to each board
member at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of the
called meeting and adequate public notice is given as required by law.
(e) Public notice of regular meetings. Public notice of regular
meetings shall be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation at
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-52
least five (5) days in advance of the meeting with a general description of
the agenda.
(f) Open meetings. All meeting of the wrecker board shall be
open to the public.
(g) Conduct of meetings. The board shall generally conduct
meetings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order.
(h) Quorum and voting. The presence of three (3) members of
the wrecker board shall constitute a quorum. If the chairperson and
vice-chairperson are absent from the meeting in which there is a quorum,
the members present shall elect from among the board members present
a chairperson of the meeting. If only three (3) members are present and
one (1) cannot vote due to a conflict of interest on a particular item, the
remaining two (2) members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
that item. In the event of a tie vote on any motion, the motion shall fail.
A motion shall have passed upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the
quorum of board members present and voting.
(i) Specific powers. The wrecker board shall have the authority
to approve, revoke or suspend wrecker permits, and otherwise administer
the provisions of this chapter. Before revoking or suspending a permit
under this chapter, the wrecker board shall hold a public hearing after
reasonable notice to the permit holder. The action of the wrecker board
in granting or refusing a wrecker permit or in revoking or suspending a
wrecker permit shall be final, except as it may be subject to judicial
review as otherwise provided by law. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July
2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, replaced by Ord. #2006-38,
Oct. 2006, amended by Ord. #2008-79, Jan. 2009, and Ord. #2009-81, Jan.
2010, and replaced by Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1206. Permit required. No person or entity shall be placed on the
rotational call list established under this chapter and engage in the business of,
or offer the services of, a wrecker under the terms of this chapter without first
applying for and receiving a permit. Each permit holder meeting the
requirements of this chapter shall receive one general permit for their wrecker
business and a separate permit for each wrecker used by that business
according to the class of wrecker set forth in § 20-1204. (as added by Ord. #2006-
23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced by
Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1207. Application for permits. (1) Any person or entity desiring
to obtain a wrecker permit under this chapter shall file with the wrecker
inspector an application setting out, among other things, the following:
(a) Name and address of the person or entity desiring the
permit.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-53
(b) The location and full description of all property to be utilized
in connection with the business, including tax parcel numbers and zoning
of this property.
(c) The number of wreckers or towing vehicles owned or
available for use by the applicant and a full description of the wreckers
sufficient to determine a proper classification under § 20-1204.
(d) A statement that all wreckers are properly equipped for the
applicable classification set forth in § 20-1204 and contain the required
equipment set out in § 20-1204, and that all wreckers meet applicable
state and federal regulations.
(e) A statement that the wrecker or towing operator will accept
responsibility for any and all personal property left in towed or stored
vehicles.
(f) A statement setting forth and describing available space
including inside storage, if available, for properly accommodating and
protecting all disabled motor vehicles to be towed or otherwise removed
from the place where they had been disabled.
(g) A statement that the applicant will provide twenty-four (24)
hour service, including holidays, and that the applicant will have a
qualified operator on duty at all times for each wrecker location permitted
hereunder.
(h) A statement that the wrecker or towing operator will not
release any vehicles impounded by the city without authorization by the
police department, that a file will be maintained on all vehicle release
forms and that this file will be made available for police inspection upon
request.
(i) An assurance that the applicant will maintain a minimum
of one (1) properly equipped and operable wrecker throughout the year for
which application is being made. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006,
repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38,
Oct. 2006, Ord. #2010-22, June 2010, and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1208. Application and investigation fees, annual permit fees,
annual wrecker permit fees, expiration date and renewal of permits.
(1) Application and investigation fees. (a) New applicants. Any new
applicant for a wrecker permit under this chapter shall be charged an
application and investigation fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to cover
the expense of investigating the new applicant, the place of business, and
the wreckers and equipment.
However, if a wrecker company is already approved by the State
of Tennessee Department of Safety (Tennessee Highway Patrol), and if
all paperwork that is filed with the state is provided by the wrecker
company to the wrecker inspector, then the inspection and the fee may be
waived.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-54
(b) Existing permit holders. Wrecker operators already
permitted under this chapter shall not be charged an application or
investigation fee unless the permit holder changes their business
location. In that event, there shall be a supplemental investigation fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) paid by the permit holder to cover the cost
of the investigation of the new business location.
However, if a wrecker company is already approved by the State
of Tennessee Department of Safety (Tennessee Highway Patrol), and if
all paperwork that is filed with the state is provided by the wrecker
company to the wrecker inspector, then the inspection and the fee may be
waived.
All current permit holders will be required to pay the annual
permit and wrecker permit fees established under this section.
(2) Annual permit fee. All current permit holders will be required to
pay the annual permit established under this section.
All permit holders shall pay an annual permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
per wrecker business to cover the cost of the processing and the issuance of an
annual permit.
(3) Annual wrecker permit fee. In addition to the annual permit fee
described above, all permit holders shall pay an annual fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) per wrecker permitted under this chapter to cover the cost of the
wrecker inspector performing an annual inspection of each wrecker permitted
under this chapter.
However, the annual wrecker permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be
waived for any wrecker that has a current inspection sticker issued by the State
of Tennessee Department of Safety (Tennessee Highway Patrol.)
The annual permit fee and the annual wrecker fee(s) shall be paid by the
permit holder to the city prior to the issuance of the annual permit and the
annual wrecker permit.
(4) Expiration date and renewal of permits. All permits shall expire
March 31. Applications for renewal shall be filed by February 28th of each year.
Late applications for renewal will be considered in due course, but the applicant
will not be privileged to operate from March 31 until a renewal is approved. (as
added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and
replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, Ord. #2010-22, June 2010, and Ord.
#2014-11, April 2014)
20-1209. Investigation of permit applicant and wreckers. The
wrecker inspector shall investigate or cause to be investigated each applicant for
a wrecker permit under this chapter to determine whether or not the applicant
has the necessary equipment and facilities to qualify as a wrecker operator
under this chapter, and, if the applicant is qualified.
The wrecker inspector shall make such inspection within fifteen (15)
business days after the city receives the completed application including the
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-55
applicable application fee. The wrecker inspector shall report the inspector's
findings to the wrecker board and make a recommendation regarding the
issuance of a general wrecker permit to the applicant and permits for the
wrecker(s) owned by the applicant. The wrecker board shall have the right to
direct the wrecker inspector to make such further or additional investigation as
it deems proper before issuing a permit. Once the wrecker board has received
the recommendation of the wrecker inspector and the results of any additional
investigation it deems necessary, it shall grant or refuse a permit. If a permit
is refused, the wrecker board shall document its reasons for any refusal. If a
permit application is denied, the city shall refund one-half (1/2) of the applicable
application fee. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by
Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006,
Ord. #2010-22, June 2010, and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1210. Issuance of permits. Every applicant and each wrecker of
each permit applicant determined by the wrecker board to be qualified under
this chapter to receive a permit shall be issued a permit by the city clerk's office.
A separate permit shall be issued for each wrecker approved by the wrecker
board, which permit shall at all times be kept with each wrecker. Such permit
shall have printed thereon the year for which it is valid. (as added by
Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced
by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, Ord. #2010-22, June 2010, Ord. #2011-06, May
2011, and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1211. Revocation of permit. The wrecker board may suspend or
revoke the permit of any permit holder or the permit issued to any wrecker on
any of the following grounds:
(1) If a permit was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement
of a material fact or a material fact concerning the applicant which was not
disclosed at the time of the application that would have constituted just cause
for refusing to issue a permit; or
(2) Failure of a wrecker permit holder to have an operable and
properly equipped wrecker and qualified operator on duty at all times or to
promptly respond to police calls while on call; or
(3) A violation of any provision of this chapter.
(4) If a wrecker does not meet all applicable state and federal
regulations or any of the provisions of this chapter; or
(5) The wrecker board may also suspend or revoke a permit in its
discretion for any good cause not otherwise specified herein.
(6) A suspension or revocation shall terminate all authority and
permission granted by such permit to the permit holder. Any person whose
general permit has been revoked shall not be eligible to again apply for a
wrecker permit for a period of one (1) year from the date of such revocation. If
a permit holder's permit is revoked, and they apply again after one (1) year, they
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-56
will be treated as a new applicant and must pay all fees applicable to new
applicants as set forth in this chapter.
(7) The wrecker board may also suspend or revoke the permit issued
for any wrecker vehicle that fails to comply with the terms and provisions of this
chapter. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct.
2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, Ord. #2010-22, June 2010, and
Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1212. Required equipment and standards for all wreckers. In
addition to the equipment required under the applicable wrecker classifications
set forth in § 20-1204, all wreckers shall have and maintain additional
equipment and standards as follows:
(1) The following additional equipment is required:
(a) At least one (1) heavy-duty push broom;
(b) Flood lights mounted at a height sufficient to illuminate the
scene at night;
(c) One (1) shovel;
(d) A minimum of one (1) fully charged twenty pound (20 lb.),
or two (2) fully charged ten pound (10 lb.), fire extinguisher(s) having an
Underwriter's Laboratory rating of four (4) A:B:C: or more. The fire
extinguisher(s) must be securely mounted on the towing vehicle;
(e) One (1) axe;
(f) One (1) set of bolt cutters;
(g) One (1) pinch bar, pry bar or crow bar;
(h) A minimum of one (1) fifty pound (50 lb.) bag of fluid
absorption compound;
(i) Three (3) red emergency reflectors.
(j) One (1) light bar. The towed vehicle must be capable of
displaying all lights on the rear of the vehicle, while in tow. When this is
not possible, a light bar must be attached to the rear most vehicle while
in tow. The bar must consist of two (2) tail lamps, two (2) stop lamps, and
two (2) turn signals. All lights on the light bar must be fully operational.
(2) The appearance of all wreckers shall be reasonably good with
equipment painted.
(3) All wreckers shall display the firm's name, address and phone
number. Such information shall be painted on or permanently affixed on both
sides. Such lettering shall be at least three inches (3") high. Magnetic signs will
not be permitted as a substitute.
(4) In accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-170 (c), it is
the responsibility of the wrecker operator to have equipment for removing glass
and other debris from the accident scene and to remove such debris from the
highway. The wrecker operator shall be responsible for removing all glass and
other debris from the street or highway. Failure to do so may result in
suspension or revocation of the wrecker operator's permit. (as added by
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-57
Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced
by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, Ord. #2010-22, June 2010, and Ord. #2014-11,
April 2014)
20-1213. Required storage facilities and procedures for wreckers.
Permit holders must provide proper storage facilities and procedures as follows:
(1) Permit holders must be equipped to provide an adequate storage
lot or building for proper, safe and secure storage of all vehicles towed.
(2) The permit holder shall provide a properly zoned (or lawful
nonconforming use) fenced lot or building for proper and safe storage. Such lot
for storage shall be located on the same property as the wrecker service or in
close proximity thereto. If the storage lot is not located on the same property as
the wrecker operator's place of business, the towing company storage facility
must be identified with a highly visible sign that has the towing company's
name, address and phone number thereon.
(3) A storage lot fence shall be a minimum of six feet (6') high,
constructed of chain-link security fencing, lumber, or other material which will
serve as a significant deterrent to unauthorized entry. The fencing shall be
equipped with gates capable of being locked, which shall be locked at all times
when the storage facility is unattended. There shall be room to store at least ten
(10) cars within the fenced lot. Class C operators shall additionally have room
to store a minimum of one (1) tractor and trailer within the fenced lot.
(4) A wrecker permit holder shall be responsible for storing,
safekeeping and preventing vandalism of all towed vehicles and their contents.
(5) A wrecker permit holder's place of business shall be staffed
between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday,
excluding legal holidays. The wrecker permit holder's storage facility, if not
located on the same property as the permit holder's place of business, shall be
readily available for access to customers and members of the Cleveland Police
Department between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. Monday through
Friday, excluding legal holidays.
(6) Records of the vehicles towed and charges of tows from calls
received from the city rotation list shall be maintained for at least two (2) years
and shall be open for inspection by the city and the owner of any vehicle towed
or his agent.
(7) The wrecker inspector may inspect any wrecker permit holder at
any time during normal business hours.
(8) All vehicles towed under the rotation call list provided for by this
chapter shall be stored inside a building or inside the fenced storage facility
described above unless an authorization to do otherwise is obtained from the
vehicle's owner.
(9) In accordance with any notice provisions applicable to wrecker
operators as set out in state law, the wrecker service shall notify the registered
owners and lien holders of the location of the stored vehicles and the costs of
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-58
securing possession of the towed and stored vehicle. The City of Cleveland Police
Department is hereby authorized, but is not required to, provide registration
information to the wrecker permit holder to assist the permit holder in giving
any required notice(s) under state law. Wrecker permit holders may also wish
to contact the Bradley County Clerk's office to obtain registration information
on vehicles. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37,
Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, Ord. #2010-22, June 2010,
and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1214. Notification(s) given by wrecker permit holders. State
law imposes certain notice requirements on wrecker permit holders. All wrecker
permit holders on the rotational call list shall comply with all of these
provisions. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37,
Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, Ord. #2010-22, June 2010,
and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1215. Insurance. (1) Each wrecker permit holder assumes the
liability for personal injury or property damage resulting from a permit holder's
or their employee's intentional or negligent act(s) from the time contact is made
with any vehicle to be towed. Each wrecker permit holder assumes full liability
for all items of value in the towed vehicle.
(2) Each wrecker permit holder shall maintain the following policies
of insurance according to the minimum limits set forth in this section. Each
policy shall be in the name of the wrecker permit holder and shall include
coverage for towing and storage. The policy shall be effective for a minimum of
a six (6) month period. It is not the intent of the City of Cleveland to limit the
wrecker permit holder to the type and amount of insurance required herein. The
wrecker permit holder may choose to purchase more or additional coverage than
specified herein. The types of coverage and the limits set forth herein are the
minimum limits necessary to be eligible to be placed on the city's rotational call
list.
(a) Any wrecker service on the rotational call list utilized by the
City of Cleveland shall be properly licensed and insured.
(b) Insurance must be sufficient to compensate for any loss of
or damage to property entrusted to the wrecker company.
(c) A certificate of insurance shall be filed with the wrecker
inspector before a towing company may be placed on the rotational call
list. Certificates of insurance must be itemized to indicate the amounts
of liability, garage keepers and on-hook coverage. The policy must also
disclose all of the towing vehicles that are covered under the policy.
(d) For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-59
(i) Vehicle liability. Insurance that pays for damages due
to bodily injury and property damage for others for which the
towing company is responsible.
(ii) Garage keepers liability. Insurance that protects a
garage keeper against liability for damage to vehicles in his/her
care, custody or control.
(iii) On-hook coverage. Insurance that will normally pay
to repair or replace a vehicle that the towing company did not own
if it is damaged by a collision, fire, theft, explosion, or vandalism
while it is being towed or hauled.
(3) Liability coverage must be equal to the minimum amounts specified
in this section. Insurance coverage may be provided in a single policy or
separate split policies. Regardless of the type of policy or policies, the total
amount of coverage must equal those amounts listed below, per incident.
(a) Minimum vehicle liability amounts:
(i) Class A and D $300,000
(ii) Class B $500,000
(iii) Class C $750,000
(b) Minimum garage keepers liability policy:
(i) Class A and D $75,000
(ii) Class B $150,000
(iii) Class C $200,000
(c) Minimum "on-hook" coverage:
(i) Class A and D $ 75,000
(ii) Class B $ 150,000
(iii) Class C $200,000
(d) Wrecker companies "on-hook" coverage may be included in
the garage keepers liability policy. It may also be provided as a separate
policy, dependent upon the underwriter. In any event, both garage
keeper's liability and "on-hook" insurance coverage must be carried by the
wrecker permit holder. The minimum rates established by this section
are in no way intended to limit the amount of coverage deemed
appropriate by a wrecker permit holder.
(4) Renewal certificates of insurance must be submitted to the wrecker
inspector ten (10) days prior to the expiration date of the current certificates of
insurance.
(5) Wrecker permit holders shall notify the City of Cleveland
immediately in writing if a policy is canceled or non-renewed. This written
notice shall be sent within forty-eight (48) hours of the time and date that the
wrecker permit holder is notified that a policy will be canceled or non-renewed.
(6) The wrecker permit holder shall also notify the City of Cleveland
in writing of any other changes in insurance coverage (i.e., changing companies,
vehicles, etc.). This notice shall be sent at least ten (10) days prior to any
change.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-60
(7) All wrecker and storage facilities shall be inspected by the City of
Cleveland and a certificate of insurance filed with the City of Cleveland before
a wrecker permit holder is placed on the rotational call list. This certificate of
insurance shall include an endorsement providing a minimum of thirty (30)
working days' notice to the City of Cleveland in the event of a cancellation or
non-renewal of a policy.
However, if a wrecker company is pre-approved by the State of Tennessee
Department of Safety (Tennessee Highway Patrol), and if all paperwork that is
filed with the State is provided by the wrecker company to the wrecker
inspector, then the inspection may be waived.
(8) Violation of any of the above insurance requirements or regulations
shall be cause for suspension or removal from the rotational call list. (as added
by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced
by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, Ord. #2010-22, June 2010, and Ord. #2014-11,
April 2014)
20-1216. Statement of charges for wreckers; written notice to
vehicle owners and operators; maximum charges for non-consensual
tows while operating on rotational call list. (1) All permit holders and
wrecker operators shall be subject to all of the requirements set forth herein as
to charges for any call from the police department or the city referred to the
wrecker operator under the city's call rotation system established herein. In
addition, all permit holders and wrecker operators shall be subject to disclosure
requirements as to charges for any call from the police department or the city
referred to the wrecker operator under the city's call rotation system established
herein.
(2) Current tow and storage rates shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at the wrecker permit holder's business office. In addition, the wrecker
permit holder shall file a copy of the company's current tow and storage rates
with the wrecker inspector.
(3) A chronological record of towed vehicles and the charges billed as
a result of the services provided by a wrecker company pursuant to calls on the
rotation call list shall be maintained and available for inspection by the wrecker
inspector upon request. These records shall be kept by the wrecker company for
at least a two (2) year period.
(4) All permit holders and wrecker operators shall have statements
with the name, address and telephone number of the permit holder's place of
business printed thereon.
(5) Before towing a disabled vehicle away from a scene, the wrecker
operator shall present a statement to the owner or operator of the disabled
vehicle or his authorized representative, unless the owner or operator is under
arrest or incapacitated.
This statement may be prepared on a pre-printed form which shall
contain, at a minimum, the following information:
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-61
(a) The name and address of the owner or operator of the
vehicle being towed.
(b) The state and license number of the vehicle.
(c) Storage rates per day or part thereof.
(d) A schedule of charges for towing and all other services that
may be provided by the wrecker operator.
(e) The name of the wrecker operator.
(f) The following language must be contained on the statement:
"The charges set forth herein are determined by the
wrecker company and not the City of Cleveland."
The statement shall be retained by the permit holder for a period of two (2)
years and shall be subject to inspection by the city's wrecker inspector or his
duly authorized representative at any time during regular business hours.
(6) Storage rates begin twenty-four (24) hours after a vehicle is towed.
(7) There will be no charge for "hook-up."
(8) There shall be no charge for normal street or highway cleanup. A
normal cleanup includes, but is not limited to, removal of glass, vehicle body
parts, vehicle fluids, etc. Cleanups requiring additional/specialized equipment
and/or resources, such as diesel spills, Haz-mat, etc., may result in additional
charges being levied against the liable party(s) by the towing companies and/or
other state or local regulatory or governmental agencies.
(9) There shall be no charge for certain types of equipment, e.g.,
dollies, and fire extinguishers.
(10) If the off-loading of cargo is required, each towing company
providing these services shall list the names, addresses, and telephone numbers
of each person hired to off-load cargo. This list shall be provided to the wrecker
inspector upon request.
(11) Maximum charges for non-consensual tows while operating on
rotational call. The following charges are hereby established as the maximum
charges for those non-consensual tows made by a wrecker permit holder while
the permit holder is operating on the city's rotational call list. These maximum
charges do not apply if the tow is consensual, or if the tow is made while the
wrecker is not operating on the city's rotational call list.
The maximum charge for non-consensual wrecker services while
operating on the city's rotational call list shall be as follows:
A&D Class: The maximum tow rate is two hundred twenty-five dollars
($225.00), plus any charges for winching, if applicable. This rate applies
regardless of the time of day, or the day of the week. This rate also applies on
weekends and holidays.
There shall be no separate fuel charge.
Winching may be charged only if the vehicle is off the road or is
overturned.
The maximum winching fee is seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per half hour.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-62
Maximum storage rates shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per day for
outside storage, and fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for inside storage.
Administration fees shall only apply after three (3) days.
B Class: The maximum tow rate is three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00)
per hour from start to stop. This rate applies regardless of the time of day, or the
day of the week. This rate also applies on weekends and holidays.
There shall be no separate fuel charge.
There shall be no separate winching fee.
Maximum storage rates shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per day for
outside storage, and fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for inside storage, except for
tractor trailers. For tractor trailers, the maximum storage rates shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day for the tractor and eighty-five dollars ($85.00) per day
for the trailer.
Administration fees shall only apply after three (3) days.
C Class: The maximum tow rate is six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) per
hour from start to stop. This rate applies regardless of the time of day, or the
day of the week. This rate also applies on weekends and holidays.
There shall be no separate fuel charge.
There shall be no separate winching fee.
Maximum storage rates shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per day for
outside storage, and fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for inside storage, except for
tractor trailers. For tractor trailers, the maximum storage rates shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day for the tractor and eighty-five dollars ($85.00) per day
for the trailer.
Administration fees shall only apply after three (3) days.
The maximum charges set forth above for all classes of wreckers do not
apply to:
Consensual wrecker services provided by a towing company for a private
individual or entity that chooses to enter into a private contract with the towing
or wrecker company for service. (Owner's request.)
Non-consensual towing from private property that occurs when a private
property owner hires or otherwise authorizes a wrecker or towing company to
remove a vehicle from that owner's private property.
Any towing or wrecker services provided by a wrecker permit holder when
that permit holder is not operating on the city's rotational call list at the time
the wrecker services are provided. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006,
repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006,
Ord. #2010-22, June 2010, and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1217. Additional rules and regulations for wrecker permit
holders. (1) All operators shall respond to a wreck within a reasonable time
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-63
after being called, and except for exigent or unusual circumstances a response
must be made within thirty (30) minutes after the dispatch request is made to
the wrecker operator. If the wrecker is engaged elsewhere or for any reason the
wrecker operator cannot reasonably expect to respond within thirty (30)
minutes, it shall be the duty of the wrecker operator to so advise the police
department and decline to accept the call whereupon the next wrecker operator
on rotation shall be called. Class C wreckers and recovery class wreckers shall
be granted an additional fifteen (15) minutes to respond to a tow for a large
truck, road tractor and trailers.
(2) No wrecker operator shall refer or delegate police calls to other
wrecker companies.
(3) No answering service, paging service or similar service or
procedure may be used to forward a call to an owner or employee of the wrecker
service between the hours of 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday,
excluding legal holidays. The wrecker permit holder may provide for an
after-hours number which shall be provided to the wrecker inspector.
(4) The first wrecker operator at the scene shall tow the vehicle
causing the greatest hazard as directed by the investigating police officer.
(5) A wrecker operator may accept a dispatch of more than one (1)
wrecker only if qualified wreckers and operators are available within the time
limits specified above.
(6) All permit holders shall file with the wrecker inspector a photocopy
of a current operator's license for each employee authorized to operate a wrecker
for the permit holder. The photocopy of any new operator's license shall be filed
within ten (10) days following employment or renewal of the operator's license.
(7) All permits holders shall immediately notify the wrecker inspector,
in writing, of any driver's license changes or any actions committed by a driver
which would cause that operator's driver's license to be suspended, revoked, or
cancelled. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37,
Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, Ord. #2010-22, June 2010,
and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1218. Vehicles to be towed to place designated by owner or
operator of vehicle. The wrecker operator may tow the wrecked or disabled
vehicle to the operator's place of business; provided, if the owner or agent of the
wrecked or disabled vehicle pays or secures the towing charges, then the
wrecker operator shall pull the vehicle to any place designated by such owner
or agent. It shall be unlawful for the wrecker owner, or an agent, employee or
representative of the wrecker owner to high-pressure or otherwise coerce any
owner of a wrecked or disabled vehicle to sign a work order or agreement at the
scene of an accident for any repairs to be made on such wrecked or disabled
vehicle. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct.
2006, added by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2014-11, April
2014)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-64
20-1219. Rotational call list - wreckers to go to scene of accident
on call of dispatcher or owner/operator only. When a member of the
Cleveland Police Department is dispatched to an accident, or is involved in other
matters which may require wrecker assistance, the investigating officer, after
making a determination of the need for a wrecker, will generally offer "owner's
request" to the registered owner, driver, or any competent occupant, except in
those situations where, in the officer's opinion, an emergency exists, or where
the immediate clearing of a public thoroughfare mandates that a tow operator
be requested on an expedited basis, or when the occupants have been physically
arrested.
If the registered owner, driver or other competent adult does not exercise
the owner's request, or if the officer determines that the owner's request is not
warranted, then that officer shall then call the dispatcher. The dispatcher will
notify the next scheduled wrecker on the rotational call list to respond.
The investigating officer will normally follow the set rotational list except
in situations where the wrecker on the rotational call list indicates an inability
to respond in a timely manner or other weather or emergency situations which
the officer deems it necessary to dispatch the closest available wrecker or if a
specialized service is deemed to be needed, or if the wrecker on the rotational
call list cannot be reached for some reason.
It shall be unlawful for any wrecker operator, or his agent or
representative, to go to any place where an accident has occurred unless called
by the dispatcher or unless called directly by the owner or operator of a motor
vehicle. Under either circumstance, the wrecker operator shall clear with the
dispatcher before going to the accident scene. It shall be unlawful for the owner
of any wrecker, or his agent or representative, to go to the place of a wreck by
reason of information received by shortwave radio, police radio or scanner.
A wrecker operator operating under this chapter shall not proceed to the
scene of a disabled motor vehicle without having been requested or notified to
do so, as provided in this section. Responding to a call upon notice from gas
station attendants, taxicab drivers or other unauthorized persons shall be
considered a violation of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July 2006,
repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct. 2006,
and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1220. Emergency towing and storage. Whenever any police officer
finds a vehicle standing upon any street or highway and the vehicle constitutes
a hazard to the safe movement of traffic along such street, or when the towing
of such vehicle is otherwise permitted by the Cleveland Municipal Code or other
applicable law, the officer shall:
(1) Notify the police dispatcher, who shall call the wrecker having the
class of wrecker necessary.
(2) The wrecker shall tow the wrecker or disabled motor vehicle in the
manner and procedures as provided in this chapter; and
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-65
(3) The wrecker shall be entitled to recover any unpaid charges for
towing and storage in accordance with title 55, chapter 16, Tennessee Code
Annotated, "Unclaimed or Abandoned Vehicles." (as added by Ord. #2006-23,
July 2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38,
Oct. 2006, and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
20-1221. Severability. If any provision of this chapter is determined to
be unenforceable or invalid, such determination will not affect the validity of the
other provisions contained in this article. Failure to enforce any provision of
this chapter does not affect the rights of the parties to enforce such provision in
another circumstance, nor does it affect the rights of the parties to enforce any
other provision of this article at any time. (as added by Ord. #2006-23, July
2006, repealed by Ord. #2006-37, Oct. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2006-38, Oct.
2006, and Ord. #2014-11, April 2014)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-66
CHAPTER 13
CODE OF ETHICS
SECTION
20-1301. Applicability.
20-1302. Definition of "personal interest."
20-1303. Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote.
20-1304. Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters.
20-1305. Acceptance of gratuities, etc.
20-1306. Use of information.
20-1307. use of municipal time, facilities, etc.
20-1308. Use of position or authority.
20-1309. Outside employment.
20-1310. Ethics complaints.
20-1311. Violations.
20-1301. Applicability. This chapter is the code of ethics for personnel
of the municipality. It applies to all full-time and part-time elected or appointed
officials and employees, whether compensated or not, including those of any
separate board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other
instrumentality appointed or created by the municipality. The words
"municipal" and "municipality" include these separate entities. (as added by
Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
20-1302. Definition of "personal interest." (1) For purposes of
§ 20-1303 and 20-1304, "personal interest" means:
(a) Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in the
subject of a vote by a municipal board not otherwise regulated by state
statutes on conflicts of interests; or
(b) Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in a
matter to be regulated or supervised; or
(c) Any such financial, ownership, or employment interest of the
official's or employee's spouse, parent(s), step-parent(s), grandparent(s),
sibling(s), child(ren), or stepchild(ren).
(2) The words "employment interest" include a situation in which an
official or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible
employment with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that
is to be regulated or supervised.
(3) In any situation in which a personal interest is also a conflict of
interest under state law, the provisions of the state law take precedence over the
provisions of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-67
20-1303. Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote. An
official with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall disclose during the
meeting at which the vote takes place. before the vote and so it appears in the
minutes. any personal interest that affects or that would lead a reasonable
person to infer that it affects the official's vote on the measure. In addition, the
official may recuse himself from voting on the measure. (as added by
Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
20-1304. Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters.
An official or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any matter,
other than casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the matter that
affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the exercise
of the discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of the discretion when
possible, the interest on a form provided by and filed with the city clerk. In
addition, the official or employee may, to the extent allowed by law, charter,
ordinance, or policy, recuse himself or herself from the exercise of discretion in
the matter. (as added by Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
20-1305. Acceptance of gratuities, etc. An official or employee may
not accept, directly or indirectly, any money, gift, gratuity, brother consideration
or favor of any kind from anyone other than the municipality:
(1) For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of
an act, that he or she would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing,
in the regular course of his duties; or
(2) That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence
his or her action, or reward him or her for past action, in executing municipal
business. (as added by Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
20-1306. Use of information. (1) An official or employee may not
disclose any information obtained in his or her official capacity or position of
employment that is made confidential under state or federal law except as
authorized by law.
(2) An official or employee may not use or disclose information
obtained in his or her official capacity or position of employment with the intent
to result in financial gain for himself or herself or any other person or entity.
(as added by Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
20-1307. Use of municipal time, facilities, etc. (1) An official or
employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities,
equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to himself or herself.
(2) An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of
municipal time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage
to any private person or entity, except as authorized by legitimate contract or
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-68
lease that is determined by the governing body to be in the best interests of the
municipality. (as added by Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
20-1308. Use of position or authority. (1) An official or employee
may not make or attempt to make private purchases, for cash or otherwise, in
the name of the municipality.
(2) An official or employee may not use or attempt to use his or her
position to secure any privilege or exemption for himself or herself or others that
is not authorized by the charter, general law, or ordinance or policy of the
municipality. (as added by Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
20-1309. Outside employment. An official or employee may not accept
or continue any outside employment if the work unreasonably inhibits the
performance of any affirmative duty of the municipal position or conflicts with
any provision of the municipality's charter or any ordinance or policy. (as added
by Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
20-1310. Ethics complaints. (1) The city attorney is designated as the
ethics officer of the municipality. Upon the written request of an official or
employee potentially affected by a provision of this chapter, the city attorney
may render an oral or written advisory ethics opinion based upon this chapter
and other applicable law.
(2) (a) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the city
attorney shall investigate any credible complaint against an appointed
official or employee charging any violation of this chapter, or may
undertake an investigation on his or her own initiative when he or she
acquires information indicating a possible violation and make
recommendations for action to end or seek retribution for any activity
that, in the attorney's judgment, constitutes a violation of this code of
ethics.
(b) The city attorney may request that the governing body hire
another attorney, individual, or entity to act as ethics officer when he or
she has or will have a conflict of interests in a particular matter.
(c) When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this
chapter is lodged against a member of the municipality's governing body,
the governing body shall either determine that the complaint has merit,
determine that the complaint does not have merit, or determine that the
complaint has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If the
governing body determines that a complaint warrants further
investigation, it shall authorize an investigation by the city attorney or
another individual or entity chosen by the governing body.
(3) The interpretation that a reasonable person In the circumstances
would apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-69
(4) When a violation of this code of ethics also constitutes a violation
of a personnel policy, rule, or regulation, the violation shall be dealt with as a
violation of the personnel provisions rather than as a violation of this code of
ethics. (as added by Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
20-1311. Violation. An elected official or appointed member of a
separate municipal board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or
other instrumentality who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
punishment as provided by the municipality's charter or other applicable law
and in addition is subject to censure by the governing body. An appointed official
or an employee who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
disciplinary action. (as added by Ord. #2006-49, March 2007)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-70
CHAPTER 14
MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER
SECTION
20-1401. Municipal administrative hearing officer.
20-1402. Communication by administrative hearing officer and parties in
contested cases.
20-1403. Appearance in person or by a duly authorized representativerepresentation
by counsel.
20-1404. Pre-hearing conference-hearing or converting pre-hearing conference
to a hearing-pre-hearing orders.
20-1405. Appointment of administrative hearing officer-temporary appointment
of administrative law judge.
20-1406. Training and continuing education-fees.
20-1407. Jurisdiction not exclusive.
20-1408. Citations for violations - written notice - signature of violator-service
on absentee property owners-deadline for transmission of citations.
20-1409. Review of citation for appropriateness - levy of fines-setting hearing
- cancellation of fines and hearing if violation remedied.
20-1410. Party in default.
20-1411. Petitions for intervention - conditions on intervenor's participation.
20-1412. Regulating course of proceedings - full disclosure of all relevant facts
and issues-hearing open to public.
20-1413. Evidence and affidavits - official notice - information in the notice.
20-1414. Rendering of final order - findings of fact - appointment of qualified
substitute - submission of proposed findings.
20-1415. Statement of when order entered and effective-compliance with final
order.
20-1416. Collection of fines, judgments and debts.
20-1417. Judicial review of final order.
20-1418. Appeal to court of appeals.
20-1401. Municipal administrative hearing officer. (1) In
accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, title 6, chapter 54, part 10, there
is hereby created the office of administrative hearing officer to hear violations
of any of the provisions codified in the Cleveland Municipal Code relating to
building and property maintenance including:
(a) Building codes adopted by the City of Cleveland-Cleveland
Municipal Code-title 12;
(b) All residential codes adopted by the City of
Cleveland-Cleveland Municipal Code-title 12;
(c) All plumbing codes adopted by the City of
Cleveland-Cleveland Municipal Code-title 12;
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-71
(d) All electrical codes adopted by the City of
Cleveland-Cleveland Municipal Code-title 12;
(e) All gas codes adopted by the City of Cleveland-Cleveland
Municipal Code-title 12;
(f) All mechanical codes adopted by the City of
Cleveland-Cleveland Municipal Code-title 12;
(g) All energy codes adopted by the City of Cleveland;
(h) All property maintenance codes and regulations adopted by
the City of Cleveland-Cleveland Municipal Code-title 13;
(i) All ordinances regulating any subject matter commonly
found in the above-described codes.
The administrative hearing officer is not authorized to hear
violation of codes adopted by the state fire marshal pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-120-101(a) enforced by a deputy building
inspector pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-120-101(f).
The utilization of the administrative hearing officer shall be at the
discretion of the city manager and/or the city manager's designee, and
shall be an alternative to the enforcement included in the Cleveland
Municipal Code.
(2) There is hereby created one (1) administrative hearing officer
position to be appointed pursuant to § 20-1405 below.
(3) The amount of compensation for the administrative hearing officer
shall be approved by the city council.
(4) Clerical and administrative support for the office of administrative
hearing officer shall be provided as determined by the city manager.
(5) The administrative hearing officer shall perform all of the duties
and abide by all of the requirements provided in title 6, chapter 54, section 1001,
et seq., of the Tennessee Code Annotated. (as added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug.
2012)
20-1402. Communication by administrative hearing officer and
parties in contested cases. (1) Unless required for the disposition of ex parte
matters specifically authorized by statute, an administrative hearing officer
presiding over a contested case proceeding may not communicate, directly or
indirectly, regarding any issue in the proceeding, while the proceeding is
pending, with any person without notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate in the communication.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), an administrative hearing officer
may communicate with municipal employees or officials regarding a matter
pending before the administrative body or may receive aid from staff assistants,
members of the staff of the city attorney or a licensed attorney, if such persons
do not receive ex parte communications of a type that the administrative
hearing officer would be prohibited from receiving, and do not furnish, augment,
diminish or modify the evidence in the record.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-72
(3) Unless required for the disposition of ex parte matters specifically
authorized by statute, no party to a contested case, and no other person may
communicate, directly or indirectly, in connection with any issue in that
proceeding, while the proceeding is pending, with any person serving as an
administrative hearing officer without notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate in the communication.
(4) If, before serving as an administrative hearing officer in a contested
case, a person receives an ex parte communication of a type that may not
properly be received while serving, the person, promptly after starting to serve,
shall disclose the communication in the manner prescribed in subsection (5).
(5) An administrative hearing officer who receives an ex parte
communication in violation of this section shall place on the record of the
pending matter all written communications received, all written responses to
the communications, and a memorandum stating the substance of all oral
communications received, all responses made, and the identity of each person
from whom the person received an ex parte communication, and shall advise all
parties that these matters have been placed on the record. Any party desiring
to rebut the ex parte communication shall be allowed to do so, upon requesting
the opportunity for rebuttal within ten (10) business days after notice of the
communication. (as added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1403. Appearance in person or by a duly authorized
representative-representation by counsel. (1) Any party may participate
in the hearing in person or, if the party is a corporation or other artificial
person, by a duly authorized representative.
(2) Whether or not participating in person, any party may be advised
and represented at the party's own expense by counsel or, unless prohibited by
any provision of law, other representative. (as added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug.
2012)
20-1404. Pre-hearing conference-hearing or converting
pre-hearing conference to a hearing-pre-hearing orders. (1)(a) In any
action set for hearing, the administrative hearing officer, upon the
administrative hearing officer's own motion, or upon motion of one (1) of
the parties or such party's qualified representatives, may direct the
parties or the attorneys for the parties, or both, to appear before the
administrative hearing officer for a conference to consider:
(i) The simplification of issues;
(ii) The possibility of obtaining admissions of fact and of
documents that will avoid unnecessary proof;
(iii) The limitation of the number of witnesses; and
(iv) Such other matters as may aid in the disposition of
the action.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-73
(b) The administrative hearing officer shall make an order that
recites the action taken at the conference, and the agreements made by
the parties as to any of the matters considered, and that limits the issues
for hearing to those not disposed of by admissions or agreements of the
parties. Such order when entered controls the subsequent course of the
action, unless modified at the hearing to prevent manifest injustice.
(2) Upon reasonable notice to all parties, the administrative hearing
officer may convene a hearing or convert a pre-hearing conference to a hearing,
to be conducted by the administrative hearing officer sitting alone, to consider
argument or evidence, or both, on any question of law.
(3) In the discretion of the administrative hearing officer, all or part
of the pre-hearing conference may be conducted by telephone, television or other
electronic means, if each participant in the conference has an opportunity to
participate in, to hear, and, if technically feasible, to see the entire proceeding
while it is taking place.
(4) If a pre-hearing conference is not held, the administrative hearing
officer may issue a pre-hearing order, based on the pleadings, to regulate the
conduct of the proceedings. (as added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1405. Appointment of administrative hearing
officer-temporary appointment of administrative law judge. (1) The
administrative hearing officer shall be appointed by the city council for a
four-year term and serve at the pleasure of the city council. Such administrative
hearing officer may be reappointed.
(2) An administrative hearing officer shall be one (1) of the following:
(a) Licensed building inspector;
(b) Licensed plumbing inspector;
(c) Licensed electrical inspector;
(d) Licensed attorney;
(e) Licensed architect; or
(f) Licensed engineer;
(3) The city may also contract with the Administrative Procedures
Division, office of the Tennessee Secretary of State to employ an administrative
law judge on a temporary basis to serve as an administrative hearing officer.
Such administrative law judge shall not be subject to the training or continuing
education requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-1007 (a) and (b).
(as added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1406. Training and continuing education-fees. (1) Each person
appointed to serve as an administrative hearing officer shall, within the six (6)
month period immediately following the date of such appointment, participate
in a program of training conducted by the University of Tennessee's Municipal
Technical Advisory Service, (MTAS) or its designee(s). MTAS shall issue a
certificate of participation to each person whose attendance is satisfactory.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-74
(2) Each person actively serving as an administrative hearing officer
shall complete six (6) hours of continuing education every calendar year. The
education required by this section shall be in addition to any other continuing
education requirements required for other professional licenses held by the
administrative hearing officer(s). No continuing education hours from one (1)
calendar year may be carried over to a subsequent calendar year.
(3) MTAS has the authority to set and enact appropriate fees for the
requirements of this section. The city shall bear the cost of the fees for
administrative hearing officer serving the city.
(4) Costs pursuant to this section shall be offset by fees enacted. (as
added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1407. Jurisdiction not exclusive. The power and authority vested
in the office of administrative hearing is not exclusive and does not terminate
or diminish any other existing municipal power or authority. The Cleveland City
Council may direct a municipal officer or employee to develop criteria for
determining when to exercise administrative enforcement. (as added by Ord.
#2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1408. Citations for violations - written notice-signature of
violator - service on absentee property owners-deadline for
transmission of citations. (1) Upon the issuance of a citation for violation of
a municipal ordinance referenced in the city's administrative hearing ordinance,
the issuing officer shall provide written notice of:
(a) A short and plain statement of the matters asserted. If the
issuing officer is unable to state the matters in detail at the time the
citation is served, the initial notice may be limited to a statement of the
issues involved and the ordinance violations alleged. Thereafter, upon
timely, written application a more definite and detailed statement shall
be furnished ten (10) business days prior to the time set for the hearing;
(b) A short and plain description of the city's administrative
hearing process including references to state and local statutory
authority;
(c) Contact information for the city's administrative hearing
office; and
(d) Time frame in which the hearing officer will review the
citation and determine the fine and remedial period, if any.
(2) Citations issued for violations of ordinances referenced in the city's
administrative hearing ordinance shall be signed by the alleged violator at the
time of issuance. If an alleged violator refuses to sign, the issuing officer shall
note the refusal and attest to the alleged violator's receipt of the citation. An
alleged violator's signature on a citation is not admission of guilt.
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-75
(3) Citations issued upon absentee property owners may be served via
certified mail sent to the last known address of the recorded owner of the
property.
(4) Citations issued for violations of ordinances referenced in the city's
administrative hearing ordinance shall be transmitted to an administrative
hearing officer within two (2) business days of issuance. (as added by Ord.
#2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1409. Review of citation for appropriateness - levy of
fines-setting hearing - cancellation of fines and hearing if violation
remedied. (1) Upon receipt of a citation issued pursuant to § 20-1408, the
administrative hearing officer shall, within seven (7) business days of receipt,
review the appropriateness of an alleged violation. Upon determining that a
violation does exist, the hearing officer has the authority to levy a fine upon the
alleged violator in accordance with this section. Any fine levied by a hearing
officer must be reasonable based upon the totality of the circumstances.
(a) For violations occurring upon residential property a hearing
officer has the authority to levy a fine upon the violator not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. For purposes of the
administrative hearing officer program, "residential property" means a
single family dwelling principally used as the property owner's primary
residence and the real property upon which it sits.
(b) For violations occurring upon non-residential property a
hearing officer has the authority to levy a fine upon the violator not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day. For purposes
of the administrative hearing officer program, "non-residential property"
means all real property, structures, buildings and dwellings that are not
residential property.
(2) If a fine is levied pursuant to subsection (1), the hearing officer
shall set a reasonable period of time to allow the alleged violator to remedy the
violation alleged in the citation before the fine is imposed. The remedial period
shall be no less than ten (10) or greater than one hundred twenty (120) calendar
days, except where failure to remedy the alleged violation in less than ten (10)
calendar days would pose an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of
persons or property in the adjacent area.
(3) Upon the levy of a fine pursuant to subsection (1), the hearing
officer shall within seven (7) business days, provide via certified mail notice to
the alleged violator of:
(a) The fine and remedial period established pursuant to
subsections (1) and (2);
(b) A statement of the time, place, nature of the hearing, and
the right to be represented by counsel; and
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-76
(c) A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under
which the hearing is to be held, including a reference to the particular
sections of the statutes and rules involved.
(4) The date of the hearing shall be no less than thirty (30) calendar
days following the issuance of the citation. To confirm the hearing, the alleged
violator must make a written request for the hearing to the hearing officer
within seven (7) business days of receipt of the notice required in subsection (3).
(5) If an alleged violator demonstrates to the issuing officer's
satisfaction that the allegations contained in the citation have been remedied
to the issuing officer's satisfaction, the fine levied pursuant to subsection (1)
shall not be imposed or if already imposed cease; and the hearing date, if the
hearing has not yet occurred, shall be cancelled. (as added by Ord. #2012-15,
Aug. 2012)
20-1410. Party in default. (1) If a party fails to attend or participate
in a pre-hearing conference, hearing or other stage of a contested case, the
administrative hearing officer may hold the party in default and either adjourn
the proceedings or conduct them without the participation of that party, having
due regard for the interest of justice and the orderly and prompt conduct of the
proceedings.
(2) If the proceedings are conducted without the participation of the
party in default, the administrative hearing officer shall include in the final
order a written notice of default and a written statement of the grounds for the
default. (as added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1411. Petitions for intervention - conditions on intervenor's
participation. (1) The administrative hearing officer shall grant one (1) or
more petitions for intervention if:
(a) The petition is submitted in writing to the administrative
hearing officer, with copies mailed to all parties named in the notice of
the hearing, at least seven (7) business days before the hearing;
(b) The petition states facts demonstrating that the petitioner's
legal rights, duties, privileges, immunities or other legal interest may be
determined in the proceeding or that the petitioner qualifies as an
intervenor under any provision of law; and
(c) The administrative hearing officer determines that the
interests of justice and the orderly and prompt conduct of the proceedings
shall not be impaired by allowing the intervention.
(2) If a petitioner qualifies for intervention, the administrative hearing
officer may impose conditions upon the intervenor's participation in the
proceedings, either at the time that intervention is granted or at any subsequent
time. Conditions may include:
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-77
(a) Limiting the intervenor's participation to designated issues
in which the intervenor has a particular interest demonstrated by the
petition;
(b) Limiting the intervenor's participation so as to promote the
orderly and prompt conduct of the proceedings; and
(c) Requiring two (2) or more intervenors to combine their
participation in the proceedings.
(3) The administrative hearing officer, at least twenty-four (24) hours
before the hearing, shall render an order granting or denying each pending
petition for intervention, specifying any conditions, and briefly stating the
reasons for the order. The administrative hearing officer may modify the order
at any time, stating the reasons for the modification. The administrative hearing
officer shall promptly give notice of an order granting, denying or modifying
intervention to the petitioner for intervention and to all parties. (as added by
Ord. #2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1412. Regulating course of proceedings - full disclosure of all
relevant facts and issues - hearing open to public. (1) The administrative
hearing officer shall regulate the course of the proceedings, in conformity with
the pre-hearing order, if any.
(2) To the extent necessary for full disclosure of all relevant facts and
issues, the administrative hearing officer shall afford to all parties the
opportunity to respond, present evidence and argument, conduct
cross-examination, and submit rebuttal evidence, except as restricted by a
limited grant of intervention or by the pre-hearing order.
(3) In the discretion of the administrative hearing officer and by
agreement of the parties, all or part of the hearing may be conducted by
telephone, television or other electronic means, if each participant in the hearing
has an opportunity to participate in, to hear, and, if technically feasible, to see
the entire proceedings while taking place.
(4) The hearing shall be open to public observation pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 8, chapter 44 unless otherwise provided by
state or federal law. To the extent that a hearing is conducted by telephone,
television or other electronic means, the availability of public observation shall
be satisfied by giving members of the public an opportunity, at reasonable times,
to hear the tape recording and to inspect any transcript produced, if any. (as
added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1413. Evidence and affidavits - official notice - information in
the notice. (1) In administrative hearings:
(a) The administrative hearing officer shall admit and give
probative effect to evidence admissible in a court, and when necessary to
ascertain facts not reasonably susceptible to proof under the rules of
court, evidence not admissible thereunder may be admitted if it is of a
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-78
type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent men in the conduct of
their affairs. The administrative hearing officer shall give effect to the
rules of privilege recognized by law and to statutes protecting the
confidentiality of certain records, and shall exclude evidence which in his
or her judgment is irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious;
(b) At any time not less than ten (10) business days prior to a
hearing or a continued hearing, any party shall deliver to the opposing
party a copy of any affidavit such party proposes to introduce in evidence,
together with a notice in the form provided in subsection (2). Unless the
opposing party, within seven (7) business days after delivery, delivers to
the proponent a request to cross-examine an affiant, the opposing party's
right to cross-examination of such affiant is waived and the affidavit, if
introduced in evidence, shall be given the same effect as if the affiant had
testified orally. If an opportunity to cross-examine an affiant is not
afforded after a proper request is made as provided in this subdivision (b),
the affidavit shall not be admitted into evidence. "Delivery," for purposes
of this section, means actual receipt;
(c) The administrative hearing officer may admit affidavits not
submitted in accordance with this section where necessary to prevent
injustice;
(d) Documentary evidence otherwise admissible may be received
in the form of copies or excerpts, or by incorporation by reference to
material already on file with the municipality. Upon request, parties
shall be given an opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if
reasonably available; and
(e) (i) Official notice may be taken of:
(A) Any fact that could be judicially noticed in the
courts of this state;
(B) The record of other proceedings before the
agency; or
(C) Technical or scientific matters within the
administrative hearing officer's specialized knowledge; and
(ii) Parties must be notified before or during the hearing,
or before the issuance of any final order that is based in whole or
in part on facts or material notice, of the specific facts or material
noticed and the source thereof, including any staff memoranda and
data, and be afforded an opportunity to contest and rebut the facts
or material so noticed.
(2) The notice referred to in subdivision (b) shall contain the following
information and be substantially in the following form:
The accompanying affidavit of __________ (here insert name of
affiant) will be introduced as evidence at the hearing in __________
(here insert title of proceeding). __________ (here insert name of
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-79
affiant) will not be called to testify orally and you will not be
entitled to question such affiant unless you notify __________ (here
insert name of the proponent or the proponent's attorney) at
__________ (here insert address) that you wish to cross-examine
such affiant. To be effective, your request must be mailed or
delivered to __________ (here insert name of proponent or the
proponent's attorney) on or before __________ (here insert a date
seven (7) business days after the date of mailing or delivering the
affidavit to the opposing party). (as added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug.
2012)
20-1414. Rendering of final order - findings of fact - appointment
of qualified substitute - submission of proposed findings. (1) An
administrative hearing officer shall render a final order in all cases brought
before his or her body.
(2) A final order shall include conclusions of law, the policy reasons
therefore, and findings of fact for all aspects of the order, including the remedy
prescribed. Findings of fact, if set forth in language that is no more than mere
repetition or paraphrase of the relevant provision of law, shall be accompanied
by a concise and explicit statement of the underlying facts of record to support
the findings. The final order must also include a statement of the available
procedures and time limits for seeking reconsideration or other administrative
relief and the time limits for seeking judicial review of the final order.
(3) Findings of fact shall be based exclusively upon the evidence of
record in the adjudicative proceeding and on matters officially noticed in that
proceeding. The administrative hearing officer's experience, technical
competence and specialized knowledge may be utilized in the evaluation of
evidence.
(4) If an individual serving or designated to serve as an administrative
hearing officer becomes unavailable, for any reason, before rendition of the final
order, a qualified substitute shall be appointed. The substitute shall use any
existing record and may conduct any further proceedings as is appropriate in the
interest of justice.
(5) The administrative hearing officer may allow the parties a
designated amount of time after conclusion of the hearing for the submission of
proposed findings.
(6) A final order rendered pursuant to subsection (1) shall be rendered
in writing within seven (7) business days after conclusion of the hearing or after
submission of proposed findings unless such period is waived or extended with
the written consent of all parties or for good cause shown.
(7) The administrative hearing officer shall cause copies of the final
order under subsection (1) to be delivered to each party. (as added by Ord.
#2012-15, Aug. 2012)
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-80
20-1415. Statement of when order entered and effective -
compliance with final order. (1) All final orders shall state when the order
is entered and effective.
(2) A party may not be required to comply with a final order unless the
final order has been mailed to the last known address of the party or unless the
party has actual knowledge of the final order. (as added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug.
2012)
20-1416. Collection of fines, judgments and debts. The city may
collect a fine levied pursuant to this section by any legal means available to a
municipality to collect any other fine, judgment or debt. (as added by Ord.
#2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1417. Judicial review of final order. (1) A person who is
aggrieved by a final decision in a contested case is entitled to judicial review
under this chapter, which shall be the only available method of judicial review.
(2) Proceedings for judicial review of a final order are instituted by
filing a petition for review in the chancery court in the county where the
municipality lies. Such petition must be filed within sixty (60) calendar days
after the entry of the final order that is the subject of the review.
(3) The filing of the petition for review does not itself stay enforcement
of the final order. The reviewing court may order a stay on appropriate terms,
but if it is shown to the satisfaction of the reviewing court, in a hearing that
shall be held within ten (10) business days of a request for hearing by either
party, that any party or the public at large may suffer injury by reason of the
granting of a stay, then no stay shall be granted until a good and sufficient bond,
in an amount fixed and approved by the court, shall be given by the petitioner
conditioned to indemnify the other persons who might be so injured and if no
bond amount is sufficient, the stay shall be denied.
(4) Within forty-five (45) calendar days after service of the petition, or
within further time allowed by the court, the administrative hearing officer shall
transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the entire
record of the proceeding under review. By stipulation of all the parties of the
review proceedings, the record may be shortened. A party unreasonably refusing
to stipulate to limit the record may be taxed by the court for the additional cost.
The court may require or permit subsequent corrections or additions to the
record.
(5) If, before the date set for hearing, application is made to the court
for leave to present additional evidence, and it is shown to the satisfaction of the
court that the additional evidence is material and that there were good reasons
for failure to present it in the administrative proceeding, the court may order
that the additional evidence be taken before the administrative hearing officer
upon conditions determined by the court. The administrative hearing officer
may modify its findings and decision by reason of the additional evidence and
Change 16, December 14, 2015 20-81
shall file that evidence and any modifications, new findings or decisions with the
reviewing court.
(6) The procedure ordinarily followed in the reviewing court will be
followed in the review of contested cases decided by the administrative hearing
officer, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The administrative hearing
officer that issued the decision to be reviewed is not required to file a responsive
pleading.
(7) The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury and shall
be confined to the record. In cases of alleged irregularities in procedure before
the administrative hearing officer, not shown in the record, proof thereon may
be taken in the court.
(8) The court may affirm the decision of the administrative hearing
officer or remand the case for further proceedings. The court may reverse or
modify the decision if the rights of the petitioner have been prejudiced because
the administrative findings, inferences, conclusions or decisions are:
(a) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
(b) In excess of the statutory authority of the administrative
hearing officer;
(c) Made upon unlawful procedure;
(d) Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion; or
(e) Unsupported by evidence that is both substantial and
material in the light of the entire record. In determining the
substantiality of evidence, the court shall take into account whatever in
the record fairly detracts from its weight, but the court shall not
substitute its judgment for that of the administrative hearing officer as
to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact.
(9) No administrative hearing decision pursuant to a hearing shall be
reversed, remanded or modified by the reviewing court unless for errors that
affect the merits of such decision.
(10) The reviewing court shall reduce its findings of fact and conclusions
of law to writing and make them parts of the record. (as added by Ord.
#2012-15, Aug. 2012)
20-1418. Appeal to court of appeals. (1) An aggrieved party may
obtain a review of any final judgment of the chancery court under this chapter
by appeal to the Court of Appeals of Tennessee.
(2) The record certified to the chancery court and the record in the
chancery court shall constitute the record in an appeal. Evidence taken in court
pursuant to title 24 shall become a part of the record.
(3) The procedure on appeal shall be governed by the Tennessee Rules
of Appellate Procedure. (as added by Ord. #2012-15, Aug. 2012)
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-A-1
APPENDIX A
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE ORDINANCE1
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO TELECABLE OF
CLEVELAND, INC., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, TO OPERATE,
MAINTAIN, AND CARRY ON THE BUSINESS OF TRANSMITTING
TELEVISION, VIDEO, AND/OR AUDIO SIGNALS TO PERSONS,
ASSOCIATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS, AND CORPORATIONS IN THE CITY OF
CLEVELAND, TENNESSEE:
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF MAYOR AND
COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF CLEVELAND AS FOLLOWS:
Section1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Franchise, the following terms, phrases, words
and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular
number include the plural number.
a. "State" is the State of Tennessee.
b. "City" is the City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
c. "Company" is TeleCable of Cleveland, Inc., a Tennessee
Corporation.
d. "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
e. "Cable Communications System," "Cable Televison System"
or "CATV System," shall mean a system of antennas, cables, wires, lines,
towers, waveguides, or other conductors, converters, equipment or
facilities, designed and constructed for the purpose of producing,
receiving, transmitting, amplifying and distributing, audio, video and
other forms of electronic or electrical signals, located in the City.
f. "Gross receipts" means all receipts received directly or
indirectly by Grantee derived from the operation of the Cable System to
1This ordinance was passed by the city council on January 19, 1990.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-A-2
provide Cable Services (as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6)). Gross Receipts
shall specifically include any receipts derived from the operation of the
Cable System to provide Cable Services received by Grantee's affiliates,
subsidiaries, parents, or any person or entity in which Grantee has
financial interest, including any receipts which have the effect of avoiding
the payment of compensation that would otherwise be payable as a
percentage of Gross Receipts to the City for the Franchise granted herein.
Gross Receipts shall include franchise fees collected from subscribers.
Gross receipts shall not include receipts received from the
provision of Internet Service over the cable system until such time as the
FCC rules that such service shall be designated a Cable Service and
included in Gross Receipts for the purpose of calculating franchise fees.
Further, Gross Receipts shall not include:
(1) Any taxes, fees or assessment collected by the
Grantee from Subscribers for pass-through to a government
agency, including the FCC User Fee;
(2) Un-recovered bad debt; and
(3) Any PEG or li-Net amounts recovered from
Subscribers.
On or before April 30th of each year of this agreement, Company
shall provide City with a detailed summary of gross receipts, by item and
type, subject to inclusion in the calculation of franchise fees received
during the preceding year, certified by an officer of the Company. The
Franchise Fee shall be payable in accordance with the ordinance.
g. "Effective Date" shall mean the day and year of final
passage.
h. "Basic Cable Services" shall mean the lowest priced level of
service offered by the Company that includes local broadcast stations. (as
amended by Ord. of 1/13/03)
Section 2. Grant of Authority.
There is hereby granted by the City to the Company, which is within the
power to the City to grant, the non-exclusive right and privilege to construct,
erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the
streets, alleys, City easements and right-of-ways, easements or right-of-ways
dedicated for use compatible with cable system operations, public ways and
public places now laid out or dedicated, utility easements, maintenance
easements, sewage and water easements, ingress and egress easements and all
extensions thereof and additions thereto in the City, wires, poles, cables,
underground conduits, conductors, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance
and operation in the City of a Cable Communications System. The Company
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-A-3
shall have the right in the operation of the system to make attachments to
City-owned property at such reasonable rates and upon such terms and
conditions as shall from time to time be determined by the City. The rights
herein granted shall extend to any area hereafter annexed to the City and
Company shall be bound by the same rules and regulations as to such area as
are otherwise herein or hereafter provided.
Section 3. Compliance with Laws, Regulations, Ordinances and Practices.
The Company shall, at all times during the life of this Franchise
Agreement, be subject to the lawful exercise of the police power of the City and
to such reasonable regulations no inconsistent herewith, as the City has or shall
hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide. The construction, operation and
maintenance of the system by the Company shall be in accord with good
engineering practices and shall be in full compliance with the National
Electrical Safety Code and applicable laws.
Section 4. Company Liability and Indemnification.
a. Company shall save City harmless from all loss sustained
by the City on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand,
including costs and attorneys fees, whatsoever, arising out of the
negligence of the Company in the construction, operation and
maintenance of its system. The Company agrees to maintain and keep
in full force and effect at all times during the term of this Franchise
Agreement sufficient property damage and personal injury and public
liability insurance coverage to protect the City and the Company against
any such claims, suits, judgments, executions or demands in a sum of not
less than One Million and no/100 Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person for
any one claim, One Million and no/100 Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any one
accident or occurrence, and not less than One Million and no/100 Dollars
($1,000,000.00) for property damage as to any one accident or occurrence.
The City shall be named as an additional insured in said policy.
b. Company shall carry Comprehensive Automobile Liability
insurance to protect against bodily injury in the amount of One Million
and no/100 Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any one person and One Million
and no/100 Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any one occurrence and One
Million and no/100 Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage as to any
one accident or occurrence.
c. The Company shall also maintain in full force and effect
throughout the duration of this Franchise Agreement sufficient Worker's
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-A-4
Compensation Insurance Coverage to protect adequately and fully its
agents and employees as required by law.
d. All Insurance policies and bonds as are required of the
Company in this Franchise Agreement shall be written by a company or
companies authorized and qualified to do business in the State of
Tennessee. Certificates of all coverage required hereunder shall be
promptly filed by the Company with the City in the office of the City
Clerk and shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this
Franchise.
Section 5. Conditions of Street Occupancy and System Construction.
a. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and
equipment erected by the Company within the City shall be so located as
to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and
other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference with the
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets,
alley or other public ways or places.
b. In the case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalks,
driveways, or other surfacing, the Company shall, at its own expense and
in a manner required by the City, properly replace and/or restore such
places so disturbed.
c. In the event that at any time during the period of this
Franchise Agreement the City shall lawfully elect to alter or change the
location or grade of any street, alley, or other public way, the Company
upon reasonable notice by the City shall remove, relay, and relocate its
equipment at is own expense.
d. The Company shall not place any fixtures or equipment, and
the location by the Company of its lines and equipment shall be in such
a manner as to not interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys
and public ways and the use of the same by gas, electric, telephone, water
lines and other public utilities, fixtures and equipment.
e. The Company shall, on the request of the City, temporarily
raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings.
f. Nothing in the Franchise Agreement shall grant to the
Company any right to City-owned property, nor shall the City be
compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-A-5
fashion other than , in the City's judgment, its own business or needs may
require.
g. The City shall not be required to assume any responsibility
for the securing of any rights of way or easements, nor shall the City be
responsible for securing any permits or agreements with other persons or
utilities.
h. Where underground service shall be required for electric
power and telephone services, the City may require that underground
service be provided by the Company.
Section 6. Franchise Consideration.
The Company shall pay to the City each year a franchise fee sum equal
to five percent (5%) of the annual gross receipts up to Two Hundred Thousand
Dollars ($200,000.00) per year and five percent (5%) of annual gross receipts in
excess of Two Hundred Thousand Dollars ($200,000.00). Franchise fees shall
be paid quarterly within 30 days following the end of the calendar quarter. (as
amended by Ord. of 1/13/03)
Section 7. Service Standards.
a. The Company shall maintain and operate the system so that
there will be no interference with television reception, radio reception,
telephone communications ro other installations which are now or may
hereafter be installed and in use by the City or any persons in the City,
and in such a manner as to prevent radiation from its facilities in excess
of the limits specified in applicable rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission.
b. The Company shall take all necessary steps so that the
system shall maintain at all times:
(1) Use of all-band distribution plan equipment capable
of passing the entire VHF television and FM radio spectrum.
(2) Equipment that passes standard color television
signals without material degradation and with no appreciable
effect on color fidelity and intelligence.
(3) A minimum level of one thousand (1,000) micro-volts
at the input terminals of each TV receiver on one line.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-A-6
(4) A system and all equipment designed and rated for
24-hour per day continuous operation.
(5) A signal-to-noise ratio of not less than forty decibels
for broadcast signals received within the station's grade B contour.
(6) A television signal with a hum modulation less than
five (5) percent.
(7) Components that have voltage standing wave ratio of
1.4 or less.
(8) An inter-modulation distortion not to exceed minus
forty-six decibels.
(9) A plot of gain versus frequency across any six
megacycle channel of a flat plus or minus two decibels.
Section 8. Rights of Individuals.
The Company shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules,
regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or
advantage to any person, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage.
This shall not prohibit the Company from offering promotional discounts and
specials from time to time or offering bulk billing discounts to commercial
accounts.
Section 9. Local Office.
During the term of this Franchise and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a local (available by phone without long distance charges)
business office for the purpose of handling customer inquiries regarding the
ordering of service, equipment malfunctions, billing questions and similar
matters.
Section 10. Company Rules.
The Company shall have the authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business and shall
be reasonable necessary to enable the Company to exercise its rights and to
perform its obligations under this Franchise Agreement and to assure an
uninterrupted service to each and all its customers; provided, however that such
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-A-7
rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the
provisions hereof.
Section 11. Service to City.
The Company, at its own expense, shall provide and maintain one
connection to existing City office buildings, police stations, fire stations,
libraries, public schools, and any other public facilities as designated by the
City; provided, that the Company shall not be responsible for providing the
distribution system within any of such places. Further, no monthly customer
service fees shall be charged for one connection of basic service to such places.
Such connection shall be provided where service can be provided from the
Company's existing distribution plant.
Section 12. Construction Plans.
All new plant extensions and cable plant rebuild shall be constructed for
a fifty-four (54) channel capacity.
Section 13. New Developments.
It shall be the policy of the City to reasonably amend this Franchise
Agreement upon application of the Company when necessary to enable the
Company to take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of
television, radio signals and cable television, and to take advantage of any
changes in the Federal Laws or Regulations relating to cable television.
Section 14. Service Area.
The Company shall serve any area within the City where the housing
density is twenty-five (25) housing units or more per mile of contiguous cable
plant. The Company may enter into cost sharing arrangements to extend cable
service to those areas that do not meet the density standard. Areas annexed to
the City which meet the density standard shall be served within one (1) year
from the date of annexation unless it is not technically feasible.
Section 15. Separability.
In the event any section or part of this Franchise Agreement shall be held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining sections or portions of this
Franchise Agreement. If the terms of this Franchise Agreement should conflict
with any laws or regulations now in effect or hereafter adopted by the Federal
Communications Commission (or any other governmental agency now existing
or to be formed issuing rules and regulations affecting telecommunications), the
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-A-8
State or the United States government, compliance by the Company with such
rules shall not cause a forfeiture of this Franchise Agreement.
Section 16. Term.
This Franchise Agreement shall supersede all previous agreements or
grants of authority by ordinance, and shall have a term commencing as of the
effective date of this Franchise Agreement and ending twenty (20) years from
August 19, 1993.
Section 17. Rates.
(1) If during the term of this franchise the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984 should be amended to permit municipal regulation of basic
cable service rates, the City shall have the option, upon proper notice to the
Company and an opportunity for the Company to comment, to regulate basic
cable service rates.
(2) Between January 1 and February 28 of each year the City Council
may determine whether it will assume basic cable service rate regulation
authority. If the City Council takes no action to assume rate regulation
authority, then basic cable service rates may be changed by the Company by
filing with the City a schedule of new basic cable service rates and by notifying
its subscribers prior to the rate change.
(3) If the City assumes rate regulation of basic cable service rates then
for the remainder of that calendar year basic cable service rates may be changed
subject to the following provisions:
(a) Upon a written request by the Company to increase basic
cable service rates, the City shall have 60 days within which to render a
decision approving, or disapproving the rate change. If such decision is
not rendered by a majority vote of the City Council within 60 days of the
initial request, such request will be deemed approved.
(b) Further, it will not be necessary for the Company to seek
approval of the City to the extent that the basic cable service rate is not
increased more than one time in any 12-month period the greater of five
percent (5%) or the cumulative increase (calculated from the date of the
last basic rate increase) in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers--the Unites States Average (CPI) published by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-A-9
(c) Notice of any rate increase made pursuant to paragraph (b)
of this section shall be filed with the City Clerk thirty or more days prior
to implementation of the rate increase together with all supporting data
to justify such an increase.
Section 18. Binding Effect.
This Franchise Agreement is binding on and inures to the benefit of the
parties hereto, their successors and assigns, forever.
Section 19. Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall be in force and take effect as provided by law.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-B-1
APPENDIX B
ORDINANCE NO. 2004-05
GAS FRANCHISE1
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING UNTO CHATTANOOGA GAS COMPANY, A
SUBSIDIARY OF AGL RESOURCES, INC., A FRANCHISE FOR THE
PURPOSE OF OPERATING A SYSTEM OF GAS DISTRIBUTION AND
SERVICE WITHIN THE CITY OF CLEVELAND SO AS TO FURNISH GAS
SERVICE WITHIN THE CITY TO ITS INHABITANTS FOR DOMESTIC,
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND MUNICIPAL GENERAL USE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
CLEVELAND, TENNESSEE:
Section 1. This Ordinance shall be know as the "Chattanooga Gas Company
Franchise Ordinance."
Section 2. For purposes of this Ordinance the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in present tense include the future,
words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
a. City - City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
b. City Manager - The City Manager of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee.
c. Company - Chattanooga Gas Company, a subsidiary of AGL
Resources, Inc., a Georgia corporation, the Grantee of rights under
this franchise and its lawful successors or assigns.
d. Construction - The installation, re-installation, laying, erection,
digging, renewal, repair, replacement, extension and removal of
the gas system, or any activity that may be necessary to maintain
and operate a gas system.
e. Council - The City Council of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee.
f. Gas System - Any pipe, pipeline, tube, main, duct, conduit, service,
fitting, feeder, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator,
valve, appliance, attachment, appurtenance, and any other
1This ordinance was accepted by Chattanooga Gas Company on April 2,
2004.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-B-2
personal property constructed, maintained, or operated by
Chattanooga Gas Company as may be necessary to import,
transport, distribute and sell gas.
g. Streets - The public streets, highways, avenues, roads, courts,
alleys, lanes, ways, bridges, utility easements, sidewalks,
parkways, public rights-of-way, or other public places or grounds
in the City as they now exist or they may be established at any
time during the term of this franchise in the City.
Section 3. That there is hereby granted to the Company a franchise to
construct, reconstruct, maintain and operate gas system in, upon, along, and
under the streets within the City and to carry on, operate, enlarge and continue
the same in said City as the same is now or may hereafter exist, for the purposes
of furnishing gas service.
The Company shall also have the right and privilege within the City to
manufacture, sell and distribute natural gas and all other products and services,
including appliances, which are related thereto. Neither the enactment of this
Ordinance nor anything contained herein shall constitute any repeal or
modification, expressed or implied, of any other ordinance of the City now in
effect, whether codified or not, and the City expressly reserves the right to enact
any and all such ordinances respecting the Company and its business as may be
authorized by law, provided that any such ordinances shall not abridge the
rights and privileges granted to the Company hereunder.
Section 4. That this franchise shall inure to the benefit of the Company, its
successors and assigns, and shall exist and remain in effect for a period of
twenty (20) years from and after passage of this Ordinance on final reading.
Section 5. That the Company shall not at any time charge in excess of such
lawful rates as from time to time may be fixed by the Tennessee Regulatory
Authority, or such other duly constituted body as may have power and authority
in such matter. That the Company shall comply with all lawful orders of the
Tennessee Regulatory Authority, or any other duly constituted body as may
have power and authority in such matters respecting rates, the quality of gas,
pressure, health measures and other conditions of service.
Section 6. That the Company in constructing or continuing a gas system along,
across, under or through any City street, shall comply with all Ordinances of the
City and shall take care not to obstruct or injure unnecessarily any such streets,
and shall with reasonable diligence restore such streets to as good state of repair
and condition as the same were before disturbed by said Company. The
Company shall in all respects fully indemnify and save harmless the City from
and against all damages, costs, attorneys fees, or other expenses which the City
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-B-3
may incur by reason of such construction. The obligation of indemnity set forth
in this section shall also extend to any construction in any street or right-of-way
of the City by any property owner pursuant to any contract between said
property owner and the Company authorizing the property owner to construct
a service line or other gas line from any main of the Company to such property
owner's property.
Section 7. That the Company, its successors, or assigns, by the exercise of this
franchise, agrees to hold harmless the City on account of any loss, expense,
damage, cost, attorneys fees, litigation expenses, or liabilities that may result
from Company's operation of its gas system unless such loss, expense, damage,
cost, attorneys fees, litigation expenses or liabilities are attributable in whole
or part to the negligence of the City, its agents, servants or employees. This
right of indemnification shall include all expenses reasonably incurred by the
City in defending any claim arising from the Company's operation of its gas
system, whether or not the claim has merit.
The company hereby agrees, upon official request of the City, to furnish the City
evidence of insurance in such an amount as may be reasonably necessary to
protect the City.
Section 8. That the Company shall maintain all service lines to its customers
up to and including the meters and shall, when necessary, repair, renew or
replace service lines which are the property of the Company.
The Company shall provide service personnel and equipment based in Cleveland
and/or Bradley County, Tennessee to respond to customer service calls from
locations within the City, and shall provide the local public service agencies,
including the City police department, the City fire department, and the 911
Center with the Company's toll-free emergency telephone number and a listing
of direct local telephone and pager numbers of local Company agents to contact
in the event of an emergency. Company shall have trained personnel available
24 hours a day, 365 days per year, who will promptly respond to emergency
calls.
The Company shall make every reasonable effort to furnish an ample and
uninterrupted supply of gas to all customers throughout its entire gas system
within the City and on any enlargements and extensions thereof within the City.
At the time each and every annexation ordinance of the City becomes operative
the City shall provide the Company with a copy of its ordinance and its
accompanying map precisely describing the annexed territory. The Company
shall not unreasonably or arbitrarily refuse to make and extension for the
purpose of giving gas service to the City, its inhabitants, institutions and
businesses.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-B-4
Section 9. City and the undersigned warrant and represent that, with the
exception of the franchise granted to Company by a previously passed ordinance,
which franchise was accepted by Company and City, there is no franchise
granted by the City in force or effect, to any other person, firm or corporation,
for the distribution and selling of gas, and that, during the term of this
Agreement, the City will not enter into any other agreements or grant any other
franchise for the distribution and selling of gas. The City reserves the right to
grant a similar use of said streets to any person or corporation at any time
during the period of this franchise so long as such right is not for the business
of conveying and selling gas to others as a public utility. Nothing contained
within this Ordinance will prevent the City from exercising its legal rights of
eminent domain or from operating its own gas system within the City of
Cleveland.
Section 10. That in consideration of the grant of this franchise, the Company
shall pay as a franchise fee a sum equivalent to 5% of the gross receipts received
from sales of any type of gas to the Company's customers within the environs of
the City of Cleveland, which sum shall, in accordance with prevailing state law
and the Company's rate tariffs be approved by the Tennessee Regulatory
Authority, be directly added to the gas bills of, and collected from, those
customers of the Company located within the City of Cleveland. Said fee shall
be in addition to any sums due to the City from the Company as an ad valorem
tax.
The amount of the franchise fee billed by the Company each quarter shall be
paid to the City on or before the 15th day of the month following the end of each
quarter. If the Company shall fail to pay the amount due, then the City reserves
the right to revoke this franchise if said amount that is due and payable is not
paid within a period of sixty (60) days after written notice of such delinquency
to the Company.
The City shall have access at all reasonable times to the books of the Company
for the purpose of ascertaining and/or auditing the amount of fees due the City.
The Company shall furnish the City with an annual report showing the amount
of gross revenues from its sale of gas within the City. The franchise fee imposed
herein shall be effective from and after the adoption of this Ordinance and
acceptance by the Company.
Other than as set forth herein, the Company shall not be required to pay any
other fee or compensation of any kind in respect of the subject matter of this
Ordinance. Provided, however, that the Company shall be required to pay any
pavement permit fees in connection with cutting the City streets.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-B-5
Section 11. If the Company desires to sell the assets of its gas system located
within the City of Cleveland as a stand-alone transaction and not as a sale of its
larger gas system, then the Company must offer the City the opportunity to buy
those assets located and situated in the City of Cleveland on the same terms as
being offered to some other party. The City will have forty-five (45) days to
accept the offer and an additional ninety (90) days to close said transaction in
the event the City elects to exercise the option to purchase.
In the event the City chooses not to exercise the option to purchase, the City
shall continue to have the right to approve any sale, assignment, or transfer that
Company may desire and this franchise cannot be sold, assigned, or transferred
without the express written consent of the City Council, provided, however, that
such consent shall not be reasonably withheld.
In any negotiations between the City and the Company for the purchase of the
Company's property by the City, no value shall be placed upon this franchise in
arriving at the purchase price to be paid by the City.
Section 12. Any flagrant or continuing violation of the provisions of this
Franchise Ordinance by the Company or its successors shall be cause for
forfeiture of this franchise agreement, provided that the City shall have given
the Company written notification of such violation and allow the Company a
reasonable and appropriate time as determined by the City Manager to correct
the cited violations.
Section 13. In the event it becomes necessary or expedient for the City to
change the course or grade of any highway, street, avenue, road, alley, way,
parkway or other public ground in which the Company is maintaining its gas
system, then, upon the written request of the City, the Company will remove or
change the location or depth of such gas system to conform to the proposed
street alteration. It is agreed that Company will, at its own expense, within
sixty (60) days after written notice from the City Manager, Company's receipt
of final plan approval, and notice to proceed, begin the work of completing any
and all things necessary to effect such change in position or location in
conformity with such written instruction. Provided, however, that if such
request is to accommodate any development by and person or entity other than
the City or another governmental body, then the person or entity responsible for
such development shall reimburse Company its expenses for such removal or
change.
Section 14. After adoption of this Ordinance, should any section, subsection,
sentence, provision, clause or phrase of this Ordinance be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction or appropriate regulatory authority, such
declaration shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-B-6
thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being
the intent in adopting this Ordinance that no portion thereof or provision or
regulation contained therein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the
unconstitutionality or invalidity of any other portion or provision or regulation.
Section 15. That this Ordinance shall not be operative, as distinguished from
its effectiveness, until is has been accepted by the Company. The Company
shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the final passage of this Ordinance
to file with the City Clerk its unconditional acceptance of the terms and
conditions of this Ordinance. The Company shall also furnish the City with a
copy of the written approval of the Tennessee Regulatory Authority which shall
be filed with this Franchise Ordinance.
Section 16. All rights herein granted and/or authorized shall be subject to and
governed by this Ordinance, provided, however, the City Council expressly
reserves unto itself all its police power to adopt general ordinances and to take
other action necessary to protect and promote the safety and welfare of the
general public in relation to the rights now reserved to or in the City of
Cleveland under its Charter and to all such rights as are now provided by
general law.
Section 17. All ordinances, and parts of ordinances in conflict with this
ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 18. This ordinance shall take effect from and after its passage on final
reading, the public welfare requiring it.
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
s/L. Harlen Painter____________ s/Tom Rowland
L. Harlen Painter, City Attorney Tom Rowland, Mayor
s/Janice S. Casteel
Janice Casteel, City Clerk
ACCEPTANCE
The within Franchise and its terms and conditions are hereby accepted
by Chattanooga Gas Company, a subsidiary of AGL Resources, Inc., on this 2nd
day of April, 2004.
CHATTANOOGA GAS COMPANY, A
SUBSIDIARY OF AGL RESOURCES,
INC.
Change 11, May 29, 2007 APP-B-7
_____________________________________
Title:
Attested:
________________________
APPENDIX C
ZONING ORDINANCE
Cleveland, Tennessee
ZONING AND LAND USE CONTROL
Recommendations
of the
Land Use Select Implementation Committee
and the
Cleveland Municipal Planning Commission
to the
Cleveland City Council
May 1996
(This Appendix C was last revised
during Change 17, July 23, 2018.
Changed sections are cited with
Ordinance number and date.)
APP-C-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
1.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-5
1.1 PURPOSES AND INTENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-5
1.2 APPLICABILITY AND COMPLIANCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-5
1.3 AUTHORIZATION/LEGAL BASIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-6
1.4 INTERPRETATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-6
1.5 LOTS OF RECORD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-7
1.6 DEFINITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-8
1.7 CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-22
2.0 ZONING DISTRICTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-23
2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-23
2.2 RA DISTRICT (Residential Agricultural) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-31
2.3 R-1 DISTRICT (Single-Family Residential) . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-32
2.4 R-2 DISTRICT (Low Density Single--and
Multi-Family Residential) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-33
2.5 R-3 DISTRICT (Multi-family Residential) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-33
2.6 R-4 DISTRICT (Mobile Home Parks) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-34
2.7 R-5 DISTRICT (High Rise Residential) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-34
2.8 CN DISTRICT (Neighborhood Commercial) . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-35
2.9 PI DISTRICT (Professional Institutional) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-39
2.10 CG DISTRICT (General Commercial) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-40
2.11 CH DISTRICT (Highway Commercial) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-41
APP-C-2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
2.12 CBD DISTRICT (Central Business District) . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-42
2.13 MU DISTRICT (Mixed Use) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-43
2.14 IL DISTRICT (Light Industrial) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-43
2.15 IH DISTRICT (Heavy Industrial) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-45
2.16 TEMPORARY USES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-46
2.17 UC DISTRICT (University Campus) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-48
2.18 B DISTRICT (Buffer) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-48
2.19 SEX OUTLETS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-49
2.20 IGC DISTRICT (Interstate Gateway Corridor) . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-52
2.21 ISE DISTRICT (Inman St East) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-57
2.22 EXISTING SALVAGE YARDS AND/OR RECYCLING
CENTER BUSINESS WITHIN THE CH ZONE . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-60
3.0 SITE DESIGN STANDARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-60
3.1 LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-69
3.2 SETBACKS, BUILDING HEIGHTS AND LOT
COVERAGE STANDARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-73
3.3 LANDSCAPING & BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS . . . . . . APP-C-82
3.4 ACCESS, PARKING AND LOADING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-97
3.5 EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-116
3.6 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-116
3.7 STANDARDS FOR FACILITIES WITH DRIVE
THRU SERVICE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-117
APP-C-3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
3.8 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-118
3.9 SPECIAL SITE CONDITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-122
3.10 REGULATIONS FOR HOME OCCUPATIONS . . . . . . . . . APP-C-123
3.11 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS FOR TOWNHOUSE
DEVELOPMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-125
3.12 MS4 PHASE II STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-125
3.13 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SITTING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-125
CELLULAR COMMUNICATION TOWERS
4.0 ALTERNATIVE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . . . . . . . APP-C-128
4.1 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-129
4.2 FLOOD AREA OVERLAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-135
4.3 GREENWAY OVERLAY (RESERVED) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-135
4.4 AIRPORT OVERLAY (RESERVED) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-135
4.5 INFILL DEVELOPMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-135
4.6 MOBILE HOME PARK STANDARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-137
4.7 NONCONFORMING USES AND DEVELOPMENT . . . . . APP-C-143
4.8 YARD PARKING OVERLAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-145
5.0 SIGN REGULATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-147
6.0 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-184
6.1 BOARDS AND AGENCIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-185
6.2 SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-192
APP-C-4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
6.3 COUNCIL ACTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-194
6.4 APPEALS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-195
6.5 FEES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-196
6.6 AIRPORT ZONING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-196
FIGURES
1. LOT COVERAGE AND SETBACKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-13
2. TYPES OF LOTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-14
3. TYPICAL PARKING LOT LAYOUT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-108
TABLES
1. USES AND ZONING DISTRICTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-25
2. LOT AREA AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-69
3. BUILDING SETBACKS, HEIGHTS & IMPERVIOUS
SURFACES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-73
4. RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-104
5. MINIMUM PARKING SPACES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-C-105
6. MINIMUM PARKING DIMENSIONS (Standard Vehicles) APP-C-107
APP-C-5
1.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1.1 PURPOSES AND INTENT.
The zoning regulations and districts herein set forth have been made in
accordance with a comprehensive plan and to provide for the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare by:
A. Encouraging the most appropriate use of land;
B. Preventing the overcrowding of land;
C. Conserving the value of land and buildings;
D. Minimizing traffic hazards and congestion;
E. Preventing undue concentration of population;
F. Providing for adequate light, air, privacy, and sanitation;
G. Reducing hazards from fire, flood, and other dangers;
H. Assisting in the economic provision, utilization and expansion of all
services provided by the public, including but not limited to roads,
water, sewer, recreation, schools and emergency services, including
fire protection;
I. Enhancing the natural and man-made amenities of the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee.
1.2 Applicability and Compliance.
No building shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall be
erected, moved, or altered unless for a use expressly permitted by and in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located, except as hereafter provided. No land or lot area shall be reduced or
diminished that the yard or open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed herein,
nor shall the lot area per family be reduced in any manner except in conformity
with the regulations hereby established for the district in which such building
is located. No yard or open space provided about any building for the purpose
of complying with these regulations shall be considered as providing a yard or
other open space for any other building.
APP-C-6
1.3 Authorization/legal basis.
This ordinance is established, pursuant to the authority granted by Tennessee
Code Annotated, §§ 13-7-201 through 13-7-210, to provide for the establishment
of districts within the corporate limits of Cleveland, Tennessee; to regulate
within such districts the location, height, bulk, number or stories and size of
buildings and structures, the percentage of lot occupancy, the required open
spaces, the density of population and the uses of land, buildings, and structures;
to provide methods of administration of this ordinance and to prescribe penalties
for the violation thereof.
1.4 Interpretations.
In Interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community. It is not intended by this
ordinance to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other
agreement between parties. However, where this ordinance imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premises, or upon the height of
buildings, or requires larger open spaces, than are imposed or required by other
ordinances, rules, regulations, easements, covenants or agreements, the
provisions of this ordinance shall control. If, because of error or omission in the
zoning map, any property in the city is not shown as being in a zoning district,
the classification of such property shall be R-1 Single-Family, unless changed
by an amendment to this article.
1.4.1. Boundaries.
Interpretations regarding boundaries of land use districts shall be made in
accordance with the following:
A. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any street
shall be construed as following the centerline of the street.
B. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any platted
lot line or other property line shall be construed as following such line.
C. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section
lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as
following such lines.
D. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following natural
features shall be construed as following such features.
APP-C-7
E. When the application of the aforementioned rules leaves a reasonable
doubt as to the boundaries between two districts, the regulations of
the more restrictive district shall govern the entire parcel in question,
unless otherwise determined by the board of zoning appeals.
1.4.2 Code Provisions.
In the event that any question arises concerning the application of this
ordinance, the planning director shall be responsible for interpretation.
Responsibility for interpretation shall be limited to standards, regulations, and
requirements of this ordinance, but shall not be construed to include
interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in this ordinance, nor
shall it be construed as overriding the responsibilities given to any commission,
board, or official designated in other sections or article of this ordinance.
1.4.3 Conflicts.
Whenever this ordinance, or development plans approved in conformance with
this ordinance, are in conflict with other local ordinances, regulations, or laws,
the more restrictive ordinance, regulations, or law shall govern and shall be
enforced by appropriate local agencies. When plans, approved by the planning
commission, contain setback or other features in excess of the minimum zoning
ordinance requirements, such features as shown on the approved plan shall
govern.
1.4.4 Separability.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall
not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is
not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.
1.5 Lots of Record.
A Lot of record is defined as any lot or parcel of land in any district which was
lawfully formed and confirmed to the lot area and lot width requirements at the
time of formation, not adjoining undeveloped land under the same ownership.
The deed to the lot must have been recorded at the time of the adoption of this
ordinance. A lot of record in an annexed area is a platted lot on the effective
date of the annexation. For a lot of record in an area annexed by the City of
Cleveland, prevailing deed restrictions shall apply on minor streets only.
A lot of record may be used as a building site even though such lot or parcel fails
to meet the minimum requirements for lot area, lot width or both, providing the
APP-C-8
development of such lots shall adhere to the requirements of the district in
which they are located as closely as possible. Where two or more lots of record
with a continuous frontage are under the same ownership, or where a
substandard lot of record has continuous frontage with a larger tract under the
same ownership, such lots shall be combined to form one or more buildings sites
meeting the minimum requirements of the district in which they are located.
1.6 Definitions.
To carry out the provisions of this ordinance, certain words, terms and phrases
are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
B. Words in the singular shall include the plural, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
C. The word "person" includes a firm, partnership or corporation as well
as an individual.
D. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word
"may" is permissive.
E. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to land or a building shall be
construed to include the words "intended," "arranged," "designed to be
used or occupied."
F. Words and terms not defined herein shall be interpreted in accordance
with their normal dictionary meaning and customary usage.
G. Words implying the masculine gender shall also include the feminine
and neuter.
1.6.0 Terms.
1.6.1 Alley. A Service way providing a secondary means of public access to
abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
1.6.1.A "Bed and Breakfast" shall mean a "bed and breakfast" establishment
or "bed and breakfast homestay" as defined in the Bed and Breakfast
Establishment Inspection Act of 19901, and regulated by the
1State law reference
(continued...)
APP-C-9
Tennessee Department of Health as provided in the aforementioned
statute. The terms "boarding home," "guest home," and "tourist home"
as used within the zoning ordinance shall have the same meaning as
"bed and breakfast." (as added by Ord. #9, Nov. 2000)
1.6.2 Billboard. See Sign, Billboard.
1.6.3 Buffer/buffer strip. A strip of land, usually in permanent vegetation,
used to visibly separate one use from another or to shield or block
noise, light, or any other nuisance.
1.6.4 Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual,
animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature.
1.6.5 Structure, Accessory. A Subordinate structure on the same lot as the
principal or main building or use occupied or devoted to a use
incidental to the principal use.
1.6.6 Building Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from
the average elevation of the finished grade to the highest point of the
roof.
1.6.7 Building Line. A line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning
district in which the lot is located.
1.6.8 Building Permit. Written permission issued by the proper municipal
authority for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a
structure.
1.6.9 Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
1.6.9.A "Car wash" shall mean a building, site, or portion thereof used for
washing and cleaning of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles, and
other light duty equipment on a commercial basis. This definition is
not intended to include vehicle washing that is incidental to the
primary business activity on the site, such as a car dealer's cleaning
of vehicles offered for sale. (as added by Ord. #23, Sept. 2002)
1(...continued)
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 68, chapter 14, part 5.
APP-C-10
1.6.9.B1 Church means a building maintained or controlled by a religious body
primarily for public worship. It includes ancillary uses necessary or
closely associated with the primary activity such as religious
education classrooms, offices, libraries, nurseries, kitchens, assembly
halls, recreational facilities, and similar facilities designed for use by
the church's members or attendees. The term church includes similar
uses or facilities regardless of religious affiliation, e.g. temple,
synagogue, mosque, etc. The term does not include daycare,
pre-school, primary school, secondary school, or other uses unless
specified by the zoning district description. (as added by Ord. #14,
March 2001)
1.6.10 City Engineer. The Cleveland City Engineer or his duly authorized
representative.
1.6.11 Conditional Use. A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon the developer or other applicant showing the board of zoning
appeals that such use in a specified location will comply with all the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
specified in a zoning ordinance and such use is authorized by the
board of zoning appeals. (as amended by Ord. #2005-20, June 2005)
1.6.12 Corner Lot. See Lot, Corner.
1.6.13 The number of families, individuals, dwelling units, or housing
structures per unit of land.
1.6.14 Duplex. A structure on a single lot containing two dwelling units.
1.6.15 Dwelling. A structure or portion thereof which is used exclusively for
human habitation.
1.6.16 Dwelling, attached. A one-family dwelling attached to one or more
one-family dwellings by common vertical walls.
1.6.17 Dwelling, detached. A dwelling which is not attached to any other
dwelling by any means.
1The codifier renumbered 1.6.9.B (added by Ord. #14, March 2001 as
1.6.9.A) to maintain alphabetization as terms are added.
APP-C-11
1.6.18 Dwelling, manufactured house. A single detached dwelling as defined
under the Tennessee Modular Building Act, Tennessee Code
Annotated, §§ 68-126-301 et seq., as amended.
1.6.19 Dwelling, multi-family. A building containing more than two dwelling
units.
1.6.20 Dwelling, single-family. A building containing one dwelling unit.
1.6.21 Dwelling, townhouse. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least two
(2) units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the
outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is
separated from any other unit by one or more common fire rated
walls, and each unit is located on a fee simple, platted lot. (as
amended by Ord. #2013-34, July 2013
1.6.22 Dwelling, two-family. See Duplex.
1.6.23 Dwelling unit. One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and
sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive
use of the household.
1.6.24 Flood/flooding. All flood-related terms are as defined in the Cleveland
Flood Damage Prevention Reduction Ordinance.
1.6.24A Green space. Land with ground cover consisting of primarily of living
vegetative matter such as grass, trees, bushes, shrubs or other living
vegetation. Any manmade products within green space, surface or
subsurface, shall be ancillary to the vegetation and not substantially
interfere with the capacity of the green space to absorb and treat
stormwater and to provide other environmental benefits. (as added
by Ord. #2009-49, June 2009
1.6.25 Home occupation. Any activity carried out for gain by a resident
conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit.
1.6.26 Impervious surface. Any material which substantially reduces and/or
prevents absorption of stormwater into the ground.
1.6.27 "Junkyard" shall mean any area, lot, land, parcel, building, structure
or part thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase,
sale, or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap
or discarded goods, materials, machinery, or inoperable vehicles as
APP-C-12
defined in title 13 chapter 2 of the Cleveland Municipal Code, subject
to certain exceptions enumerated herein. "Junkyard" shall not include
a "recycling center" as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, title 54,
chapter 20, part 1, section 103. "Junkyard" shall not include solid
waste disposal facilities registered under Tennessee Code Annotated,
title 68, chapter 211, part 1, section 106; except however, "junkyard"
shall include the dumping, or filling of land with, dead trees or other
vegetative debris, construction or demolition debris, or other waste
material without required permits or otherwise in violation of city
ordinances. "Junkyard" shall not include materials stored and used
as part of a manufacturing process conducted on the same site in a
lawful place and manner. Inoperable vehicles as defined in title 13
chapter 2 of the Cleveland Municipal Code shall not, apart from the
existence of other junkyard conditions, constitute a junkyard if the
inoperable vehicles are stored in compliance with the exceptions
described in § 13-204 of the aforementioned title 13. (as amended by
Ord. #19, March 2002)
1.6.28 Loading space. An off-street space or berth used for the loading or
unloading of commercial vehicles.
1.6.29 Lot. A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,
subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit.
1.6.30 Lot area. The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any
street rights-of-way. (See Figure 1)
1.6.31 Lot, corner. A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets
at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an
interior angle of less than 135 degrees. Also corner lot. (See Figure 2)
1.6.32 Lot coverage. That portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and
structures, or other impervious surfaces. (See Figure 1)
1.6.33 Lot depth. The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear
lot line. (See Figure 2)
APP-C-13
FIGURE 1
Setbacks, Lot Lines and Coverage
APP-C-14
FIGURE 2
Types of Lots
APP-C-15
1.6.34 Lot, double frontage. A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or
which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries
of the lot. (See Figure 2)
1.6.35 Lot, flag. A lot not fronting on or abutting a public road and where
access to the public road is by a narrow, private right-of-way owned
in fee simple. (See Figure 2)
1.6.36 Lot, frontage. The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way line. (See Figure 1)
1.6.37 Lot line, front. The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
(See Figure 1)
1.6.38 Lot line, rear. The lot line opposite and more distant from the front
lot line; or in the case of a triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped
lots, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at
a maximum distance from the front lot line. (See Figure 1)
1.6.39 Lot line, side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. (See
Figure 1)
1.6.40 Lot, minimum area of. The smallest lot area established by the zoning
ordinance on which a use or structure may be located in a particular
district.
1.6.41 Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to
the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line. (See
Figure 2)
1.6.41.A "Mini-warehouse" a building(s) divided into separate storage units or
bays that are individually leased to persons or organizations for the
small-scale storage of personal property, excluding hazardous
materials stored in an unsafe manner, such as the household goods of
a family. The individual storage units may be climate controlled.
Warehouse facilities designed to accommodate large-scale shipping
and receiving of goods and materials are not included in this
definition. (as added by Ord. #13, March 2001)
1.6.42 Net area of lot (net acreage). The area of the lot excluding those
features or areas which the ordinance excludes from the calculation.
APP-C-16
1.6.43 Nonconforming lot. A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning
ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning
district.
1.6.44 Nonconforming structure or building. A structure or building the size,
dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance, but which fails by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the
present requirements of the zoning district.
1.6.45 Nonconforming use. A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance, but which
fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to
the present requirements of the zoning district.
1.6.45.A "Oil change facilities" shall mean a building, site, or portion thereof
used for the checking, changing, and adding of motor oil and other
vehicle fluids. Other minor vehicle maintenance services may also be
provided including lubrication, tire rotation, tire inflation, and
installation of wiper blades and air filters. This definition is not
intended to include businesses providing other more extensive vehicle
repairs and maintenance. (as added by Ord. #23, Sept. 2002)
1.6.46 Owner Is a person who is the owner of property or agent in charge or
control of the property.
1.6.47 Permitted use. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
1.6.48 Person is any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture,
public or private corporation, commission, board, public or private
institution, or any other legal entity.
1.6.48A Porous paving material. Any commonly recognized surface treatment,
which allows storm water to pass through, including modular grid
pavements, permeable interlocking concrete pavement, porous
concrete and asphalt, pavers, or cobbles. This definition is intended to
encompass such "green infrastructure" surface treatments as may be
allowed or required by the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation for purposes of stormwater treatment. (as added by
Ord. #2009-49, June 2009)
APP-C-17
1.6.48.B Portable Storage Unit. A portable storage unit shall mean a fully
enclosed box-like storage container that is constructed primarily of
metal, that is without wheels or axles, that is transported to a location
by truck and set in placed by a hydraulic lift or similar device, and
that is used for temporary storage. (as added by Ord. #2008-02, June
2008, and amended by Ord. #2008-50, Aug. 2008)
1.6.49 Principal use. The primary or predominant use of any lot.
1.6.50 Quadruplex. A structure on a single lot containing four dwelling
units.
1.6.51 Reserve strip. A strip of land located adjacent to a roadway right-ofway
that a developer retains title to in order to prevent neighboring
owners from obtaining access to the roadway.
1.6.52 Right-of-way. (1) A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil
or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar
uses; (2) generally, the right of one to pass over the property of
another.
1.6.53 Setback. The Distance between the street right-of-way line and the
front line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered
steps.
1.6.54 Setback Line. That line that is the required minimum distance from
the street right-of-way or any other lot line that established the area
within which the principal structure must be erected or placed.
1.6.54.A.
(1) Hardcore Sex Media shall mean media that is
characterized or distinguished by specified sexual
activities as described herein.
(2) Mini-sex Media Exhibition Outlet shall mean a sex
media exhibition outlet wherein customers, members
or patrons view sex media in booths, stalls, rooms, or
other viewing areas that have a seating capacity of
less than fifty (50) people.
APP-C-18
(3) Sex Accessories shall mean instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia designed as representatives of human
genital organs or female breasts, or designed and
marketed primarily for use in stimulating human
genital organs; or lingerie, leather goods, and/or other
items marketed or presented in a context to suggest
their use in sadomasochistic practices characterized
by flagellation, torture, and/or physical restraint.
(4) Sex Accessories Outlet shall mean an establishment
displaying and/or offering for sale sex accessories.
(5) Sex Entertainment Outlet shall mean an
establishment offering live performances of nude
dancing or other live displays of specified anatomical
areas, whether viewed in person or through electronic
transmission, and any establishment that would be
an "adult cabaret" as defined Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 7-51-102.
(6) Sex Outlet shall mean any "sex media outlet," "sex
media exhibition outlet," "sex entertainment outlet,"
"sex service outlet," or "sex accessories outlet" as
defined herein.
(7) Sex Media shall mean any print or electronic media
(including but not limited to books, magazines,
photographs, films, videocassettes, compact discs,
DVD, etc.) that is characterized or distinguished by
an emphasis on matter depicting "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(8) Sex Media Exhibition Outlet shall mean an
establishment exhibiting media that is characterized
or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas where such
exhibition is primarily for on-site enjoyment by
customers, members, or patrons.
(9) Sex Media Outlet shall mean an establishment
having as a substantial portion of its stock and trade
(substantial portion meaning over 20% of floor area,
or over 20% of inventory by units or value, or over
20% of revenues, or an inventory of 200 or more units
APP-C-19
of sex media, or any amount of hardcore sex media)
in sex media, where the sex media is for use offpremises.
(10) Sex Service Outlet shall mean an establishment offering
through its employees or otherwise for any consideration,
on-premises or off-premises, to privately perform or
participate in specified sexual activities, whether actual or
simulated; to privately model or display specified
anatomical areas; or to provide any sort of intense physical
contact such as wrestling or tumbling between persons of
the opposite sex, or between persons of the same sex if at
least one of the persons is displaying his or her specified
anatomical areas as described herein; or to provide massage
(except by state licensed massage therapists in accordance
with state licensing standards); or body painting; or lap
dancing; or any "adult-oriented establishment" as defined in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-51-1102, where such
establishment is not encompassed in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 7-51-1102, definitions of "adult bookstore,"
"adult cabaret," "adult-entertainment," "adult mini-motion
picture theater," or "adult motion picture theater."
(11) Specified Anatomical Areas shall include less than
completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely
covered.
(12) Specified Sexual Activities shall mean human genitals in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse, contact between the
mouth of one person and the genitals of another, sodomy, or
bestiality; or penetration of body orifices or stimulation of a
genital organ by a sex accessory as defined herein; or
fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breasts. (as added by Ord. #2004-02,
March 2004)
1.6.55 Sign. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct
or attract attention to a object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means, including
APP-C-20
words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination
or projected images.
1.6.56 Sign, billboard. A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
1.6.57 Sign, portable. A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building,
structure, or the ground.
1.6.58 Slope is the inclination of ground surface which is expressed as a ratio
of horizontal to vertical distance, sometimes also expressed as a
percent or degree.
1.6.59 Snack shop. A limited menu restaurant serving primarily prepackaged
items and items prepared off-site and being without
restaurant cooking equipment (commercial range, ovens, fryers, etc.)
and having seating for the lesser of 20 patrons or 1 seat per available
customer parking space and with no drive-through window service.
(as added by Ord. #2010-19, June 2010)
1.6.60 Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it and including those basements used for principal use.
1.6.61 Story, Half. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet (3')
above the floor level, and in which space the possible floor area with
head room of five feet (5') or less occupies at least 40 percent of the
total floor area of the story directly beneath.
1.6.62 Street, collector. A street which collects traffic from local streets and
connects with minor and major arterials.
1.6.63 Street, cul-de-sac. A street with a single common ingress and egress
and with a turnaround at the end.
1.6.64 Street, dead end. A street with a single common ingress and egress.
1.6.65 Street, local. A street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting
property and to discourage through traffic.
APP-C-21
1.6.66 Street, major arterial. A street with access control, channelized
intersections, restricted parking, and which collects and distributes
traffic to and from minor arterials.
1.6.67 Street, minor arterial. A street with signals at important
intersections and stop signs on the side streets, and which collects and
distributes traffic to and from collector streets.
1.6.68 Structure. A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of land or water.
1.6.69 Triplex. A structure on a single lot containing three (3) dwelling
units.
1.6.70 Yard. An open space that lies between the principal or accessory
building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be
specifically provided in the zoning ordinance.
1.6.71 Yard depth. The shortest distance between a lot line and a yard line.
1.6.72 Yard, front. A space extending the full width of the lot between any
building and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the
building at the closest point to the front lot line. Such front yard is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may
be permitted elsewhere in the ordinance.
1.6.73 Yard line. A line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance therefrom
equal to the depth of the required yard.
1.6.74 Yard, rear. A space extending across the full width of the lot between
the principal building and the rear lot line, and measured
perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
Such rear yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward except as may be permitted elsewhere in the ordinance.
1.6.75 Yard, required. The open space between a lot line and the buildable
area within which no structure shall be located except as provided in
the zoning ordinance.
1.6.76 Yard, side. A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the principal building and the side lot line measured
perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal
APP-C-22
building. Such side yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward except as may be permitted elsewhere in the
ordinance.
1.7 CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW
1.7.1 General
Conditional uses must be listed as a conditional use in the zoning district and
they require approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals. This section establishes
a process for the review of conditional use requests. The applicant for a
conditional use shall supply information adequate for a review and decision
regarding the proposed conditional use. The information to be supplied by the
applicant is to include a survey and site plan identifying existing and/or
proposed property boundaries, adjacent roads and properties including the
buildings and uses thereon, the proposed building footprint and site features,
proposed indoor and outdoor uses on the property, proposed landscaping and
buffering, proposed outdoor lighting, proposed parking and traffic circulation
including site ingress and egress, proposed areas for shipping and receiving and
waste disposal, proposed hours of operation including shipping and receiving,
proposed special conditions for truck routing, and descriptions of any local, state
and federal permits required for the proposed use and location. The Planning
Director (Community Development Director) shall prepare a staff report
addressing the considerations described below. The review of these
considerations shall be used to identify any concerns with the particular
conditional use proposal. Pursuant to any identified concerns, possible
mitigating conditions or limitations in the approval of the conditional use shall
be discussed. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall approve or deny the conditional
use request based upon its findings in the review process described herein. The
approval of a conditional use request shall include any conditions or limitations
of the approval based upon the review. Operation and maintenance of a
conditional use in violation of any conditions or limitations stipulated for its
approval is unlawful and a violation of the zoning regulations.
1.7.2 Considerations
The considerations in reviewing a conditional use permit applications include
the following: What is the size and configuration of the proposed site and how
is it situated relative to surrounding properties? Does the size of the proposed
site present any concerns in terms of its ability to accommodate parking,
expansion of the proposed use, or needed buffering? What is the classification
of the street(s) by which the site is accessed? Will the proposed use have traffic
impacts on residential streets? Does the proposed use generate traffic, noise,
light, glare, vibrations, odors, fumes, or hazards that are not in keeping with the
APP-C-23
character of the zone? Does the proposed use fit relatively well within the
neighborhood or district in terms of scale, appearance, pedestrian circulation,
etc.? Does the proposed use present any particular problems if the site and/or
any structures thereon do not conform to the requirements of the zoning
ordinance in terms of size, setbacks, impervious area, etc.? Does the existing or
proposed site design present a particular problem if the conditional use was
approved (e.g. a driveway location with poor visibility)? Would the proposed
conditional use impact historic resources or other environmental concerns to a
significantly greater extent than if the site were developed with a principally
permitted use? Will the proposed conditional use experience significant negative
impacts from the surrounding uses in the zoning district? (as added by
Ord. #15, April 2001, and replaced by Ord. #2005-20, June 2005)
2.0 ZONING DISTRICTS.
2.1 General Provisions.
No Building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall
be erected, moved, or altered unless for a use expressly permitted in the district
in which it is located, except as hereafter provided. No lot, even though it may
consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that
yards, lot area, lot width, building area, or other requirements of this ordinance
are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is
acquired for a public purpose including but not limited to emergency service
facilities such as buildings, garages, and/or dispatch centers for ambulances, fire
police and rescue and the like and other public services and facilities owned and
operated by a governmental entity. (as amended by Ord. #2017-05, Feb. 2017)
2.1.1 Districts Established.
To classify and regulate the uses of land and buildings, the height and bulk of
buildings, the area and other open spaces about buildings, and the intensity of
land use, the city is hereby divided into sixteen (16) zoning districts to be known
as follows:
(1) RA esidential Agricultural District;
(2) R-1 Single-Family Residential Dwelling District;
(3) R-2 Low Density Single and Multi-family Dwelling
District;
(4) R-3 High Density Single and Multi-family Dwelling
District;
APP-C-24
(5) R-4 Mobile Home Parks District;
(6) R-5 High Rise Residential District;
(7) CN Commercial/Neighborhood District;
(8) PI Professional and Institutional District;
(9) CG General Commercial District;
(10) CH Highway Commercial District;
(11) CBD Central Business District;
(12) MU Mixed Use District;
(13) IL Light Industry District;
(14) IH Heavy Industry District.
(15) UC University Campus District;
(16) B Buffer (as amended by Ord. #8, Aug. 2000, and
Ord. #2003-22, Aug. 2003)
Table 1 Summarizes uses by district.
2.1.2 Uses Prohibited.
Uses which are not specified as allowed, or conditional, including uses
substantially similar to named uses, are prohibited. The sale, distribution, and
manufacture of fireworks is prohibited in all zoning districts. (as amended
Ord. #2003-38, Dec. 2003)
2.1.3 Accessory Structures and Uses.
Subject to the regulations governing accessory structures in Section 3.8,
customary and incidental accessory structures are allowed in any zoning district
except CBD. Accessory structures are to be for uses that are incidental to and
in support of an otherwise lawful principal use of the lot such as those examples
given in Table 1. In no case shall an accessory structure be used for a use that
is not lawful in the zoning district.
APP-C-25
Table 1
USES AND ZONING DISTRICTS1
USES RA R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 B CN PI CG CH CBD MU IL IH UC
Accessory structures such
as a tool shed, garden shed,
workshop, detached garage
or carport, gazebo, pool
house and the like may be
located in conjunction with
residential uses. Accessory
structures associated with
non-residential uses could
include the foregoing types
of uses as well as signs and
other structures that
support the principal use of
the property.
x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
Agricultural accessory,
customary
x
Agricultural uses x
Amusement facility x x x x c c
Bed and breakfast c x x x x x c c
Billboards c
Building supply x x x x c c
Cellular communication
towers
c
Cemetery x x x x x x c c
Church c c c c c x x x x x x x x c
College or other higher
education institution2 x x x x x c c x
Commercial, region-serving c
Community center and the
like
x x x x c c
Day care c c c c c c x x x x x c c c
Dry cleaners, one drive-up
window
x x x x x c c
Dry cleaners, with or
without drive-up window
x x x x c c
Dwelling, duplex x x x x
Dwelling, high rise
residential
x
1x = use by right
c = conditional use
2Includes usual and customary uses associated with a college or
university as described in section 2.17.
APP-C-26
USES RA R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 B CN PI CG CH CBD MU IL IH UC
Dwelling, mobile home, in
mobile home park
x
Dwelling, multi-family x x x x x x x x x x
Dwelling, quadruplex x x x x
Dwelling, residential, above
first floor
x
Dwelling, single family
detached
x x x x x x
Dwelling, triplex x x x x x
Emergency services facility
and/or dispatch center and
other public facilities and
services
x x x x x x x x x x x x c x x x
Entertainment facility x x x x c c
Farm and garden x x x x c c
Financial institution with
any number of drive-up
lanes
x x x x x x x
Financial institution, with
up to 3 drive-in lanes
x x x x x x x x
Flea market or similar
indoor/outdoor sale complex
x c
Forests, other natural
vegetative growth,
landscaping, berms, fences,
and/or walls
x
Foster home x x x x x c c
Fraternal lodge and the like x x x x c c
Funeral home, mortuary,
and like
x x x x x c c
Gasoline sales and/or
service, including combined
with food mart
x x x c
Golf course c c c c c x
Government office x x x x x c c
Home occupation, subject to
3.10
x x x x x x x x x
Hospital x x x x x c c
Hotel x x x x c c
Junkyard x
Library, public x x x x x x c c
Living facility, congregate
and/or residential care
x x x x x c c x
Maintenance facility x
Mall, regional c
Manufacturing business x
Manufacturing, light,
within a building
x x
APP-C-27
USES RA R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 B CN PI CG CH CBD MU IL IH UC
Medical office or clinic x x x x x c c
Mini-warehouse facilities x x
Motel x x x x c c
Office park, region-serving c
Outdoor arena, rodeo
grounds, race track, firing
range, or similar facility
c
Ornamental and vegetable
gardens
x
Park c c c x x x
Parking lots c
Passive parks, playgrounds,
fitness trails, picnic areas
and picnic shelters,
swimming pools, outdoor
sports courts, fields, or
grounds primarily for
recreational use other than
league or tournament play,
and greenways
x
Professional office c x x x x x x c c
Public utilities x
Recreation, commercial x x x x c c
Recreation/utility/other
necessary building for
mobile home park
c
Recycling center x
Restaurant, with drive-up
facility
x x c
Restaurant, without driveup
facility
x x x x x c c
Salvage yard x
School, preschool, primary
or secondary, public or
private
c c c c c c x x x x x c c c
School, commercial or trade x x x x x c c
Service business, personal c x x x x x x c c
Service business x x x x x c c
Shopping center, not a
regional mall
x x x x c c
Single-family homes in
single-family house
structures built or located
on the same site prior to
2008
x
Snack shop c
Storage yard x
Store, department x x x x c c
Store, retail x x x x c c
APP-C-28
USES RA R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 B CN PI CG CH CBD MU IL IH UC
Store, convenience x x x x x c c
Store, discount, large scale,
freestanding
x c
Store, freestanding
neighborhood
x x x x x c c
Streets, driveways, bridges,
walkways, bikepaths
x
Supermarket x x x x c c
Tourist, guest or boarding
home
c c c x x x x x c c
Tower, any type c c x x x x x
Tower, utility c c c c c c
Townhomes x x x x x x x x x x
Upper-story residences c
Utility facility x x
Vegetated riparian buffers x
Vehicle parts and
accessories, not including
vehicle repair or sales
x x x x c c
Vehicle sales, rental, and/or
repair
x c c
Veterinary office or clinic,
without kennels and runs
x x x x x c c
Veterinary office or clinic,
with or without kennels and
runs
x c c c
Wetland mitigation areas,
stormwater detention or
retention areas, water
courses or bodies of water,
slope easements for
construction projects or
slope preservation areas
x
Wholesale business, storage
and distribution
c x x
(as amended by Ord. #8, Aug. 2000, Ord. #23, Sept. 2002, Ord. #2003-22, Aug. 2003, Ord. #2007-02, Jan.
2007, Ord. #2007-05, March 2007, Ord. #2007-30, Sept. 2007, Ord. #2007-34, Sept. 2007, Ord. #2007-42,
Nov. 2007, Ord. #2008-02, Jan. 2008, Ord. #2010-18, June 2010, Ord. #2010-19, June 2010, Ord. #2010-38,
Oct. 2010, Ord. #2011-04, May 2011, Ord. #2017-05, Feb. 2017, Ord. #2017-38, July 2017, Ord. #2017-46,
Sept. 2017, and Ord. #2018-22, July 2018)
2.1.4 Zoning Map Adoption.
The boundaries of the zoning districts established by this ordinance are hereby
established as shown on the "Official Zoning Map of Cleveland, Tennessee," July
2006 which is on file in the city planning department. The Official Zoning Map
of Cleveland, Tennessee, July 2006, and all notations, references and other
information shown thereon are as much a part of this article as if the
APP-C-29
information set forth thereon was all fully described and set out in this section.
Any amendments and revisions of the official zoning map heretofore or hereafter
enacted by the Cleveland City Council are also made a part of this article. (as
amended by Ord. #2006-22, Aug. 2006)
2.1.5 Rooming Houses
2.1.5.A Purpose and intent. The residential zoning districts are established
with the intention that a dwelling unit would be occupied by a single
family or household. Occupancy of a dwelling unit by several
unrelated individuals can negatively impact the quality of the
residential environment for other dwelling units in the neighborhood
through increased traffic, parking demand, noise, litter, property that
is poorly maintained, etc. These problems can arise since the
unrelated occupants may lack a shared since of common household
responsibility toward the general upkeep of the property and the
owners of such property may be induced to minimize maintenance
investment where occupancy is somewhat transitory and the
expectations of the occupants regarding property conditions are
relatively low. Likewise the unrelated occupants may lack the
personal interest in neighborhood environmental quality held by those
whose concerns for such quality extend beyond themselves to fellow
members of their households. Such occupancy of a dwelling unit by
several unrelated individuals is the primary characteristic of a
rooming house as hereinafter defined. This ordinance is intended to
provide for the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare
by furthering the purposes and intent described in the general
provisions of the zoning ordinance and by mitigating the
aforementioned negative impacts while providing for the
establishment of rooming houses in certain residential districts.
2.1.5.B Rooming house definition. Subject to exceptions specifically described
herein, a rooming house is defined as a singular dwelling unit in a
structure containing one or more dwelling units that is occupied by
more than four (4) unrelated persons, or a dwelling unit that is not a
single-family dwelling where there are more than two (2) unrelated
occupants of legal driving age and where there are not at least two (2)
paved on-site parking spaces outside driveway travel lanes for each
bedroom or sleeping area in all the dwelling units on the site. For
purposes of this definition, occupancy by more than four (4) unrelated
persons means that each of the occupants is not in a qualifying
relationship to all of the other occupants by birth, marriage, or
adoption. A qualifying relationship is that of a spouse, parent, child,
direct descendent such as a grandchild, direct ancestor such as a
APP-C-30
grandparent, step-child or step-parent, or sibling or step-sibling.
Exceptions to this rooming house definition shall include: a lawfully
operating bed and breakfast, motel, or hotel; group homes for the
disabled with not more than two (2) live-in caregivers; dwelling units
with not more than two (2) persons per bedroom and with not more
than two (2) occupants who are not in a qualifying relationship with
each of the remaining occupants; dwelling units in structures with two
(2) or more dwelling units that were lawfully constructed prior to
November 1, 2002 and that are occupied by not more than two (2)
person per bedroom; and dwelling units other than single-family
dwellings where occupancy does not exceed two (2) persons per
bedroom and where there are at least two (2) paved on-site parking
spaces excluding driveway travel lanes for each bedroom on the site.
It is not the intention of this ordinance to determine that a qualifying
relationship does not exist between any two (2) persons who declare
themselves to be in a domestic partnership that they consider as
equivalent to marriage and where the physical, emotional, and
financial relationships correspond to marriage. It is not the intention
of this ordinance to prohibit such occasional and transitory occupancy
by houseguests as might be normal within the community.
2.1.5.C Special criteria for rooming houses. In addition to site design criteria
and conditional use requirements stipulated elsewhere in the zoning
ordinance, rooming houses must comply with special criteria described
below. Special criteria applicable to rooming houses may exceed
requirements otherwise applicable to buildings and sites employed in
other uses but nothing herein is intended to allow rooming houses to
violate other ordinance provisions. Special criterion: rooming house
shall have a minimum of one bedroom for every two (2) occupants.
Special criterion: rooming houses shall provide at least two (2) paved
on-site parking spaces per bedroom plus one paved on-site space for
each additional room (excepting rooms used exclusively as bathrooms,
laundry rooms, kitchens, hallways or storage space) and the parking
shall be configured such that double-parking and backing into a public
street is not promoted. Special criterion: on-street parking for
rooming houses shall be prohibited where the street width is
substandard or where undesirable traffic conditions would result.
Special criterion: each rooming house site shall contain at least seven
thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of land area per dwelling
unit plus two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for each
bedroom over two (2). Special criterion: occupancy of a rooming house
shall require a minimum living area of three hundred (300) square
feet per occupant and otherwise meet requirements of the adopted
building codes. Special criterion: each rooming house shall have
APP-C-31
garbage containers with snug-fitting attached lids and a minimum
capacity of thirty (30) gallons each (one can per bedroom but not less
than three cans) unless alternative containers of equal or greater
capacity are allowed or required by the code enforcement officer.
Special criterion: the owner shall keep the rooming house and its
grounds in a good repair at all times and shall otherwise keep the
property in compliance with city ordinances. Special criterion: after
10:00 P.M. and before 7:00 A.M. noise emanating from the rooming
house or its grounds shall not be perceptibly louder at the property
lines of the rooming house property than noise from residential
property located wholly or in part within three hundred (300) feet of
the rooming house property in any direction. Special criterion: the
owner of property used as a rooming house shall maintain on file with
the city clerk the current owners name, correct mailing address and
correct phone number as well as the name, correct address, and
correct phone number of the local agent responsible for the
management of the property. Special criterion: conditional use
approval for rooming houses shall be for a period of four (4) years from
the date of the approval and continuation of the rooming house shall
require review and re-approval of the conditional use by the Board of
Zoning Appeals every four (4) years thereafter at which time a record
of complaints against the rooming house the previous period may be
considered. (as amended by Ord. #2011-07, June 2011)
2.1.5.D Rooming house violations. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the
zoning ordinance to occupy as a rooming house any dwelling unit that
is the property of another, or suffer such occupancy of a dwelling unit
that is one's own property, contrary to any provisions of this ordinance
including also the aforementioned special criteria for rooming houses
and any conditions imposed in the conditional use approval.
Violations are subject to enforcement and remedies permitted in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-7-208, and the zoning ordinance and
other applicable City of Cleveland ordinances. (as added by Ord. #22,
Sept. 2002, and amended by Ord. #25, Dec. 2002, and Ord. #2011-07,
June 2011)
2.2 RA DISTRICT (Residential Agricultural).
2.2.1 Uses allowed. The RA, Residential District, allows the following uses:
A. Uses Allowed by right in the R-1 District;
APP-C-32
B. Agricultural uses including farmland, cropland, pastureland,
silviculture, floriculture, sale of farm produce, and other agricultural
uses, subject to the health codes of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee;
C. Customary agricultural accessories such as barns, corrals, pens, and
the like which are normally required in the operation of agricultural
uses.
2.2.2 Conditional Uses. The Following uses may be allowed:
A. Conditional uses allowed in the R-1 District and subject to any
minimum requirements as may be established for the review of a
given conditional use in the R-1 district. (as amended by Ord. #14,
March 2001, and Ord. #2007-34, Sept. 2007).
2.3 R-1 DISTRICT (Single-Family Residential).
2.3.1 Uses allowed. The R-1, Single-Family Residential, District allows the
following uses:
A. Single-Family Detached Dwellings;
B, Home Occupations, subject to 3.10.
2.3.2 Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed:
A. Parks;
B. Utility Towers.
C. Churches with or without daycare, pre-school, primary school, or
secondary school. Conditions for approval include location on and
access from an arterial or collector street and compliance with the
applicable site planning requirements in sections 3.0 and 6.2.
Conditions for approval would be directed toward mitigating impacts
on homes and residential streets from noise, traffic, parking demand,
and other effects of the church development however, proposed new
church sites shall not be considered for a conditional use review unless
they contain at least two (2) acres and are located on an arterial or
collector street.
D. Golf courses and ancillary facilities such as clubhouses, parking, cart
sheds and the like. (as amended by Ord. #14, March 2001, and
Ord. #2007-05, March 2007)
APP-C-33
2.4 R-2 DISTRICT (Low Density Single- and Multi-Family Residential
2.4.1 Uses allowed. The R-2, Low Density Residential, District Allows the
following uses:
A. Uses allowed by right in R-1;
B. Duplexes, triplexes, and quadraplexes.
C. Townhomes, provided that the townhomes are built in compliance
with the townhome subdivision regulations of the Cleveland
Municipal Planning Commission including but not limited to such
provisions of those subdivision regulations that modify lot width and
setbacks within the underlying zoning district. (as amended by
Ord. #2007-30, Sept. 2007)
2.4.2 Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed:
A. Uses allowed as conditional uses in the R-1 District;
B. Churches with or without day care, preschool, primary, or secondary
schools; however, proposed new church sites shall not be considered
for conditional use review unless they are located on an arterial or
collector street;
C. Day-care, preschool, primary or secondary schools, public or private;
D. Golf courses. (as amended by Ord. #14, March 2001)
2.5 R-3 District (Multi-family Residential).
2.5.1 Uses allowed. The R-3, Multi-family Residential, District allows the
following uses:
A. Uses Allowed by right in the R-2 District;
B. Multi-family Dwellings with three (3) or more units per structure
(whether designed as an apartment, condominium, or townhouse);
C. Parks.
D. Townhomes, provided that the townhomes are built in compliance
with the townhome subdivision regulations of the Cleveland
Municipal Planning Commission including but not limited to such
APP-C-34
provisions of those subdivision regulations that modify lot width and
setbacks within the underlying zoning district. (as amended by
Ord. #2007-30, Sept. 2007)
2.5.2 Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed:
A. Except as otherwise allowed by right in the R3 district, conditional
uses allowed in the R2 district subject to any minimum requirements
that may be established for the review of a given conditional use in
the R2 district.
B. Tourist, guest, or boarding homes. (as amended by Ord. #14, March
2001)
2.6 R-4 District (Mobile Home Parks).
2.6.1 Uses allowed. The R-4, mobile home park, district allows the
following uses:
A. Uses allowed by right in the R-3 District;
B. Mobile homes or manufactured housing in mobile home or
manufactured home parks or mobile home or manufactured home
developments.
2.6.2 Conditional Uses. The Following uses may be allowed:
A. Conditional uses allowed in the R3 district subject to any minimum
requirements that may be established for a given conditional use in
the R3 district.;
B. Recreational, utility, and other necessary accessory buildings and uses
in mobile home parks for the exclusive use of mobile home park
residents. (as amended by Ord. #14, March 2001)
2.7 R-5 District (High Rise Residential).
2.7.1 Uses allowed. The R-5, High Rise Residential, District allows the
following uses:
A. Residential structures over three stories in height with necessary
resident services, such as utility rooms;
B. Home occupations, subject to 3.10.
APP-C-35
2.7.2 Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed:
A. Professional offices;
B. Personal service businesses, such as barbers, beauty salons, nail
salons, photography studios and the like;
C. Churches with or without day care, preschool, primary, or secondary
schools.
2.8 CN District (Neighborhood Commercial).
2.8.1 Neighborhood Commercial District.
A. Neighborhood Commercial District Created. There is hereby created
a neighborhood commercial district nc which is designed to provide
Convenient retail and professional services facilities in proximity to
populated residential areas without imposing incompatible uses or
undesirable impacts upon a residential area.
B. Uses permitted. Professional-institutional Zoning District uses
permitted as prescribed in section 2.9, Professional Institutional
Zoning District, of this zoning ordinance; barber shop, beauty shop,
restaurants but excluding a restaurant establishment that is defined
as a fast-food or drive-in restaurant, dry cleaning, excluding drive-in
window service and coin-operated laundry, hardware store, drug store,
grocery store, nursery or garden store, bakery, shoe repair, apparel
shops, self-service gasoline station limited to three (3) pumps per
district and excluding auto repair, branch banks with drive-in window
service, residential district uses. (Ord. of 11-27-78, as amended by
Ord. #2014-37, Oct. 2014, and Ord. #2018-17, June 2018)
C. Uses prohibited.
Any use not specifically permitted or permitted on appeal. (Ord. Of
11-27-78)
D. Uses permitted on appeal. Government offices, tailoring or
dressmaking shops, appliance or television repair. (as amended by
Ord. #2013-39, Aug. 2013, and Ord. #2014-37, Oct. 2014)
APP-C-36
E. Required lot size.
A minimum lot size of one (1) acre (43,500 square feet) is required
with a maximum lot size of three (3) acres. A minimum lot width of
one hundred (100) feet measured at the front building setback line is
required. The structure must be situated on the lot to front on a
street.
F. Minimum building setbacks.
Front-50 feet; rear-20 feet; side-15 feet. On a corner lot that adjoins
intersecting streets, the front of the building must be determined and
the fifty (50) foot setback maintained. The side setback from the other
intersecting street shall be increased to a minimum of thirty (30) feet.
(Ord. Of 11-27-78)
G. Maximum building area.
The maximum building area for all buildings including accessory
buildings shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total lot area. No
individual establishment shall occupy more than three thousand)
3,000 square feet. The maximum building height shall be two (2)
stories or thirty (30) feet measured from the highest point of the
structure.
H. Minimum off-street parking and loading.
All parking facilities shall be off-street and be provided at a rate of ten
(10) spaces for each establishment. Each parking space shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet in length and ten (10) feet in width.
All loading and unloading facilities can be located either in the rear
or in specifically designated spaces in the front.
No customer or employee parking is allowed in the rear or side yard
setbacks unless the required setback distances are increased sufficient
to accommodate parked vehicles. (Ord. Of 11-27-78)
I. Landscaping, buffers and appearance.
(a) Landscaping and buffers. On land to be used for
neighborhood commercial use that adjoins any
residential property the following minimum
landscaping requirements apply:
APP-C-37
(1) Planted areas shall be provided and maintained at
the side and rear property lines that adjoin
residential property. The planted area shall be 3-10
feet in width and consist of vegetation that will
provide screening protection for the residences or an
attractive wall or fence may be provided that is a
minimum of eight (8) feet in height. (as amended by
Ord. #2014-37, Oct. 2014)
(2) At streets entrances and exits to a neighborhood
commercial district, planted areas shall be provided
that enhance appearance but doesn't obstruct traffic
visibility or create a hazard for pedestrians.
(3) Areas for refuse and trash collection shall be so
designated and the containers kept in an enclosed
area that will allow adequate trash storage yet
prohibit the viewing of the trash collected from
adjoining properties.
(4) Lighting. No lighting may be directed in a manner
that will illuminate adjacent residential properties.
(5) Signs. All signs erected on the structure itself must
be mounted flat against the structure and may be no
more than ten (10) square feet in size. Each
establishment located in a neighborhood commercial
development is permitted one (1) such sign. (as
amended by Ord. #2014-37, Oct. 2014)
In Addition, one (1) sign may be constructed that identifies the
establishments located in the neighborhood commercial development
provided its arrangement doesn't obstruct traffic visibility and doesn't
exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size. No sign may be
mounted above or beyond the wall of the building.
(b) Appearance. The exterior of the building must be of
materials that will conform to adjacent residential
neighborhoods. The purpose of this is to promote
compatibility with the surroundings in residential
areas. This section doesn't apply to neighborhood
commercial districts if the location is in a district
other than residential. (Ord. Of 11-27-78)
APP-C-38
J. Hours of operation.
No establishment, except for emergency services of physicians or
dentist, shall be open for business between the hours of 10:00 P.M.
and 7:00 A.M. (Ord. Of 11-27-78)
K. Special provisions.
(a) No Sales or services shall be conducted on the outside
grounds of the neighborhood commercial district.
(b) No public address systems or any other means of
amplification shall be used outside the buildings in a
neighborhood commercial district.
(c) No neighborhood commercial district shall be permitted
within three thousand feet (3,000') of a district where
similar facilities are permitted. The measurement of
distance will be taken along the center line of streets
providing the most direct route and will measure from the
nearest corner lot line of each facility in question.
(d) The requirements as stated in this chapter apply only to
neighborhood commercial developments in residential and
professional-institutional zoning districts as shown on the
City of Cleveland Official Zoning Map. (Ord. Of 11-27-78)
L. Site plan requirements.
A site plan containing the following information must be submitted
and approved by the Cleveland Municipal Planning Commission.
(a) A Legal description of the total site and a statement
of present and/or proposed ownership.
(b) The Location and floor area size of the proposed
building, accessory structures, or other
improvements, including lot lines, building setbacks,
building height, adjacent properties by use and
ownership, open spaces, parking spaces, streets and
utilities.
(c) The location and dimensions of all point of vehicular and
pedestrian access, exits and circulation.
APP-C-39
(d) Specify the material proposed for the exterior walls of the
building.
(e) Identify the location, intensity and direction of all lighting.
(f) Specify the location of planted areas and type of vegetation
or fencing planned for landscaping and buffers. (Ord. Of
11-27-78)
2.8.2 Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed:
A. Tourist, guest, boarding homes, or bed and breakfast establishments;
B. Day-care;
C. Utility towers.
2.9 PI District (Professional Institutional).
2.9.1 Uses allowed. The PI District includes the following uses.
A. Single-family homes in single-family house structures built or located
on the same site prior to 2008. (as deleted by Ord. #2007-42, Nov.
2007, and replaced by Ord. #2010-38, Oct. 2010)
B. Professional offices;
C. Government offices;
D. Service businesses such as catering, dry cleaners, interior decorating
services, printing, tailoring, travel agencies, upholstery;
E. Financial institutions with any number of drive-up lanes;
F. Colleges and other higher education institutions;
G. Commercial or trade schools, such as dance studios, martial arts
studios, etc.
H. Personal service businesses, such as barbers, beauty salons, nail
salons, photography studios and the like;
I. Cemeteries with or without funeral homes;
APP-C-40
J. Funeral homes, mortuaries and the like;
K. Tourist, guest, boarding homes, or bed and breakfast establishments;
L. Congregate living facilities, residential care facilities, foster homes
and the like;
M. Churches with or without day care, preschool, primary, or secondary
schools;
N. Public libraries;
O. Veterinary offices and clinics, without outside kennels or runs;
P. Medical offices or clinics;
Q. Hospitals. (as amended by Ord. #2, Sept. 1998)
2.9.2 Conditional uses. The following use may be allowed:
A. Transmission towers, microwave towers, water towers, and the like.
B. Upper-story residences; snack shops. (as added by Ord. #2010-18,
June 2010, and Ord. #2010-19, June 2010)
2.10 CG District (General Commercial).
2.10.1 Uses allowed. The CG (General Commercial) District, includes the
following uses.
A. All uses allowed by right in the CN and PI districts and multi-family
dwellings allowed by right in the R-3 District;
B. Commercial recreation, entertainment and amusement facilities;
C. Department stores and retail stores;
D. Dry cleaners with or without drive-up windows;
E. Shopping centers, but not regional malls;
F. Building supply, farm and garden, vehicle parts and accessories, but
not including repair or vehicle sales;
APP-C-41
G. Supermarkets;
H. Hotels and motels;
I. Restaurants with or without drive-up facilities; (as amended by
Ord. #2011-04, May 2011)
J. Convenience stores with or without gasoline pumps;
K. Community centers, fraternal lodges and the like.
L. Mini-warehouse facilities provided that storage units are accessed
internally from within the building. (as amended by Ord. #2017-46,
Sept. 2017)
2.10.2 Conditional uses.
A. Transmission towers, microwave towers, water towers, and the like.
B. Car wash.
C. Oil change facilities. (as amended by Ord. #23, Sept. 2002)
2.11 CH District (Highway Commercial).
2.11.1 Uses allowed. The CH District includes the following uses:
A. All Uses allowed by right in the CG District and multi-family
dwellings allowed by right in the R-3 District;
B. Vehicle sales, rental, service and repair, including truck stops, body
shops, road services, car wash facilities, including new or used
automobiles, boats, buses, farm equipment, motorcycles, trucks,
recreational vehicles and mobile homes;
C. Gasoline sales and service, combination gasoline sale and food marts,
and similar facilities;
D. [Deleted];
E. Flea markets or similar outdoor or outdoor/indoor sales complexes;
F. Restaurants with or without drive-up facilities;
APP-C-42
G. Large-scale, free-standing, discount stores (often called "big-box
retailers");
H. Emergency service facilities such as buildings, garages and/or
dispatch centers for ambulances, fire, police and rescue;
I. Veterinary offices and clinics, with or without outside kennels or runs;
J. Transmission towers, microwave towers, water towers, and the like.
K. Any junkyard and/or recycling center business in operation as of
January 1, 2015 pursuant to the requirements of section 2.22 of the
zoning ordinance.
L. Mini-warehouse facilities provided that storage units are accessed
internally from within the building. (as amended by Ord. #20, March
2002, Ord. 2016-17, June 2016, Ord. 2017-05, Feb. 2017, Ord.
#2017-38, July 2017)
2.11.2 Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed:
A. Region-serving commercial, including regional malls;
B. Region-serving office parks.
C. Mini-warehouse to the conditional uses in the CH zoning district.
D. Outdoor arenas, rodeo grounds, race tracks, firing ranges,
campgrounds, and other outdoor sports and recreation facilities is
added so as to make such facilities conditional uses in the CH zone.
E. Car wash.
F. Oil change facilities. (as amended by Ord. #11, March 2001, Ord. #20,
March 2002, and Ord. #23, Sept. 2002)
2.12 CBD District (Central Business District).
2.12.1 Uses allowed. The CBD includes the following uses:
A. All uses allowed by right in CN, PI, and CG Districts, except
veterinary offices and clinics with outside kennels or runs;
B. Multi-family dwellings allowed by right in the R-3 District;
APP-C-43
C. Residential uses located above the first floor;
D. Home occupations, subject to 3.10.
2.12.2 Conditional uses.
A. Automobile sales provided no more than 50 percent of the automobile
inventory is located outside of a permanent building. In no case shall
any parts be stored outdoors nor any repair or body work be conducted
outdoors. (As replaced by Ord. #2018-22, July 2018)
2.13 MU District (Mixed Use).
2.13.1 Uses allowed. The MU (Mixed Use) District includes the following
uses:
A. All Uses Allowed by Right in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5, CN, PI, and CG
Districts.
2.13.2 Conditional uses.
A. All uses allowed by right in the CH and IL Districts which are not
otherwise allowed by right in the MU District.
2.14 IL District (Light Industry).
2.14.1 The IL (Light Industry) District, includes the following uses:
A. Existing or replacement of single family or multi-family developments
on existing sites subject to the section 3.0 Site Design Standards for
multi-family development in the R3 zone.
B. Churches with or without day care, preschool, primary, or secondary
schools;
C. Wholesale businesses for storing and/or distribution of goods;
D. Light manufacturing which is conducted entirely within a building;
E. Emergency service facilities such as buildings, garages and/or
dispatch centers for ambulances, fire, police and rescue;
F. Transmission towers, microwave towers, water towers, and the like;
APP-C-44
G. Utility facilities, such as water plants, wastewater treatment plants,
electricity substations;
H. Financial institutions with any number of drive-up facilities.
I. Vehicle repair but not including the storage of junk vehicles in the
manner of a junkyard as defined in the zoning ordinance;
transportation facilities including garages, terminals, transfer
facilities, fuel facilities (including fleet fuel facilities and gas stations
with or without convenience stores) and the like; and outdoor storage
of vehicles, construction materials, and other materials incidental to
the operation of a business otherwise allowed in the zone except where
such storage would constitute a junkyard (as amended by Ord. #11,
March 2001, and Ord. #26, March 2003, replaced by Ord. #2015-25,
Sept. 2015, and amended by Ord. #2016-10, April 2016)
2.14.1.1 Mini-warehouse to the principally permitted uses in the IL zoning
district. (as added by Ord. #12, March 2001, and replaced by Ord.
#2015-25, Sept. 2015)
2.14.2 Conditional uses.
A. All uses, allowed by right in the CN, PI, CG and CH districts which
are not otherwise allowed by right in IL.
B. Outdoor arenas, rodeo grounds, race tracks, firing ranges,
campgrounds, and other outdoor sports and recreation facilities are
added so as to make such facilities conditional uses in the IL zone.
C. LP gas storage and/or distribution.
D. Car wash.
E. Oil change facilities.
F. Vehicle sales. (as amended by Ord. #11, March 2001, Ord. #16, June
2001, Ord. #20, March 2002, Ord. #21, May 2002, Ord. #23, Sept.
2002, Ord. #2011-07, June 2011, Ord. #2014-03, Feb. 2014, and Ord.
#2014-15, May 2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-25, Sept. 2015)
2.14.3 Prohibited Uses
A. Notwithstanding any of the above permitted or conditional uses, new
residential uses are not permitted within the IL Light Industry
District. (as added by Ord. #2015-25, Sept. 2015)
APP-C-45
2.15 IH District (Heavy Industry).
2.15.1 The IH (Heavy Industry) District includes the following uses:
A. All uses allowed by right in the IL zoning district including existing
or replacement of single family or existing multi-family developments
on existing sites subject to the same conditions as in the IL zoning
district.
B. Manufacturing businesses, junkyards and salvage yards;
C. Maintenance facilities and storage yards for schools, government
agencies and telephone and cable companies;
D. Recycling centers and the like;
E. Financial institutions with any number of drive-up facilities.
F. Mini-warehouse to the principally permitted uses in the IH zoning
district.
G. Vehicle sales, rental, and repair. (as amended by Ord. #2, Sept. 1998,
Ord. #11, March 2001, Ord. #12, March 2001, Ord. #21, May 2002, and
Ord. #2003-40, Jan. 2004, replaced by Ord. #2015-25, Sept. 2015, and
amended by Ord. #2016-10, April 2016)
2.15.2 Conditional uses.
A. Conditional uses allowed in the IL zoning district subject to any
restrictions or conditions identified for such conditional use in the IL
zoning district. (as amended by Ord. #11, March 2001, and replaced
by Ord. #2015-25, Sept. 2015)
B. Junkyards and salvage yards. (as added by Ord. #2, Sept. 1998, and
replaced by Ord. #2015-25, Sept. 2015)
2.15.3 Prohibited Uses
A. Notwithstanding any of the above permitted or conditional uses, new
residential uses are not permitted within the IH Heavy Industry
District. (as added by Ord. #2015-25, Sept. 2015)
APP-C-46
2.16 Temporary uses
The regulations contained in this section are necessary to govern the operation
of certain transitory or seasonal uses, non-permanent in nature.
A. Application for a temporary use permit shall be made to the building
inspector and shall contain the following information:
(1) A description of the property to be used, rented, or
leased for a temporary use, shall include all
information to accurately portray the property
including address, zoning district, surrounding uses,
and any other information deemed necessary by the
building inspector.
(2) A sketch plan or map showing the location of the
temporary use and surrounding properties.
(3) A description of the proposed activity or use(s),
including anticipated attendance.
(4) Availability of parking spaces to service the
anticipated use.
B. The following uses are deemed to be temporary uses and shall also be
subject to the specific regulations and time limits for use, and to the
regulations of any district in which the use is located:
(1) Carnival or circus.
In any nonresidential district, a temporary use permit may
be issued for a carnival or circus, but such permit shall be
issued for a period of not longer than fifteen (15) days. Such
uses shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet
from any residential district.
(2) Real estate sales office.
In any district, a temporary use permit may be issued for a
temporary real estate office. Such office shall contain no
sleeping or cooking accommodations. Such permit shall be
valid for not more than six months, but may be renewed.
Such Office or shed shall be removed upon completion of the
APP-C-47
development project or upon expiration of the temporary use
permit, whichever occurs first.
(3) Religious tent meeting.
In any non-residential district or on the property of a church
in a residential district, a temporary use permit may be
issued for a maximum of thirty (30) days for a tent or other
temporary structure to house religious meetings.
C. It shall be unlawful to place or use any portable storage unit on any
tract, lot, or parcel in any RA, R1, R2, or R3 zoning district where one
or more homes have been constructed except in compliance with this
ordinance. Only one portable storage unit shall be allowed per lot,
tract, or parcel and none are allowed on a vacant tract, lot, or parcel.
No portable storage unit shall be placed so as to interfere with the
vision of motorists, or so as to interfere with any utility or drainage.
No portable storage unit shall be placed within any public right of way
or within15 feet of the travelway of any street, nor shall any portable
storage unit be located in front of a house. Portable storage units shall
meet or exceed the setback requirements for accessory structures in
side and rear yards, as the case may be. No portable storage unit shall
be placed in a manner that violates any building code, fire or life
safety code, or otherwise block building egress or access for fire and
emergency services on the site or adjacent properties. No portable
storage unit shall be placed in a floodway. Portable storage units shall
be used only for the storage of household goods belonging to persons
living on the property. The portable storage unit is for temporary
storage only, for a period not exceeding 90 days, and not for more than
one such 90 day period during any 12 month period. A sign shall be on
the portable storage unit identifying its owner and giving a contact
telephone number. A property owner placing a portable storage unit
on his/her property shall promptly notify the Community
Development Department in writing as to the address and date of
placement; where there is no such notification and a complaint is
received or the unit is observed by City staff, no action will be taken
for one week but if the required notice is not received during that
week enforcement will begin with the presumption that the unit has
been in place for 45 days for purposes of the 90 limit. No
tractor-trailer type trailer (Federal Highway Administration Vehicle
Classification Class 8 or above) shall be used for temporary storage in
lieu of a portable storage unit in the aforementioned residential
zoning districts. Nothing herein is intended to prohibit the
construction trailers of contractors engaged in work on the site or to
APP-C-48
prohibit commercial vehicles that are otherwise specifically allowed
to be parked on the residential property by another ordinance. (as
amended by Ord. #2008-50, Aug. 2008)
2.17 UC DISTRICT (University Campus)
2.17.1 The UC University Campus zoning district includes the following
uses:
A. All uses allowed by right in the R3 district.
B. Usual and customary uses associated with a college or university are
characterized by serving primarily the mission or purposes of the
college or university and by a physical and/or organizational
integration into the campus life of the institution. Such usual and
customary uses include but are not necessarily limited to the
following: dormitories; academic buildings; research facilities;
libraries; student centers; conference facilities; athletic facilities;
operational and administrative facilities (physical plant, fleet
facilities, central supply facilities, central computer facilities,
administrative offices, etc.); food service facilities; facilities for the
arts; book stores, commissaries; churches or houses of worship;
campus affiliated organizations facilities (fraternal, social,
professional, and public service organizations); schools and
pre-schools; daycare facilities; student health care facilities; and
parking areas.
2.17.2 Conditional Uses
A. All uses identified as conditional uses for the R3 district and not
otherwise included as a usual and customary use associated with a
college or university as described above in 2.17.1. (as added by
Ord. #8, Aug. 2000)
2.18 B DISTRICT (Buffer)
2.18.1 The B-Buffer zoning district includes the following uses as uses by
right when developed such that impervious areas apart from
swimming pools does not exceed 20% of the lot area; no principal
structure is located within 50 feet of another zoning district; and the
area within 20 feet of an adjoining residentially zoned or developed lot
or parcel that is completely outside the B-Buffer zoning district must
be developed and maintained in perpetuity as a buffer as described in
APP-C-49
2.18.1.A below and in accordance with a plan approved by the
Planning Director;
A. Buffering between land uses consisting of forests and other natural
vegetative growth, landscaping, berms, fences, and/or walls.
B. Passive parks, playgrounds, fitness trails, picnic areas and picnic
shelters, swimming pools, outdoor sports courts, fields, or grounds,
primarily for recreational use rather than for league or tournament
play, greenways, golf courses.
C. Ornamental and vegetable gardens for use of property owners but not
commercial agriculture.
D. Cemeteries, memorial gardens, and the like but not funeral homes,
mortuaries, or cremation facilities.
E. Vegetated riparian buffers, wetland mitigation areas, stormwater
detention or retention areas, water courses or bodies of water; slope
easements for construction projects or slope preservation areas.
F. Public or private streets or driveways, bridges, walkways, bikepaths;
public utilities including but not limited to drainage facilities, utility
substations, water tanks, and the like.
G. Accessory structures such as a tool shed, garden shed, workshop,
detached garage or carport, gazebo, pool house and the like.
2.18.2 Conditional use. (as replaced by Ord. #2011-07, June 2011)
A. Billboards subject to the requirements in Section 5.0.
B. Cellular communication towers subject to the requirements in section
3.13.
C. Parking lots. (as added by Ord. #2003-22, Aug. 2003)
2.19 SEX OUTLETS
A. For the purposes of this ordinance, sex outlets and the various types
of sex outlets (sex media outlet, sex media exhibition outlet, mini-sex
media exhibition outlet, sex entertainment outlet, sex service outlet,
and sex accessories outlet) are defined in Section 1.6 Definitions.
APP-C-50
B. Sex outlets of any type are not allowed in any zone except as expressly
provided herein. Sex outlets that are not in compliance with any other
applicable law or ordinance, including any permit or licensing
requirement, are not allowed in any zone. Violations of this ordinance
are unlawful and subject to penalties provided for in Title 14 Chapter
2 of the Cleveland Municipal Code.
C. No sex outlet of any type shall be located within 750 feet of any of the
following protected land uses: any church or house of worship or
religious institution such as a seminary or denominational agency
except when located in a rented storefront or office suite; public or
private licensed daycare or child care center, pre-school, kindergarten,
elementary school, middle school or junior high school, or high school;
residence or residential zoning district; public park, playground,
greenway, recreation center, community center, or public library;
private or semi-private recreational facility such as a YMCA,
miniature golf course, video arcade, movie theatre, or any other type
of recreational use for which at least one-third of the users are persons
under age 18 with at least 100 user visits per mouth. No sex outlet of
any type shall be located within 1500 feet of another sex outlet;
however, this restriction is not intended to prohibit the co-location of
more than one type of sex outlet within a common interior space
where the requirements of this ordinance are otherwise met. No sex
outlet of any type shall be located within 2000 feet of the Interstate 75
right-of-way or within 1000 feet of the intersection of U.S. Highway 64
or Waterlevel Highway and APD-40.
D. For purposes of measuring the required 1500 foot distance between
any two sex outlets, the measurement shall he a straight line distance
between the front doors of the existing and/or proposed buildings that
contain or will contain the sex outlet. For purposes of measuring the
required 750 foot distance between a sex outlet and any protected land
use, the measurement shall be the straight line distance between the
front door of the sex outlet and the nearest entrance of the building
occupied by the protected use. However, in the case of a protected land
use that is not primarily contained within a building, e.g. residential
zoning district, park, miniature golf course, etc., the measurement
shall be the straight line distance from the front door of the sex outlet
to the nearest property line of the protected use. With respect to sex
outlets and protected land uses that lie within unincorporated Bradley
County where a sex outlet is proposed to be located in the City of
Cleveland, the separation requirements shall he applied in the same
manner as if all of the property were in the city except that a zoning
district within unincorporated Bradley County shall not be considered
APP-C-51
as a protected land use. In the case of a protected land use in a
structure that is vacant but not in such a condition that it is or could
be condemned for demolition, the distance requirement shall apply if
the structure was built or remodeled by more than 50% of its value to
serve a protected use.
E. Except as provided herein, no sex outlet of any type shall be located
except on property that fronts on specified roadways (specified
roadways include APD-40 or a principal arterial street as identified in
the subdivision regulations or Wildwood Avenue, or Dalton Pike, or
Blue Springs Road, or Old Tasso Road, or Stuart Road) with a
minimum lot frontage of at least 100 feet on the specified roadway.
Sex outlets on sites of at least two acres in an IL-Industrial Light zone
or in an IH-Industrial Heavy zone are exempt from the requirement
for frontage on a specified roadway provided that the sex outlet is the
only development on the site and the site is not reduced below two
acres in size. Nothing herein shall be construed to require the
approval of access to specified roadways in a manner inconsistent with
any applicable law, regulation, ordinance, policy, or standard.
F. No sex outlet of any type shall be located on a flag lot, in a rear
building, in a rear suite, in an upstairs suite, in a basement, facing
a side lot line, or in any other manner except a ground floor location
that is not obscured from view from the roadway traffic traveling in
either direction. Customers shall enter and exit only through a
well-lighted and unobscured entrance at the front of the building.
Parking areas serving any sex outlet shall be well lighted and shall be
arranged such that parked vehicles are clearly visible from the
roadway on which the sex outlet is located. No sex outlets of any type
shall be located on property having fencing, vegetation above two feet
in height, or screening of any type except within three feet of the side
or rear property lines but not closer to the front property line than the
front entrance.
G. Sex service outlets and Mini-sex media exhibition outlets, including
video booths or similar facilities located as an accessory use, are not
allowed in any zoning district as either a principally permitted use or
as a conditional use. Sex media outlets and sex accessories outlets are
principally permitted uses in the CH-Commercial Highway,
IL-Industrial Light, and IH-Industrial Heavy zoning districts subject
to all requirements of the zoning ordinance. Sex media exhibition
outlets are allowed as a principally permitted use in the IL and IH
zones. Sex entertainment outlets are principally permitted uses in the
IL and IH zones provided that they comply with all applicable laws
APP-C-52
that prohibit indecent exposure in public, that prohibit performing or
offering to perform any sexual activity for any consideration, that
prohibit performing any actual or simulated sexual activity in any
establishment serving food or beer, or that establish any other
requirements such as those in Title 11 Chapter 5 of the Cleveland
Municipal Code. No sex outlet of any type is allowed as a conditional
use or any accessory use in any zoning district. (as added by
Ord. #2004-02, March 2004)
2.20 IGC DISTRICT (Interstate Gateway Corridor)
2.20.1 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of the IGC, Interstate Gateway Corridor Overlay District
regulations is to establish a framework for site planning and design to ensure
development of a high quality. These regulations set standards for all
development within Interstate Gateway Corridor Overlay District including
commercial, residential and office uses. It is the intent of these regulations to
establish standards that will be reflective and protective of the community
amenities in gateways along or adjacent to Exit 20 and the Spring Branch
Industrial Park, Exit 25 and Exit 27 along Interstate 75 to enhance the quality
of life for the citizens of Cleveland and Bradley County. It is the intent of the
Interstate Gateway Corridor Overlay District regulations to protect and enhance
the existing character of the land throughout the district.
The purposes of the Interstate Gateway Corridor Overlay District regulations
shall include the following:
(1) encourage high quality development as a strategy for investing in the
City's future;
(2) maintain and enhance the quality of life for Cleveland's citizens;
(3) shape the District's appearance, aesthetic quality, and spatial form;
(4) reinforce the civic pride of citizens through appropriate development;
(5) increase awareness of aesthetic, social, and economic values;
(6) protect and enhance property values;
(7) minimize negative impacts of development on the natural
environment;
APP-C-53
(8) provide property owners, developers, architects, engineers, builders,
business owners, and others with a clear and equitable set of
regulations for developing land;
(9) enhance the City's sense of place and contribute to the sustainability
and lasting value of the City; and,
(10) shape and develop the District in a manner that is beneficial to the
entire City.
2.20.2. Permitted Uses.
A. The permitted uses shall be designated as those permitted within the
underlying zoning district with the exception of those listed in the
following section.
2.20.3. Uses Prohibited.
No use shall be permitted which is inconsistent with the operation of a
first-class development. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the
following uses shall not be permitted:
a. Any "second hand' store, "surplus" store, or pawn shop.
b. Any mobile home park, trailer court, labor camp, junkyard, or
stockyard; provided, however, this prohibition shall not be applicable
to the temporary use of construction trailers or office trailers during
periods of construction, reconstruction or maintenance.
c. Any dumping, disposing, incineration or reduction of garbage;
provided, however, this prohibition shall not be applicable to garbage
compactors located near the rear of any building.
d. Any fire sale, bankruptcy sale (unless pursuant to a court order) or
auction house operation.
e. Any veterinary hospital or animal raising or boarding facility;
provided, however, this prohibition shall not be applicable to pet
shops.
f. Any establishment selling or exhibiting "obscene" material as
determined by final decree of a Court of competent jurisdiction or any
establishment classified as a sex outlet by City ordinance.
APP-C-54
g. Any establishment selling or exhibiting illegal drug-related
paraphernalia or which exhibits either live or by other means to any
degree, nude or partially clothed dancers or wait staff.
h. Any gambling facility or operation, including but not limited to:
off-tract or sports betting parlor; table games such as blackjack or
poker; slot machines, video poker/blackjack/keno machines or similar
devices; or bingo hall. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this prohibition
shall not be applicable to government sponsored gambling activities
or charitable gambling activities, so long as such activities are
incidental to the business operation being conducted by the Occupant.
(1) Temporary outdoor uses of land:
(a) The following temporary outdoor uses of land shall be prohibited: [1]
carnivals [2] circuses [3] fireworks sales [4] Christmas tree sales
(b) Tents shall be permitted within the District provided that a tent shall
not be used for retail sales of merchandise. Permits issued for tents
shall be valid for a period not in excess of fourteen consecutive days.
(2) Itinerant and/or temporary outdoor sales of retail merchandise shall
be prohibited, including but not limited to the following:
(a) sale of vacuum cleaners, fans and other appliances;
(b) sale of rugs, carpets, toys, T-shirts, license plates, velvet paintings and
artwork;
(c) sale of landscaping materials not grown on-site;
(d) sale of vegetables and produce not grown on-site;
(e) sale of souvenirs and mementos;
(f) sale of tropical plants, potted plants, and bouquets of flowers;
(g) sale of stone, clay, glass, or concrete figurines;
(h) sale of chairs, sofas, tables, or other furniture; and,
(i) sale of food and beverages.
APP-C-55
(3) Outdoor display or sale of merchandise, other than motor vehicles
within an authorized facility, is prohibited. Provided, however, an
outdoor display of items regularly offered for sale indoors will be
permitted on an infrequent and incidental basis. No such items may
be displayed within any required landscape area.
(4) Chain link, woven wire, or barbwire fencing shall be prohibited in any
required front yard or in any area visible from the public right-of-way.
Provided, however, woven wire fence or barbwire fence shall be
permitted on land used for agricultural uses when such fencing is
used for the keeping of livestock on the property. Provided further
that chain link fencing necessary for safety or security during a
construction project shall be allowed but it must be removed prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
2.20.4. Site Plan Requirements.
A master site plan containing the following information must be submitted to
the Cleveland Municipal Planning Commission prior to any construction or
alteration not consistent with the materials, layout or style as presented in any
previously approved site plan. Individual structures or buildings may be
reviewed and approved by staff if the architectural design is consistent with the
master plan. Any discrepancy in interpretation may be reviewed and approved
by the Planning Commission.
A. A legal description of the total site and a statement of present and/or
proposed ownership.
B. The location and floor area size of the proposed building, accessory
structures, or other improvements, including lot lines, building
setbacks, building height, adjacent properties by use and ownership,
open spaces, parking spaces, streets and utilities.
C. The location and dimensions of all point of proposed vehicular and
pedestrian access, exits and circulation.
D. Specify the material proposed for the exterior walls of the building.
E. Identify the location, intensity and direction of all proposed lighting.
F. Specify the location of proposed planted areas and type of vegetation
or fencing planned for landscaping and buffers.
APP-C-56
Requirements of the City's adopted building codes, fire codes, stormwater
regulations and other ordinances affecting the development, use, and
maintenance of property shall apply.
2.20.5 Signage.
A master signage plan is to be produced and submitted by the developer for all
areas within the IGC District and the parameters of this signage plan include
one main entrance sign not to exceed 300 square feet, one ground sign for each
individual commercial building not to exceed 150 square feet, wall signage on
commercial buildings not to exceed 10% of any front or side facade. No sign shall
be mounted on the roof. Portable signs, inflatable advertising devices, strobe
lights, and other advertising devices characterized by motion, flashing light, or
high-intensity light are prohibited. Except when located within 20 feet of a
permanent building, no banner, flag, pennant, temporary sign, or merchandise
display shall be located within 100 feet of any public right-of-way.
Billboards.
Billboards are allowed in the IGC District and must comply with section 5.6 of
the City of Cleveland Zoning Ordinance.
Billboards are permitted within 660 feet of I-75 the maximum size of the total
sign display area shall be the maximum size for billboards set forth in the State
of Tennessee Department of Transportation Rules and Regulations for the
Control of Outdoor Advertising.
2.20.6 Building Placement and Setbacks
A. Unless provided by the Planning Commission, all primary structures
along an industrial or major arterial shall be no less than 40 (forty)
feet or 30 (thirty) feet for other roadways including local roads or
access roads. Side setbacks shall be 5 (five) feet and a rear setback of
ten (10) feet.
B. Buildings should be oriented so that cross-access is allowed for ingress
and egress across properties whenever feasible.
C. Cul-de-sacs should be avoided whenever possible and connectivity
along side streets should be encouraged.
2.20.7 Landscaping, buffers and appearance.
APP-C-57
A. In addition to section 3.3 of the Zoning Ordinance regarding
Landscaping and Buffers, the following shall apply:
(1) At street entrances and exits planted areas shall be provided that
enhance appearance but do not obstruct traffic visibility or create a
hazard for pedestrians.
(2) Areas for refuse and trash collection shall be so designated and the
containers kept in an enclosed area that will allow adequate trash
storage yet prohibit the viewing of the trash collected from adjoining
properties or ROW.
B. Appearance:
(1) The exterior of any wall of any building or habitable structure fronting
along any public or private roadway shall consist of at least fifty (50)
% brick, stone or similar materials.
(2) Metal buildings are not permitted except within any underlying
industrial zone.
(3) Large blank walls are not allowed along the front of any primary
structure. Walls facing the main corridor shall be recessed or
articulated wall surfaces or have at least twenty-five (25) percent of
the street level coverage by windows.
(4) Canopies, cornices, pitched roofs and other architectural elements
which define the roof are required. All mounted equipment and
protrusions should be screened from view from entrances and
pedestrian pathways as viewed form on-site ground level. Roofmounted
equipment should be screened from all sides. (as added by
Ord. #2014-10, March 2014)
2.21 ISE DISTRICT (Inman St East)
2.21.1 Purpose and Intent.
There is hereby created an Inman St East District ISE which is designed to
provide future development which brings value to the existing neighborhood,
builds upon areas of historic significance and creates a high quality gateway into
the historic downtown area. The district shall include a mix of uses including
retail, and professional facilities without imposing undesirable impacts upon
existing residential areas. (as amended by Ord. #2014-36, Oct. 2014)
APP-C-58
2.21.2 Permitted Uses.
A. Uses allowed by right in the PI, CN, CG unless prohibited in section
2.21.3. (as amended by Ord. #2014-36, Oct. 2014)
2.21.3 Uses Prohibited.
A. Billboards, off-premise signs, veterinary offices and clinics with
outside kennels or runs, residential uses, display and sales of
merchandise located outdoors unless explicitly approved by the
Planning Commission. (as amended by Ord. #2014-36, Oct. 2014)
2.21.4 Site Sketch Plan Requirements.
A site sketch plan containing the following information must be submitted and
approved by the Cleveland Municipal Planning Commission prior to any exterior
construction requiring a building permit.
A. A legal description of the total site and a statement of present and/or
proposed ownership.
B. The location and floor area size of the proposed building, accessory
structures, or other improvements, including lot lines, building
setbacks, building height, adjacent properties by use and ownership,
open spaces, parking spaces, streets and utilities.
C. The location and dimensions of all point of proposed vehicular and
pedestrian access, exits and circulation.
D. Specify the material proposed for the exterior walls of the building.
E. Identify the location, intensity and direction of all proposed lighting.
F. Specify the location of proposed planted areas and type of vegetation
or fencing planned for landscaping and buffers. (as replaced by Ord.
#2016-30, Aug. 2016)
2.21.5 Off-street parking and loading.
A. The proposed development or use should demonstrate that there is
adequate parking available for the proposed use. This may be
accomplished through existing or proposed public or private parking
spaces or through joint use agreements with nearby facilities. Each
APP-C-59
parking space shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length and
ten (10) feet in width.
B. Parking is encouraged to be located to the rear or side of the primary
structure.
C. All loading and unloading facilities shall be located in the rear unless
specifically approved by the reviewing board.
2.21.6 Building Placement and Setbacks
A. Unless provided by the Planning Commission, all primary structures
are recommended to be located within 20 (twenty) feet, but no closer
than 5 (five) feet of any lot line directly adjoining Inman St. There
shall be no minimum rear or side setback requirements unless deemed
necessary for the public safety by the Planning Commission.
2.21.7 Landscaping, buffers and appearance.
A. In addition to section 3.3 of the Zoning Ordinance regarding
Landscaping and Buffers, the following shall apply:
(1) At street entrances and exits planted areas shall be
provided that enhance appearance but do not
obstruct traffic visibility or create a hazard for
pedestrians.
(2) Areas for refuse and trash collection shall be so
designated and the containers kept in an enclosed
area that will allow adequate trash storage yet
prohibit the viewing of the trash collected from
adjoining properties or ROW.
B. Appearance:
(1) The exterior of the building should be of materials
that will conform to adjacent existing neighborhoods.
Brick and stone or similar materials are encouraged.
(2) Large blank walls are discouraged. Recessed or
articulated wall surfaces are encouraged as well as
windows facing the main corridor. Forty (40) % of the
walls for street level businesses are recommended to
be windows.
APP-C-60
(3) Canopies and other architectural elements which
define the roof are encouraged. All mounted
equipment and protrusions should be screened from
view from entrances and pedestrian pathways as
viewed form on-site ground level. Roof- mounted
equipment should be screened from all sides.
(4) Unless otherwise provided for in this section or at the
discretion of the Planning Commission, all signs shall
comply with the sign regulations as described in
section 5.0 of the zoning ordinance. (as added by
Ord. #2014-13, April 2014)
2.22 EXISTING SALVAGE YARDS AND/OR RECYCLING CENTER
BUSINESS WITHIN THE CH ZONE
A. For the purposes of this ordinance, junkyards yards and recycling
centers are defined in Section 1.6 Definitions. It is the intent of this
section to provide for conditions for the continuance of recycling
collection centers and the amortization of salvage yards within the
Commercial Highway zone.
B. All areas which my hold, store, sort, or receive any materials or goods
for the purposes of supporting a salvage yard or recycling center
business must be screened so that the operation is not visible form the
front or side view of the property. This includes the requirements of
section 13-205 of the municipal code.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4.7 of the zoning ordinance,
no existing salvage yard or recycling center business shall be allowed
to continue if it ceases operations or activity for a period of 90 days.
For the purposes of this ordinance, cease operations shall be also be
constituted by the termination of any business licenses by any
business owner. Nor may any such license be transferred to any
different individual or corporation for continuance of operation.
D. Any case in which a salvage yard or recycling center business shall
operation cease, in no circumstance may it be allowed to be
re-established. (as added by Ord. #2016-17, June 2016)
3.0 Site Design Standards.
3.0.1. SITE PLAN SUBMISSION, VESTED PROPERTY RIGHT,
DEVELOPMENT PLANS, DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS, AND
APP-C-61
OTHER TOPICS ADDRESSED IN THE TENNESSEE VESTED
PROPERTY RIGHTS ACT OF 2014.
A. General requirements for Site Plans and Development Plans- In
circumstances where a site plan is required by the zoning ordinance
or other ordinance of the City of Cleveland, the owner or developer
shall submit three copies or as many as may be required of his
proposed site plan to the Development and Engineering Services at
least twenty-one (21) days prior to his or her intended date of site
alteration; however, nothing herein shall prohibit the City Manager
from establishing time periods of less than twenty-one (21) days for
staff review and comment on submitted site plans. The Development
and Engineering Services Department manages a site plan review
process conducted by a team of City of Cleveland and Cleveland
Utilities reviewers representing different development-related
functional areas. The site plan review process shall consider the site
plan in light of the provisions of this chapter and approve or
disapprove same as required (a reviewer comment noting that the
plan was "reviewed" is followed by comments indicating changes that
are necessary to meet required development standards and gain
approval is equivalent to disapproval until those conditions are met
with appropriate revisions). A letter from the Development and
Engineering Services Director shall be sent to the owner or his agent
with the results of the site plan review. The letter shall indicate the
approval or disapproval of the site plan, and contain the review
comments including but not limited to those comments requiring
changes in the site plan prior to approval. Where a site plan is
required, approval of the site plan is a requirement for the issuance
of any related City permits unless otherwise allowed by ordinance.
Where a site plan is required, it must be approved in accordance with
the process described herein before vesting would occur.
A site plan is one of the types of development plans that would fall
under the Vested Property Rights Act of 2014 but other types of plans
described below that are in various circumstances required by the City
of Cleveland are also considered development plans under the Vested
Property Rights Act of 2014. For these other types of development
plans, where required by other provisions of City of Cleveland
ordinances, or by the subdivision regulations of the Cleveland
Municipal Planning Commission, or by the rules or procedures of any
other board or similar body, regardless of how styled, affecting the
development of property which has or may be established by the City
of Cleveland consistent with the laws of Tennessee, other review
processes, approvals, and signatures may be required. It is intended
APP-C-62
that these aforementioned requirements particular to any type of
development plan would be met prior to any vesting of rights to
develop property in accordance with that plan. However, nothing
herein is intended to abrogate any vesting of a development right that
has occurred by virtue of an approved development plan through a
subsequent change in development standards (e.g. through a zoning
change or the establishment of a design review board that does not
presently exist) unless such change is required by state or federal laws
or regulations.
B. Vested Property Rights- the Tennessee General Assembly enacted
Public Chapter No. 686, the "Vested Property Rights Act of 2014"
which amends Title 13, Chapters 3 and 4, specifically T.C.A.
§ 13-4-310 regarding the powers of municipal planning commissions.
As enacted, far-reaching statutory requirements are established
relative to development standards and vested property rights for
landowners and developers that will affect the ability of cities to
establish and update contemporary development standards to guide
land use and growth in the future.
Definitions of Vested Property Rights
"Applicant" means a landowner or developer or any party, representative, agent,
successor, or heirs of the landowner of developer.
"Construction" means the erection of construction materials in a permanent
manner, and includes excavation, demolition, or removal of an existing building.
"Development plan" means both a preliminary development plan and a final
development plan.
"Development standards" means all locally adopted or enforced standards
applicable to the development of property including, but not limited to planning:
storm water requirements; layout; design; local infrastructure construction
standards, off-site improvements, lot size, configuration, and dimensions. NOT
included are standards required by federal or state law, or building construction
safety codes.
"Final development plan" means a plan approved by the local government
describing with reasonable certainty the use of property. Such plan may be in
the form of, but not limited to, a planned unit development plan; subdivision
plat; general development plan; subdivision infrastructure construction plan;
final engineered site plan; or any other land-use approval designated utilized.
UNLESS otherwise expressly provided by the City of Cleveland, such a plan
APP-C-63
shall include the boundaries of the site; significant topographical features
affecting the development of the site; locations of improvements; building
dimensions; and the location of all existing and proposed infrastructure on the
site. Neither a sketch plan nor other document that fails to describe with
reasonable certainty the use and development scheme may constitute a final
development plan.
"Preliminary development plan" means a plan submitted to facilitate initial
public feedback, and secure preliminary approvals from local government. It
serves as a guide for all future improvements.
"Site preparation" means excavation, grading, demolition, drainage, and
physical improvements such as water and sewer lines, footings, and foundations.
Vesting Rights and Periods
Vested property rights are established for any preliminary development plan,
final development plan (where no preliminary development plan is required), or
building permit issued to allow construction of a building to commence where
there is no local requirement for prior approval of a preliminary development
plan.
During the vesting period, the locally adopted development standards in effect
on the date of approval remain the development standards applicable to that
property or building during the vesting period as follows:
! Building permit projects (no preliminary plan approval) - The vesting
period commences on the date of building permit issuance and
remains in effect for the period authorized by the building permit.
! Development plan project - The vesting period applicable to a
development plan is three years, beginning on the date of approval of
the preliminary development plan; provided the applicant obtains
final development plan approval, secure permits, and commences site
preparation within the 3-year vesting period.
! If the applicant obtains approval of a final development plan, secures
permits, and commences site preparation within the 3-year vesting
period, then the vesting period is extended an additional two years (to
a total of five years) to commence construction from the date of
preliminary plan approval. During the two year period, the applicant
shall commence construction and maintain any necessary permits to
remain vested.
! If construction commences within the 5-year vesting period following
preliminary development plan approval, the development standards
in effect on the date of approval remain in effect until final completion
of the project, provided however, that the vesting period shall not
exceed ten (10) years unless the City of Cleveland grants an extension
APP-C-64
through an ordinance or resolution; and provided further that the
applicant maintain all necessary permits during the 10-year period.
! Multi-phase projects - A separate vesting period applies for projects
proceeding in two or more sections or phases (as set forth in the
development plan).The development standards in effect on the date of
approval of the preliminary development plan for the first section or
phase remain in effect for all subsequent sections or phases; provided
the total vesting period does not exceed fifteen (15) years unless the
City of Cleveland grants an extension through an ordinance or
resolution; and provided that the applicant maintains all necessary
permits during the 15-year period.
APP-C-65
Type of Project Effective Date Vesting Period
Total Vesting
Period to Maintain
Vested Rights Required Actions
Building Permit (No
development plan required)
Date of Issuance of
Building Permit
Period authorized
by the building
permit
Period authorized
by the building
permit
Complete construction within
period authorized by the
building permit
Development Plan
Preliminary Development Plan Date of Issue 3 years 3 years Obtain Final Development Plan
approval; secure permits; and
commence site preparation
Final Development Plan 3 years from date of
Preliminary Plan
approval
2 years 5 years Commence construction,
maintain permits
5 years from date of
Preliminary Plan
approval
5 years 10 years Complete construction;
maintain permits
Multi-phase or sections Date of Issue of
Preliminary
Development Plan
Separate vesting
period for each
phase or section
15 years Complete construction for each
phase; maintain permits
A vested property right attaches to and runs with the applicable property and
confers upon the applicant the right to undertake and complete the development
and use such property under the terms and conditions of a development plan,
including any amendments thereto or under the terms and conditions of any
building permit that has been issued with respect to the property.
Development plans
"Preliminary development plan" means a plan which has been submitted by an
applicant and that depicts a single-phased or multi-phased planned
development typically used to facilitate initial public feedback and secure
preliminary approvals from local governments. Examples of information found
on development plans include proposed land uses, density and intensity of
development, public utilities, road networks, general location of off-street
parking, building location, number of buildable lots, emergency access, open
space, and other environmentally sensitive areas such as lakes, streams,
APP-C-66
hillsides, and view sheds. An approved preliminary development plan serves as
a guide for all future improvements within defined boundaries.
"Final development plan" means a plan which has been submitted by an
applicant and approved by a local government describing with reasonable
certainty the type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels of property.
Such plan may be in the form of, but not be limited to, any of the following plans
or approvals:
(i) A planned unit development plan;
(ii) A subdivision plat;
(iii) General development plan;
(iv) Subdivision infrastructure construction plan;
(v) Final engineered site plan; or
(vi) Any other land-use approval designation as may be utilized by the
City of Cleveland
Preliminary Development Plans and Final Development Plans shall include the
boundaries of the site; significant topographical and other natural features
affecting development of the site; the location on the site of the proposed
buildings, structures, and other improvements; the dimensions, including
height, of the proposed buildings and other structures or a building envelope;
and the location of all existing and proposed infrastructure on the site, including
water, sewer, roads, and pedestrian walkways. A variance shall not constitute
a final development plan, and approval of a final development plan with the
condition that a variance be obtained shall not confer a vested property right
unless and until the necessary variance is obtained. Neither a sketch plan nor
any other document which fails to describe with reasonable certainty the type
of use, the intensity of use, and the ability to be served with essential utilities
and road infrastructure for a specified parcel or parcels of property may
constitute a final development plan.
Approval of a Development Plan
Approval of a development plan, regardless of type described above under the
"Development Plan" section, shall occur when the development plan submitted
shall be determined by the City of Cleveland to meet all local, state and federal
regulations governing the development. The meeting of all regulations governing
the development shall include , but not be limited to, items such as any required
APP-C-67
stormwater plans, grading plans, sewer plans, utility plans, on-site or off-site
mitigation plans, site access plans, shared driveway plans, plans for sidewalks
and other improvements such as may be required in the public right-of-way,
required permits, easements, bonds for the construction of required
infrastructure, and the like, as may be appropriate to that stage of the planning
and development process as determined by the City of Cleveland (this is
intended to recognize the necessity of phasing in some cases, the progression
from preliminary concepts to final designs, and the City of Cleveland's need to
gain and maintain an accurate understanding and management of the
development's impacts on city resources and the public as the development
progresses to completion).
Termination of Vesting Rights
During the vesting period, the locally adopted development standards which are
in effect on the date of approval of a preliminary development plan or the
issuance of a building permit, whichever applies, remain the development
standards applicable to the property described in such preliminary development
plan or permit, except such vested property rights terminate upon a written
determination by the City of Cleveland under the following circumstances:
! When the applicant violates the terms and conditions specified in the
approved development plan or building permit; provided, the
applicant is given ninety (90) days from the date of notification to cure
the violation; provided further, that the City of Cleveland may, upon
a determination that such is in the best interest of the community,
grant, in writing, an additional time period to cure the violation;
! When the applicant violates any of the terms and conditions specified
in the local ordinance or resolution; provided, the applicant is given
ninety (90) days from the date of notification to cure the violation;
provided further, that the City of Cleveland may, upon a
determination that such is in the best interest of the community,
grant, in writing, an additional time period to cure the violation;
! Upon a finding by the City of Cleveland that the applicant
intentionally supplied inaccurate information or knowingly made
misrepresentations material to the issuance of a building permit or
the approval of a development plan or intentionally and knowingly did
not construct the development in accordance with the issued building
permit or the approved development plan or an ap-proved amendment
for the building permit or the development plan; or
! Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law,
regulation, rule, policy, corrective action or other governance,
regardless of nomenclature, that is required to be enforced by the City
of Cleveland and that precludes development as contemplated in the
APP-C-68
approved development plan or building permit, unless modifications
to the development plan or building permit can be made by the
applicant, within ninety (90) days of notification of the new
requirement, which will allow the applicant to comply with the new
requirement.
The City of Cleveland may allow a property right to remain vested despite such
a determined occurrence when a written determination is made that such
continuation is in the best interest of the community by the City of Cleveland.
Development Standards Enforcement
A vested development standard shall not preclude city enforcement of any
development standard when:
! The City of Cleveland obtains the written consent of the applicant or
owner;
! The City of Cleveland determines, in writing, that a compelling,
countervailing interest exists relating specifically to the development
plan or property which is the subject of the building permit that
seriously threatens the public health, safety or welfare of the
community and the threat cannot be mitigated within a reasonable
period of time, as specified in writing by the City of Cleveland, by the
applicant using vested property rights;
! Upon the written determination by the City of Cleveland of Cleveland
of the existence of a natural or man-made hazard on or in the
immediate vicinity of the subject property, not identified in the
development plan or building permit, and which hazard, if
uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety,
or welfare and the threat cannot be mitigated within a reasonable
period of time, as specified in writing by the local government, by the
applicant using vested property rights;
! A development standard is required by federal or state law, rule,
regulation, policy, corrective action, order, or other type of governance
that is required to be enforced by the City of Cleveland, regardless of
nomenclature; or
! A City of Cleveland is undertaking an action initiated or measure
instituted in order to comply with a newly enacted federal or state
law, rule, regulation, policy, corrective action, permit, order, or other
type of governance, regardless of nomenclature.
APP-C-69
Development Plan Amendment
An amendment to an approved development plan by the applicant must be
approved by the City of Cleveland to retain the protections of the vested
property right. An amendment may be denied based upon a written finding by
the City of Cleveland that the amendment:
! Alters the proposed use;
! Increases the overall area of the development;
! Alters the size of any nonresidential structures included in the
development plan;
! Increases the density of the development so as to affect traffic, noise
or other environmental impacts; or
! Increases any local government expenditure necessary to implement
or sustain the proposed use.
If an amendment is denied by the City of Cleveland based upon such a written
finding, then the applicant may either proceed under the prior approved plan
with the associated vested property right or, alternatively, allow the vested
property right to terminate and submit a new application. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a vested property right shall not terminate if the City of Cleveland
determines, in writing, that it is in the best interest of the community to allow
the development to proceed under the amended plan without terminating the
vested property right.
Waiver Rights Prohibited
A City of Cleveland may not require an applicant to waive the applicant's vested
rights as a condition of approval, or as a consideration of approval, of a
development plan or the issuance of a building permit.
Extension of Rights
The vesting period for an approved construction project may be extended as
deemed advisable by the City of Cleveland.
Zoning with Vested Property Rights
A vested property right, once established, precludes the effect of any zoning
action by a City of Cleveland which would change, alter, impair, prevent,
diminish, or otherwise delay the development of the property, while vested, as
described in an approved development plan or building permit. With said
exception, nothing shall preclude, change, amend, alter or impair the authority
of a City of Cleveland to exercise its zoning authority.
APP-C-70
Development Moratorium
In the event a City of Cleveland enacts a moratorium on development or
construction, the vesting period established by this act shall be tolled during the
moratorium period.
Eminent Domain with Vested Property Rights
A vested property right does not preclude, change, amend, alter or impair the
authority of a City of Cleveland to exercise its eminent domain powers as
provided by law. (as added by Ord. #2014-45, Dec. 2014)
3.1 Lot Area and Dimensions and Maximum Allowable Density.
3.1.A. Table 2 below sets forth the minimum lot area and minimum lot width
for uses in zoning districts, except PUD districts numbered PUD1 and
higher where development standards are determined by the PUD
ordinance.
Table 2
Lot Area & Width Requirements

Zone Standards 

Zoning District
Minimum Lot Area 
Lot Width 
R-A Residential
Agriculture
7,500 sf 75 feet
R-I Single-family
Residential
7,500 sf 75 feet
R-2 Low Density Single
and Multi-family
Residential
5,000 sf (single
family)
7,500 sf (duplex)
10,000 sf (triplex)
12,500 sf
(quadruplex)
50 feet
75 feet
75 feet
75 feet
3 Multi-family
Residential
7,500 sf for the first
unit + 2,500 sf for
each additional unit
75 feet
R-4 Mobile Home Parks Section 2.6.4 Section 2.6.4
APP-C-71
R-5 High Rise
Residential
7,500 sf with
additional area
requirements per
unit:
1 bedroom: 570 sf
2 bedrooms: 750 sf
3 or more
Bedrooms: 930 sf
75 feet
CN Neighborhood
Commercial
7,500 Sf
15,000 - corner Lots
50 feet
100 feet - corner lots
PI Professional and
Institutional
7,500 sf 75 feet
CG General Commercial 7,500 sf
9,250 sf - corner lot
75 feet
100 feet - corner lot
CH Highway
Commercial
7,500 sf 100 feet
CBD Central Business
District
None None
MU Mixed use 7,500 sf 75 feet
IL Light Industry 7,500 sf
15,000 sf - corner lot
75 feet
HI Heavy Industry 10,000 sf 100 feet
APP-C-72
B Buffer 7,500 sf
UC University Campus R2 or R3
requirements
except for dormitory
dwelling units
where an
alternative design
may be approved,
including
alternatives for
parking, greenspace
(R3 minimum), etc.
that are
demonstrated to be
adequately met
off-site consistent
with a master plan.
Campus oriented
apartment housing
may also submit an
alternative design
for consideration.
25 feet (front yard),
making the side yard
10 ft for the first
story plus 2 ft for
each additional story
for principal
structures and 5 ft
for accessory
structures, making
the rear yard 20 ft
for principal
structures and 5 ft
for accessory
structures, making
the maximum
building height 5
stories or 55 ft., and
making the
maximum
impervious surface
area 65%
IGC Interstate Gateway
Corridor
7500 50
ISE Inman St East None None
2A lot of record may be a minimum of 3,000 square feet for a residential
use.
(as replaced by Ord. #2009-49, June 2009, and amended by Ord. #2014-10,
March 2014, and Ord. #2014-13, April 2014)
3.1.B. Maximum Allowable Density
Where requirements are otherwise met, this ordinance generally
allows for the development of multiple structures on a common site.
For multiple buildings on a common site or for a subdivision of two or
more lots, the maximum allowable density is a function of the
required minimum lot size. R1 and RA land cannot exceed a maximum
of 1 residential unit per 7500 square feet, including any common open
space if developed as a cluster subdivision. R2 land, or land in any
other zoning district where allowed to be developed residentially at R2
standards cannot exceed one (1) unit per five thousand (5,000) square
APP-C-73
feet for single family, or two (2) units per seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet for duplex structures, or three (3) units per ten
thousand (10,000) square feet for triplex structures, or four (4) units
per twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) for quadruplex structures,
including any common open space if developed as a cluster
subdivision, townhouse subdivision, or other type of development. R3
land, or land in any other zoning district where allowed to be
developed residentially at R3 standards, requires seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet for the first unit and two thousand five
hundred (2,500) feet for each additional unit on the same lot or parcel
regardless of structure type, adjusted for any common open space if
developed as a cluster subdivision, townhouse subdivision, or other
type of development. As an alternative where a lot otherwise allowed
to be developed residential at R3 standards is less than 1 acre that
and is not a flag lot, if designed to include a minimum 5 foot
greenspace buffer area along the lot's street frontage except for not
more than 2 driveways not exceeding 24 feet in width for both
driveways, and otherwise meeting the landscaping and buffering
requirements of zoning and stormwater ordinances, can be designed
to the R2 density standard. R4 residential development density is
regulated by the standards for mobile home parks and subdivisions.
R5 residential development must provide adequate parking and
otherwise conform to the requirements of the R5 district. Density for
residential development in the UC zone is to be guided by Table 2.
Residential development in mixed use development projects, such as
with ground floor commercial with residential above, shall provide
adequate parking and otherwise be governed by the height, lot
coverage, and setback requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located. Non-residential development does not have a density
limit, but the intensity of the use in terms of its overall developed floor
area is restricted by height, setback, lot coverage, greenspace, parking
requirements, and other requirements of the zoning and stormwater
ordinances.
In any zone where multi-family residential uses are permitted, the
Board of Zoning Appeals may grant approval of the R5 density
standards as a conditional use where appropriate. The same
considerations outlined in section 1.7.2 of the zoning ordinance shall
be applied. (as added by Ord. #2009-49, June 2009, and amended by
Ord. #2017-16, May 2017)
APP-C-74
3.2 Setbacks, building heights and lot coverage standards.
A. The Table below shows site design requirements for each zoning
district. Shown are maximum building heights, minimum building
setbacks, and maximum impervious surface coverage. In the case of
lots within a cluster subdivision the required pervious area or
greenspace for the lots are intended to be met in part through common
open space within the subdivision. Apart from cluster subdivisions, for
any lot, tract, or parcel that is developed, the owner may provide up
to 25% of the required pervious area or greenspace on a perpetual
easement for such pervious area or greenspace that is located on an
adjoining lot, tract, or parcel but the area of the easement shall not be
counted toward the pervious area or greenspace requirement for the
lot, tract, or parcel on which the easement is located
Table 3
Building Setbacks, Heights, and Impervious Surfaces
Zoning
District
Minimum Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
Minimum
Green
Space
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
Front Yard Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
R-A 25 ft 10 ft
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
15 ft
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
35 feet 0.65 0.35
R-1 25 ft 10 ft
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
15 ft
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
35 feet 0.40 0.45
R-2 25 ft 10 ft
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
15 ft
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
35 feet 0.40 0.50
R-3 25 ft
(principal)
10 ft
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
15 ft
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
70 feet 0.25 0.70
R-4 Sec 4.6 Section 4.6 Section 4.6 Section 4.6 Section 4.6 Section 4.6
APP-C-75
Zoning
District
Minimum Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
Minimum
Green
Space
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
Front Yard Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
R-5 25 ft. 10 ft 15 ft 85 ft. 0.40 0.60
B1 25 ft. 10 ft for
the 1st
story + 2 ft
for each
additional
story
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
20 ft
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
35 ft. 0.80 0.20
CN 15 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 25 ft. 0.25 0.75
PI 30 ft for
single
story
buildings
less than
20 feet
tall, and
20 ft plus
3 ft for
each 10 ft,
or fraction
thereof, of
building
height
above the
first 10 ft
10 ft plus
3 ft for
each 10 ft,
or fraction
thereof, of
building
height
over the
first 10
feet
(principal);
5 ft
(accessory)
10 ft plus
3 ft for
each 10 ft,
or fraction
thereof, of
building
height
over the
first 10 ft
(principal);
5 ft
(accessory)
70 ft. 0.25 0.75
CBD None None None 55 ft. None None
CH 50 ft. 20 ft
(principal);
5 ft
(accessory)
20 ft
(principal);
5 ft
(accessory)
50 ft. 0.25 0.75
APP-C-76
Zoning
District
Minimum Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
Minimum
Green
Space
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
Front Yard Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
MU 30 ft. 15 ft.
(principal);
5 ft
(accessory)
15 ft.
(principal);
5 ft
(accessory)
65 ft. 0.25 0.75
IL 30 ft. 20 ft.
(principal);
5 ft
(accessory)
20 ft.
(principal);
5 ft
(accessory)
50 ft. 0.10 0.90
IH 40 ft. 25 ft.
(principal);
5 ft
(accessory)
25 ft.
(principal);
5 ft
(accessory)
50 ft. 0.10 0.90
UC 25 ft. 10 ft for
the 1st
story + 2 ft
for each
additional
story
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
20 ft
(principal)
5 ft
(accessory)
55 ft. 0.35 0.65
IGC 40**
30
5 10 65 .80
ISE None* None None 55 None
*Suggested setbacks are provided for in section 2.21.6.A
**See district description
1All site design requirements are subject to all requirements in Section 2.18 of
this Zoning Code. (as amended by Ord. #3, Nov. 1998, Ord. #13, March 2001,
Ord. #2003-22, Aug. 2003, Ord. #2005-04, March 2005, Ord. #2007-02, Jan.
2007, and Ord. #2008-02, Jan. 2008, and replaced by Ord. #2009-49, June 2009,
and amended by Ord. #2011-24, Nov. 2011, Ord. #2014-10, March 2014, Ord.
#2014-13, April 2014, and Ord. #2017-26, July 2017)
APP-C-77
B. Exceptions to height requirements.
(1) The height limitations do not apply to spires, belfries,
cupolas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other
similar appurtenances usually required to be placed
above the roof level and not intended for human
occupancy. Where necessary to accommodate the
design of a manufacturing or warehousing facility,
zoning height restrictions are waived to the extent
necessary to accommodate the storage, handling,
manufacturing, or assembly of materials and
products as determined by the Director in
consultation with the owner.
(2) The minimum lot area requirements do not apply for
properties located in the CH Commercial Highway
when the proposed lot is not intended to support a
use designed for human occupancy, including but not
limited to cell towers, billboards, public utility
stations and the like. The proposed aforementioned
lots shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission
and a note shall be placed on the plat stating the lot
is unsuitable for structures intended for human
occupation. (as amended by Ord. #2013-16, April
2013, and replaced by Ord. #2013-46, Oct. 2013)
C. Additional yard requirements.
(1) In computing the depth of a rear yard for any
building where such yard opens onto an alley, onehalf
of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of
the rear yard.
(2) Each part of a required yard shall be open and
unobstructed from the lowest point to the sky, except
for the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses,
cornices, buttresses, ornamental features and eaves.
However, none of such projections shall project into
a yard more than thirty six (36) inches.
D. Requirements for corner lots.
APP-C-78
(1) A development proposed on a corner lot shall
designate which street frontage shall be the front
orientation.
(2) The required lot width shall be measured along the
building setback for the frontage designated as the
front of the lot. In no case shall a street frontage be
designated as the front where the lot width would be
nonconforming and where the other street frontage
conforms to the lot width requirement.
(3) It is intended that the front yard setback be applied
to both street frontages subject to the exceptions
described herein. It is not intended that the
application of any rule or exception regarding corner
lots would result in a setback on an arterial or
collector street that is less than 30 feet. In
residential zoning districts where the lot width is less
than 75 feet for most of the lots depth or length, the
setback on the side with the longest street frontage is
reduced to 15 feet for one- and two- family structures.
On the side of a corner lot that would otherwise
require a front setback but which has not been
designated as the front of the lot, a front setback
shall not be required where the right-of-way width of
the adjoining street is less than 20 feet. Nothing in
this section shall require any structure located within
an ISE (Inman St-East) zoning district to have a
setback of greater than 5 (five) feet for the lot line
adjoining Inman St.
(4) Accessory structures shall not be located between the
building and the streets, except one garage or carport
not exceeding 24 feet in width when located so as to
conform with the required street-side setback for the
principal structure. (as amended by Ord. #2007-51,
Dec. 2007, and Ord. #2014-13, April 2014)
E. Multiple Residential Structures on Common Sites and Residential in
Commercial Zones (CH and CG).
This subsection addresses development of multiple residential structures on a
common site where the underlying land is to remain under the ownership of one
person or entity. It also addresses the case of one or more residential structures
APP-C-79
built on a site in a commercial zoning district (CH and CG). In these cases, the
requirements of Table 2 "LOT AREA & WIDTH REQUIREMENTS" and Table
3 "SETBACKS, BUILDING HEIGHTS & LOT COVERAGE STANDARDS" are
to be interpreted differently than in the case of a single building on a single lot
with respect to residential density, building footprint area, setbacks and spacing
between buildings, and ancillary buildings and uses. In residential zoning
districts where more than one structure is to be built on a single lot or site, the
minimum lot area requirements need to be interpreted as the maximum
allowable density for residential uses. The R1 district allows only single-family
structures at unit per 7,500 square feet. The R2 district allows 1 unit per 5,000
square feet for single family, two units per 7,500 square feet for duplex
structures, 3 units per 10,000 square feet for triplex structures, and four units
per 12,500 for quadruplex structures. The R3 district requires 7,500 square feet
for the first unit and 2,500 feet for each additional unit regardless of structure
type. Where residential uses are otherwise allowed to be built in commercial
zoning districts (CH or CG), the density requirement shall be that which is
applicable in the R3 district but the setback and impervious area requirements
shall be those otherwise applicable in the commercial zoning district (nothing
herein shall be construed to reduce other site design requirements for parking,
etc.). Height restrictions and other requirements with City ordinances will limit
the total floor area that can be developed within a given site. Separation
between buildings within the development is not addressed by the setback
requirements of the zoning districts but the separation shall meet the
requirements of the building code and otherwise conform to requirements of the
site plan review process. The setbacks otherwise required by the zoning district
will be maintained along all public streets and, together with any required
buffer area, along property lines external to the development. (as amended by
Ord. #2007-48, Jan. 2008)
F. Limitation on Location of Accessory Structures
Accessory structures shall in no way be located on any property so as to obstruct
any utility or drainage easement, or so as to impair site distances for traffic
ingress or egress on the same property or adjoining property as determined by
the City's traffic engineer or director of public works.
G.1 Where a property owner and/or developer can demonstrate that no
other applicable code is violated, including but not limited to site
planning standards in Section 3.0 of the zoning regulations and the
1This subsection was designated in Ord. #2005-15 as "F" however;
Ord. #2005-04 added subsection F and the compiler changed this subsection to
"G."
APP-C-80
provisions of this section, certain minor encroachments into required
yards or setbacks, enumerated below, are permitted. It is not intended
that such minor encroachments into required yards or setbacks be
allowed where the result would be to diminish the quality of what
would otherwise be provided in the development of the site in terms
of traffic circulation, parking, public safety, drainage, landscaping,
and provision of utilities and other services. In order that it may be
determined by the Planning Director (Community Development
Director), in consultation with the site plan review team, whether a
proposed minor encroachment into a required yard or setback is of the
type permitted by this section, the property owner and/or developer
shall provide a survey of the property indicating property lines, the
location of all proposed buildings and drives, adjacent streets and
their geometry, building lines on adjacent developed properties, and
the location of utilities and drainage structures on and within 200 feet
of the subject property. The Planning Director may require any such
additional building plans or elevations as he or she deems necessary
in order to reach a decision. A fee of one-hundred dollars ($100) shall
be assessed for the review of a proposed minor encroachment into a
required yard or setback under this section, except as otherwise noted
below. The Planning Director shall produce a written record
documenting the determination made and the reasons for the
determination in each case submitted under this section. Where a
determination is made that the minor encroachment is permitted
under this section, the specific area of the permitted minor
encroachment is to be documented. Determinations of the Planning
Director under this section are subject to appeal to the Board of
Zoning Appeals in the same manner as other administrative decisions
made under this ordinance. The provisions of this section apply to the
following types of minor encroachments into required yards or
setbacks, except as provided below:
(1) Awnings and canopies extending into required front,
side, or rear yards or setbacks are allowed provided
that these do not exceed 20 feet in height, provided
that they are open from the ground up except where
connected to the building for at least 75% of their
height and 90% of their length provided that their
total length does not exceed 30 feet, provided that
they do not extend into any easement or within 5 feet
of any side or rear property line or within 10 feet of
any front property line, and provided that they
otherwise comply with the requirements of this
section.
APP-C-81
(2) Where a required yard abuts a public greenway, or a
controlled access highway in an area where it cannot
be accessed, or an area zoned B-Buffer,
encroachments of up to 50% of the required setback
is permitted provided that such encroachments
otherwise comply with the requirements of this
section.
(3) Where the perimeter of a building footprint
(including the building with awnings, canopies,
porches, decks, patios, and heating/air conditioning
equipment pads) is within the building envelope
formed by the required yard or setback lines for 75%
of its length, an encroachment is approved not
exceeding 20% of the required setback but not to
within nine (9) feet of any property line, provided
that such encroachments otherwise comply with the
requirements of this section.
(4) Roof overhangs of two (2) feet or less; the width brick
or other siding material when installed in the
customary manner; and protrusions including
chimneys, bay windows, heating and air conditioning
units, window boxes, ornamental balconies, "bump
outs" and the like not exceeding a combined footprint
of 30 square feet of encroachment in any required
yard; and pedestrian bridges, conveyor systems, and
the like connecting buildings on adjoining properties
when otherwise built in compliance with applicable
codes and site planning requirements, shall not be
considered to violate setbacks and are permitted.
Encroachments permitted under this subsection (4),
when consisting entirely of roof overhangs of two (2)
feet or less and/or the width of brick or other siding
material as customarily installed, and/or heating and
air conditioning units do not require the submission
of a survey or the payment of the one hundred ($100)
fee for review.
H. In order to maintain the appearance of existing residential
subdivisions that are annexed into the City of Cleveland, residential
development on subdivision lots that were platted prior to annexation
into the City Of Cleveland will be allowed to have a setback with
respect to a local street that is the setback found on the plat or the
APP-C-82
typical prevailing setback among nearby residences but not less than
20 feet for a front setback. The same rule shall apply also to
resubdivisions of existing lots in such subdivisions.
I. Application of Setback, Minimum Green Space and Maximum
Impervious Surface Requirements in Table 3 (Table 3 requirements
apply unless otherwise stated below, or otherwise modified in a
manner provided for in the zoning ordinance):
An R2-zoned residential lot under 1 acre that is not a flag lot, if
designed to include a minimum 5 foot greenspace buffer area along
the lot's street frontage except for not more than 2 driveways not
exceeding 24 feet in width for both driveways, and otherwise meeting
the landscaping and buffering requirements of zoning and stormwater
ordinances, can be designed to 65% impervious area and 35%
greenspace, the Table 3 limits notwithstanding.
Where there are multiple RA, R1, R2, or R3 lots, each under 1 acre, to
be developed on an existing or proposed local street, alternative
setbacks, greenspace and impervious requirements may be granted in
a design plan approved by the Cleveland Municipal Planning
Commission based upon innovative design elements such as shared
driveways, rear parking, pedestrian street amenities, zero lot-line
designs; accommodation of site constraints (slopes, wetlands, unusual
easements, buffering needs, etc.). This provision may be used in
conjunction with conventional subdivisions or with alternatives
(cluster, townhome) but nothing herein is intended to change the
density limitation within the zoning district. The reductions in
setbacks or greenspace will be proportional to the benefits of the
design innovations for the development and the surrounding
community. Porous paving materials and other innovative drainage
and stormwater treatment features and additional landscaping and
buffering and the like can be considered in the design.
For development on an RA, R1, R2, or R3 lot under one acre that is
not part of a special development (a cluster subdivision, townhome
subdivision, PUD, infill development or other alternative design plan
approved by the Planning Commission) the Community Development
Director, in consultation with the Public Works Director, may approve
a setback, greenspace, or impervious area limit deviation of up to
one-half of the amount otherwise required if it is necessary to improve
the design of the development to account for contingencies such as an
oddly shaped lot, slopes, improved building orientation on the site,
privacy and buffering, tree preservation, parking needs, better
APP-C-83
handicapped accessibility, consideration of cost constraints for lowand
moderate-income affordable housing, protection of views, access
protection, protection of streams, wetlands, etc. It is intended that a
reasonable justification for the deviation is to be documented and that
the deviation would be the minimum necessary to overcome the
particular conditions described. It is further intended that the
proposed design demonstrate some accommodation to the site
conditions to reach a reasonable solution that balances design
constraints with the amount of deviation allowed. Where the lot falls
within one of the aforementioned special development categories, the
same process may be followed except that the deviation is limited to
one-third of the amount of setback, greenspace, or impervious area
limit otherwise required. In evaluating the extent of deviation(s) to be
approved, proposed conditions may also be approved that would
include innovations such as the use of porous paving materials, other
innovative drainage and stormwater treatment features, additional
landscaping and/or buffering, and the like. (as amended by Ord. #17,
Oct. 2001, Ord. #2005-04, March 2005, Ord. #2005-15, May 2005,
Ord. #2005-41, Nov. 2005, Ord. #2008-01, Jan. 2008, and
Ord. #2009-49, June 2009)
3.3 LANDSCAPING & BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS
A. Landscaping
The following requirements shall apply to all multi-family residential
uses, mobile home parks, commercial and office developments:
(1) Landscaping shall be integrated into building
arrangements, topography, parking and buffering
requirements. Landscaping shall include trees,
shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, art, and
the use of building and construction materials in a
manner that respects the natural topographic
features, natural resources of the site, and existing
vegetation to the greatest extent practicable. The use
of existing native species of plant material is strongly
encouraged in landscaping and buffers. Existing
natural ground cover and trees should be retained
where possible by avoiding scraping, grading and
sodding within the landscaped buffer. Where
additional trees or shrubs are required in an existing
natural area, it should be done in a manner which
minimizes the disturbances to native species.
APP-C-84
(2) A detailed landscape plan shall be submitted with the
site plan when requesting a building permit.
(3) Landscaping shall be integrated into parking areas,
buffer areas and open spaces. The design shall
maximize the visual effect to motorists and adjacent
properties.
(4) Landscaping in parking lots and perimeter planting
areas shall meet the requirements of the City of
Cleveland's Section 18-307 stormwater regulations as
to types of plants, numbers of plants, planting
location and density, size and spacing of landscape
areas, and irrigation and maintenance of
landscaping. Developments that are less than one
acre and which are not considered to be part of a
larger common plan of development under the
stormwater regulations Section 18-304, are also
exempt from these zoning requirements for
landscaping except that the buffer requirements
below must be met. Landscape plantings used to
meet buffering requirements may count toward the
landscape requirements for perimeter and/or parking
lot to the extent that these requirements are met by
the buffer landscaping.
B. Buffers
It is the intention of this ordinance that land uses of lesser intensity
shall be buffered from land uses of higher intensity, that the amount
of the required buffering shall be determined in consideration of the
difference in the intensity of the two adjoining uses, and that some
options shall be provided to developers in determining how to meet
buffer requirements in view of site conditions. Specifically, these
regulations are intended to mitigate the impacts of noise, dust, debris,
light, etc., where such impacts arise due to differences in neighboring
land uses. The terms "use" or "uses" in this section refer to types of
land uses (residential, commercial, etc.) that are proposed or which
exist or which are allowed in a particular zoning district.
(1) For purposes of this buffering section the intensity of
uses is determined as follows: Negligible (N) includes
single-family residential dwellings; Low (L) includes
two-family residential dwellings and uses lawful in
APP-C-85
the PI zoning district except any use with a
drive-through service and not including any PI
development requiring 100 or more parking spaces;
Medium (M) includes other residential uses not
otherwise classified, other uses allowed in the PI, UC,
or R3 district not otherwise classified, and
commercial (CN, CG, or CH) development excluding
automotive repair and outdoor recreation, and
excluding any such commercial use requiring more
than 100 parking spaces; Heavy (H) includes
commercial (CN, CG or CH) not otherwise classified,
and IL uses; and Very Heavy (V) includes IH uses.
(2) Buffers are of the following types: Type A is a heavily
wooded area of natural vegetation at least 50 feet in
width that is approved by the Urban Forester as
being generally free of invasive exotic plants and
fulfilling the equivalent buffering function of another
buffer type that is acceptable between the two uses
(may also be approved with supplemental fence
and/or plantings as approved by the Urban Forester
with or without a possible reduction in width to not
less than 25 feet); Type B is a 20 foot buffer with one
row of evergreen trees on 10 foot centers and shade
trees on 35 foot centers (buffer width may reduced to
15 feet with the addition of a 8 foot solid wood fence)
, but for existing lots of record created prior to final
passage of this landscape buffer ordinance the Type
B buffer is reduced to 15 feet without the fence or 10
feet with a 6 foot fence if a side or rear lot line(s) of
the property is less than 225 feet; Type C is a 25 foot
buffer with one row of evergreen trees on 10 foot
centers and shade trees on 35 foot centers and a row
of evergreen shrubs on 5 foot centers (buffer width
may reduced to 20 feet with the addition of a 8 foot
solid fence or a second row of evergreen trees
staggered with the first row), but for existing lots of
record created prior to final passage of this landscape
buffer ordinance the Type C buffer is reduced to 20
feet without the fence or 15 feet with a 6 foot fence if
a side or rear lot line(s) of the property is less than
225 feet; Type D is a 30 foot buffer with a row of
shade trees on 35 foot centers, two staggered rows of
evergreen trees on 12 foot centers, and a row of
APP-C-86
evergreen shrubs on 5 foot centers with an 8 foot
solid fence; and a Type E is a 40 foot buffer with two
staggered rows of shade trees on 35 foot centers, two
staggered rows of evergreen trees on 10 foot centers
and a row of evergreen shrubs on five foot centers
and an 8 foot solid wooden fence. The Urban Forester
may approve an additional reduction of up to 5 feet in
any Type A, B, C, D buffer where a masonry wall 6 to
8 feet in height (faced with stone, brick, or cut faced
block) is used in lieu of a solid wooden fence or where
a planting berm at least 4 feet high is incorporated
into the design. The Urban Forester may approve an
alternative design that incorporates a stormwater
detention facility, wetland, required stream buffer, or
utility or pipeline easement or right-of-way, in an
area affected by such a feature provided that the
quality of the buffering effect is maintained. Where
a B-Buffer zone is implemented between two
adjoining zoning districts or uses, it is intended that
such B zone be at least as wide as the buffer
otherwise required by this ordinance and that it
provide the same buffering features in the same
amounts that are otherwise required (plantings,
fences, berms, walls), however the Urban Forester
may approve an alternative design where such B
zone is wider than the buffer that is otherwise
required. Where a solid wood fence is included as
part of a buffer it shall be constructed in a sturdy and
workman -like manner using pressure treated wood
designed for the construction of privacy fences with
tightly spaced vertical slats of 8 inches or less in
width. The specifications for plant materials to be
used in buffers are a minimum 1.5" diameter dbh for
shade trees, minimum 6' tall for evergreen trees, and
7 gallon size for shrubs with a minimum height of 24'
to 30"; all plant materials are to be healthy and
properly planted, watered and otherwise maintained
to ensure survival and growth. The requirements for
each buffer type are summarized in the table below
and illustrations of possible buffers meeting the B,C,
D, and E requirements follow:
APP-C-87
BUFFER TYPE DESCRIPTION TABLE
BUFFER
WIDTH
AND
CONTENT
NORMAL WIDTH CONTENT FOR
NORMAL
WIDTH
REDUCED
WIDTH
CONTENT FOR
REDUCED
WIDTH
BONUS WIDTH
REDUCTION
BUFFER
TYPE
A 50' Heavy natural
woods, free of
pest plants,
equivalent to B
or C depending
on requirement
for property.
Requires Urban
Forester
approval
As low as 25'
depending on
Urban Forester
review
Supplemental
plantings and/or
fence. More
supplement
required to get
higher reduction
in width.
Requires Urban
Forester
approval
Additional 5'
with
construction of
6' to 8' masonry
wall in lieu of
fence (must be
cut block, brick,
or stone on face)
or a 4' planting
berm
B 20' but for
existing lots of
record created
prior to final
passage of this
landscape buffer
ordinance 15' if
side or rear lot
line is less than
225'
1 row evergreen
trees on 10'
centers, shade
trees on 35'
centers
15' but for
existing lots of
record created
prior to final
passage of this
landscape
buffer
ordinance 10' if
side or rear lot
line is less than
225'
Normal content
plus 8' solid
wood fence but
for existing lots
of record created
prior to final
passage of this
landscape buffer
ordinance fence
may be 6' high if
side or rear lot
line is less than
225'
Same as A
C 25' but for
existing lots of
record created
prior to final
passage of this
landscape buffer
ordinance 20' if
side or rear lot
line is less than
225
1 row evergreen
trees on 10'
centers, shade
trees on 35'
centers, and 1
row evergreen
shrubs on 5'
centers
20' but for
existing lots of
record created
prior to final
passage of this
landscape
buffer
ordinance 15' if
side or rear lot
line is less than
225'
Normal content
plus a 8' solid
wood fence (but
for existing lots
of record created
prior to final
passage of this
landscape buffer
ordinance fence
may be 6' high if
side or rear lot
line is less than
225') or a second
row of evergreen
trees staggered
with the first
row
Same as A
APP-C-88
BUFFER TYPE DESCRIPTION TABLE
BUFFER
WIDTH
AND
CONTENT
NORMAL WIDTH CONTENT FOR
NORMAL
WIDTH
REDUCED
WIDTH
CONTENT FOR
REDUCED
WIDTH
BONUS WIDTH
REDUCTION
BUFFER
TYPE
D 30' A row of shade
trees on 35'
centers, 2
staggered rows
of evergreen
trees on 10'
centers, and a
row of evergreen
shrubs on 5'
centers, and an
8' solid fence
NA NA Same as A
E 40 2 staggered rows
of shade trees on
35' centers, 2
staggered rows
of evergreen
trees on 10'
centers, and a
row of evergreen
shrubs on 5'
centers, and an
8' solid fence
NA NA NONE
APP-C-89
APP-C-90
APP-C-91
APP-C-92
APP-C-93
(3) The minimum required buffer shall be determined
according to the table below. In the interest of
preserving the quality of development in the City of
Cleveland, proposed development with an intensity of
(N) must provide a Type A or Type B buffer when
locating adjacent to property that is (H) or (V), and
proposed development that has an intensity of (L)
must provide a Type A or Type B buffer when
locating next to property that is (V). The other cases
represented in the table below are of proposed
development areas that are more intensive than the
adjacent areas and therefore have to provide a buffer.
(4) Proposed residential uses with an intensity of (N) or
(L), when developed adjacent to a highway require a
buffer between the proposed residential use and the
highway as described herein. Residential
development with an intensity of (N) shall provide a
Type A or Type B buffer along its borders with
principal arterial streets, Interstate highways, and
other freeways. Residential development with an
intensity of (L) shall provide a Type A or Type B
buffer along its borders with Interstate highways
and other freeways. Where a buffer is required by
this paragraph, it may be interrupted for the purpose
of installing driveways, access roads, signage, and the
like where these are otherwise permitted, and where
accessory structures serving the residential
development are located so as to buffer the
residences.
(5) On sites abutting a street classified as arterial or
above and which are wooded, meaning that tree
canopy covers at least 50% of the site, reduction of
the tree canopy to less than 20% without commencing
development on an approved site plan or subdivision
(not minor subdivision) within one year of the canopy
reduction shall require the planting of a Type B
buffer within 20 feet of adjoining properties or the
maintenance of a Type A buffer within 50 feet of
adjoining properties. The planting and maintenance
of this buffer on the undeveloped property shall not
eliminate the requirement to otherwise fully comply
APP-C-94
with the buffering requirements of this ordinance
when the property is developed.
(6) For purposes of this section on landscape buffers, the
term "shade tree" shall mean large trees from the
Urban Forester's recommended tree list, or other
species specifically approved by the Urban Forester.
For purposes of this section on landscape buffers, the
term "evergreen tree" shall mean large or medium
evergreen trees from the Urban Forester's
recommended tree list. These recommended tree lists
are reproduced here below for the sake of
convenience:
Recommended Deciduous Tree List
Large Trees
(mature height >50')
Common Name Scientific
Name
Common Name Scientific
Name
English Oak Quercus robur Red maple Acer rubrum
Sawtooth Oak Quercus
acutissima
Sugar maple Acer saccharum
Willow Oak Quercus phellos River Birch Betula nigra
White Oak Quercus alba American Beech Fagus
grandifolia
Water Oak Quercus nigra White Ash Fraxinus
pennsylvanica
Pin Oak Quercus
palustris
Green Ash Fraxinus
americana
Shumard Oak Quercus
shumardii
Ginkgo* Gingko biloba
Scarlett Oak Quercus coccinea Kentucky Coffee
Tree*
Gymnocladus
dioicus
Red Oak Quercus rubra Tulip tree Liriodendron
tulipifera
APP-C-95
Common Name Scientific
Name
Common Name Scientific
Name
Black Oak Quercus velutina Silver Linden Tilia tomentosa
Northern Red
Oak
Quercus borealis Japanese
Pagodatree
Sophora japonica
Southern Red
Oak
Quercus falcata Southern
Magnolia
Magnolia
grandifolia
American
Linden
Tilia Americana Bald Cypress Taxodium
distichum
Littleleaf Linden Tilia cordata Honey Locust Gleditsia
triacanthos
American
Sycamore
Platanus
occidentalis
Sweetgum Liquidambar
styraciflua
Blackgum Nyssa sylvatica Japanese
Zelkova
Zelkova serrata
Dawn Redwood Metasequoia
glyptostroboides
London
Planetree
Platanus
acerifolia
Chinese Elm Ulmus parvifolia
*Note: Only male of these species shall be planted
Recommended Evergreen Trees
Medium Size Trees
(mature height >25', <50')
Large Trees
(mature height >50')
Common Name Scientific
Name
Common Name Scientific
Name
Foster Holly Ilex x'Fosteri'
cultivars
Atlas Blue Cedar Cedrus
atlantica glauca
Yaupon Holly Ilex vomitoria
cultivars
Deodar Cedar Cedrus deodara
English Holly Ilex aquifolium
cultivars
Eastern White
Pine
Pinus strobes
American Holly Ilex opaca
cultivar
Loblolly Pine Pinus taeda
APP-C-96
Cherry Laurel Prunus
caroliniana
Canadian
Hemlock
Tsuga
Canadensis
Norway spruce Picea abies
APP-C-97
REQUIRED BUFFER TABLE
ADJACENT
USE
INTENSITY
N L M H V
PROPOSED
USE
INTENSITY
N NONE NONE NONE A or B A or B
L A or B NONE NONE NONE A or B
M A or C A or B NONE NONE NONE
H D A or C A or B NONE NONE
V E D A or C A or B NONE
(7) There may arise from time to time situations wherein
a landscape buffer required by this ordinance would
negatively affect the public interest. Such situations
could include impeding visibility or maintenance
along a public right-of-way, or interference with
utilities or drainage, or interruption of a stream
buffer, or flood hazard impact, or impact on historic
resources, wildlife habitat, or scenic views, and like
concerns. In such a situation, the Director may allow
the landscape buffer to be modified to the extent
necessary to address the problem after considering
the effects of the required buffer on the public
interest in comparison to a proposed modification to
the buffer. The analysis made by the Director would
include documentation of the impact of the buffer,
consideration of any known alternatives that would
be mitigate the impact of the required landscape
buffer while preserving the benefits it is intended to
provide, and consideration of comments from
property owners whose interests would otherwise be
protected by the required buffer. The Director's
analysis could also include other site design features
of the buffering property that complement the
intended effects of the landscape buffer, such as the
location and screening of noisy or unsightly activities.
(as amended by Ord. #2014-02, Feb. 2014)
APP-C-98
C. Tree Preservation
It is the purpose and intent of this section of the zoning regulations to
promote the preservation of trees on private property, or the
replacement of such trees where preservation is ineffective, in order
to improve the quality of development and to provide environmental
and aesthetic benefits and to buffer or otherwise mitigate the affects
of urbanization.
On any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or portion thereof, lying in the City
of Cleveland, Tennessee that is 1 acre or more in size or on any such
tract, lot, or parcel less than 1 acre that contains no building with a
tax appraisal of $25,000 or more, it shall be unlawful and a zoning
violation in any zoning district to remove any trees with a trunk
diameter greater than 6 inches or any trees designated for
preservation in an approved Tree Removal, Replacement, and
Preservation Plan (TRRPP), except in compliance with the following
requirements (trees that are dead, that are severely diseased or
severely and unintentionally damaged, or that are in a utility
easement or right-of-way, or that are physically damaging or
endangering existing structures, utilities, transportation, or
communication systems, e.g. root damage to pipes or the blocking of
satellite reception and the like---these are subject to coverage by a
general City Of Cleveland permit but the owner of any tree or trees
removed pursuant to these exceptions is responsible to maintain
specific documentation of the existence of such exception conditions in
order to sustain coverage by the aforementioned general permit):
1. A tree removal permit is obtained from the Department of Community
Development based upon a Tree Removal, Replacement, and
Preservation Plan (TRRPP) approved by the Urban Forester. A tree
removal permit would not authorize grading of a site or any other land
disturbing activity requiring a land disturbance permit under the
City's stormwater ordinance but it would authorize tree removal in
conjunction with these activities once they are properly permitted. A
tree removal permit would authorize tree removal by cutting in the
absence of a land disturbing activity. A tree removal permit would
authorize only such tree removal as is consistent with the approved
TRRPP. Removing or endangering (failing to follow the Urban
Forester's guidelines for preserving trees) trees that are to be
preserved under the TRRPP would be a violation of the tree removal
permit.
APP-C-99
2. The TRRPP is to include the general location of forested areas on the
site and available aerial photography. The TRRPP is to identify
general areas on the site within 50 feet of property lines where tree
preservation could occur (where the required tree preservation is not
feasible within 50 feet of property lines alternative areas of the site
may be designated). The TRRPP is to identify how any trees and their
associated understory will be preserved on the site (pre-development,
during development, and post-development) consistent with guidelines
provided by the Urban Forester. The TRRPP should result in a
practical and sustainable preservation of trees that will provide
benefits to the development and the community consistent with the
purpose and intent of this ordinance. Trees that are preserved should
be incorporated into any required buffering for the site or into site
landscaping and trees that are preserved are intended to be counted
toward the fulfillment of any requirements for buffering (if in the
buffer area) or landscaping. Shielding of residential areas from
roadways and other uses is an important consideration. Preserving of
the largest tree or trees is not necessarily paramount but
consideration should be given to size, species characteristics, potential
positive and negative impacts of the particular trees in their location
in light of the development plan, and long term survival of the trees.
The TRRPP is to achieve a target of preserving 10 trees with a trunk
diameter of 6 inches per acre, or a canopy coverage from trees with a
6 inch trunk diameter that is equal to 10% of the site acreage. Trees
preserved are to be from species approved by the Urban Forester and
are to consist of at least 50% shade trees, by number of trees or
percentage of canopy. The TRRPP is to identify the location, species,
common name, and diameter at breast height (dbh) of the tree to be
preserved and this same information is to be provided for any tree
that exceeds 20 inches dbh not to exceed 20 trees per site (priorities
for inclusion are the largest trees, hardwood shade trees not otherwise
listed among the exceptions for preservation, and trees within 50 feet
of a property line). Where a large tree of 20 inches or more dbh is
included in the TRRPP to be preserved, it will count as two trees if the
required minimum is to be met by preserving 10 trees per acre.
3. The TRRPP is a part of and a condition of any tree removal permit,
site plan approval, land disturbance permit, and/or building permit
issued for development on the site. The property owner is responsible
to maintain the property perpetually in compliance with the approved
TRRPP. Modifications to the plan that are necessitated by the final
site design are to be approved by the Urban Forester. In the event
that a preserved tree in the TRRPP dies or must be removed for some
other reason, the Urban Forester may approve a modification to the
APP-C-100
TRRPP that includes replacement of the tree. Replacement will be
with one or two trees that have a minimum combined dbh of at least
6 inches at the time of planting. The TRRPP is to be submitted to and
approved by the Urban Forester prior to the issuance of a tree removal
permit. A TRRPP review fee of twenty-five dollars shall be submitted
with each TRRPP and with each TRRPP revision that is initiated by
the property owner.
On any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or portion thereof, lying in the City
of Cleveland, Tennessee that is less than 1 acre and that contains a
building with a tax appraisal of $25,000 or more, it shall be unlawful
and a zoning violation in any zoning district to remove any tree(s)
with a trunk diameter greater than 28 inches diameter at breast
height (dbh) without a Limited Tree Removal Permit approved by the
Urban Forester (trees that are dead, that are severely diseased or
severely and unintentionally damaged, or that are in a utility
easement or right-of-way, or that are physically damaging or
endangering existing structures, utilities, transportation, or
communication systems, e.g. root damage to pipes or the blocking of
satellite reception and the like---these are subject to coverage by a
general City Of Cleveland permit but the owner of any tree or trees
removed pursuant to these exceptions is responsible to maintain
specific documentation of the existence of such exception conditions in
order to sustain coverage by the aforementioned general permit). If
there would be fewer than five trees of 6 inches or more dbh
remaining on the site after the removal of the tree(s) that are the
subject of the Limited Tree Removal Permit, then each tree removed
shall be replaced by a shade tree from the Urban Forester's approved
list. The replacement shall be on-site or, if approved on appeal to the
Urban Forester, on a public property or alternative site protected by
a conservation easement. The total number of trees removed pursuant
to one or more Limited Tree Removal Permits on a given property
shall not exceed four. The Limited Tree Removal Permit fee of ten
dollars shall be submitted prior to approval of the permit. (as
amended by Ord. #2008-10, April 2008, Ord. # 2008-11, April 2008,
and Ord. #2009-57, June 2009)
3.4 Access, parking and loading.
A. General access requirements.
(1) Each lot shall have access to it that is sufficient to
afford a reasonable means of ingress and egress for
APP-C-101
emergency vehicles as well as for all those likely to
need or desire access to the property.
(2) A Point of access (driveway, curb cut, entrance or exit
point) shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width
on lots for residential uses, and forty (40) feet in
width for nonresidential uses, provided that the point
of access does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the lot
frontage.
(3) In zoning district, other than residential, lots less
than one hundred fifty (150) feet in width shall have
only one (1) point of access to any public street; lots
less than two hundred fifty (250) feet in width shall
have no more than two (2) points of access on through
streets.
(4) The distance between any two (2) points of access
shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet measured from
edge of pavement to edge of pavement at the
right-of-way line.
(5) An access point shall be located at least twenty-five
(25) feet from any street intersection measured from
the curb radius tangent point or property line radius
point.
(6) Where access to a state or federal highway is
controlled by regulations other than those stated
herein, the most restrictive regulations shall prevail.
B. Driveway locations.
All driveway entrances and other openings onto streets shall be
constructed so that:
(1) Vehicles can safely enter and exit; specifically, that it
is not necessary for vehicles to exit by backing onto
collector streets and above; and
(2) The Location of the driveway does not interfere with
traffic.
C. Streets, cul-de-sacs and alleys.
APP-C-102
(1) Design standards for streets.
This section establishes minimum requirements applicable to the
access and circulation system, including public and private streets,
and access control to and from public streets. The standards in this
section are intended to minimize the traffic impacts of development,
to assure that all developments adequately and safely provide for the
storage and movement of vehicles consistent with good engineering
and development design practices.
a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and
location of all streets shall conform to the street and
highway plans of the Tennessee department of
transportation and the City of Cleveland, and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
to topographical conditions and to public convenience and
safety. Streets shall be considered in their appropriate
relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by
such streets and the most advantageous development of the
surrounding area.
b) Where streets are not shown in any street or highway plan,
their arrangement shall either provide for the continuation
of appropriate projections of existing principal streets in
surrounding areas; or conform to a plan for the
neighborhood, Approved or adopted by the Cleveland
Planning Commission, to meet a particular situation where
natural conditions make continuance or conformity to
existing streets impractical.
c) Local streets shall be so laid out and arranged as to
discourage their use by through traffic.
d) Where a development abuts or contains an existing or
proposed arterial street, the planning commission may
require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with
screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along
the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys or
such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate
protection of residential properties and to afford separation
of through and local traffic.
e) Where a development borders on or contains a right-of-way,
expressway, drainage canal or waterway, the planning
APP-C-103
commission may require a street approximately parallel to
and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable
for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such
distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades for future bridge or grade
separations.
f) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in
the city under conditions approved by the planning
commission.
g) Half or partial streets shall not be permitted except where
essential to the reasonable subdivision of a tract in
conformity with the standards of this ordinance and where,
in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the
remaining part of the street is provided. Wherever a tract to
be subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street,
the other part of the street shall be dedicated within such
tract.
h) Dead-end streets are prohibited except those designed to be
so permanently. Permanent dead-end streets must have the
approval of the planning commission.
(2) Design standards for cul-de-sacs.
a) A cul-de-sac is measured from its dead-end or vehicular
turnaround back to its intersection with another street or
cul-de-sac. A "Y" shaped road leaving the highway would
have two (2) Cul-de-sacs: the two (2) branches of the "Y."
The base of the "Y" would not be considered a part of the
cul-de-sac.
b) Normal cul-de-sac length shall be limited to the length
required to generate an average daily traffic (ADT) of two
hundred fifty (250) vehicles per day based upon an estimate
of ten (10) average daily trips per single family unit, or one
thousand (1,000) feet, whichever is shorter.
c) Normal cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum forty (40) foot
right-of-way and a minimum twenty-two (22) foot wide
paved surface. At the closed end (cul-de-sac) they shall be
provided with a turnaround having an outside roadway
APP-C-104
diameter of at least sixty (60) feet and a street property line
diameter of at least eighty (80) feet. No sidewalk is
required.
d) Extended cul-de-sac lengths shall be limited to the length
required to generate a maximum ADT of five hundred (500)
vehicles per day or one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet,
whichever is shorter.
e) Extended cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum of fifty (50) foot
right-of-way, a twenty-four (24) foot paved street, and a
sidewalk on at least one side.
f) A cul-de-sac that is an extension of a local street shall have
a right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet, a twenty-four (24) foot
wide paved street, and a sidewalk on at least one (1) side
regardless of length. If the combined length of the local
street and the cul-de-sac extension exceeds two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet from the end of the cul-de-sac
paved surface to the centerline of the collector street or
arterial to which it connects, the turnaround shall have an
outside roadway diameter of at least ninety (90) feet, and a
street property line diameter of at least one hundred ten
(110) feet to accommodate school buses.
(3) Design standards for alleys.
a) The width of an alley shall be twenty (20) feet or more.
b) Changes in the alignment of alleys shall be made on a
centerline radius of not less than seventy-five (75) feet.
c) Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if they
are unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate
turnaround facilities for service trucks at the dead end, with
a minimum external diameter of ninety (90) feet, or as
determined to be adequate by the transportation engineer.
(4) Design standards for intersections.
a) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of
less than seventy-five (75) degrees, except at a "Y"
intersection of two (2) minor streets.
APP-C-105
b) Multiple intersections involving junctions of more than two
(2) streets are prohibited, except where they are found to be
unavoidable by the Cleveland Planning Commission.
c) "T" intersections of minor and collector streets are to be
encouraged.
d) As far as possible, intersections on arterial streets shall be
located not less than eight hundred (800) feet apart
measured from the centerline.
e) Property line radii at street intersections shall be
twenty-five (25) feet for minor streets. Where the angle of
intersection is less than seventy-five (75) degrees, a greater
radii may be determined by the transportation engineer and
approved by the Cleveland Planning Commission.
f) Curb return radii at local streets intersecting local streets
shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, and shall be a
minimum of twenty-five (25) feet where local streets
intersect collectors or arterials. Curb returns at collector
and/or arterial intersections shall be as determined by the
city transportation director.
3.4.1 Drives, driveways and sidewalks.
A. No sidewalk, driveway or other means of entrance to any lot,
regardless of the district in which the said lot is located, shall be
constructed without the written approval of the city public works
director.
(1) Adjacent commercial or office properties which are major
traffic generators (such as shopping centers and office
parks) shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian
access to allow circulation between sites. A major traffic
generator is defined as a generator that is responsible for
initiating over five hundred (500) trips per day.
(2) Joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be
established wherever feasible along arterial streets and
major collector streets. A unified access and circulation
system plan that includes coordinated or shared parking
areas is encouraged wherever feasible.
APP-C-106
(3) The city may reduce required separation distances of access
points provided that joint access driveways and cross access
easements are provided as described in this section.
(4) Driveways shall be located and constructed in the City of
Cleveland according to the urban standards outlined in the
latest edition of the Tennessee Department of
Transportation guidelines entitled "Rules and Regulations
for Constructing Driveways on State Highway Rights-ofway."
B. Sidewalk locations.
(1) Where a proposed development includes improvements or
new construction of collector or arterial facilities, facility
designs shall include provision for sidewalks within the
right-of-way on both sides of the street.
(2) Residential projects within two thousand (2,000) feet of an
activity center comprised of commercial, office, service,
recreation activities, or public primary and secondary
schools shall provide sidewalks on both sides of the street,
except that cul-de-sacs with less than two hundred fifty
(250) adt or less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length
shall not require sidewalks. All other residential streets
shall have a sidewalk on at least one side.
(3) Pedestrian-ways or crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet
wide with a sidewalk meeting the requirements of this
ordinance, may be required to be placed in the center of
blocks more than eight hundred (800) feet long where
deemed necessary to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other
community facilities.
3.4.2 [Reserved.]
3.4.3 Rights-of-way
A. Right-of-way widths.
(1) Unless otherwise required by the Tennessee department of
transportation or the city street plan, right-of-way
APP-C-107
requirements shall be as shown in the following table.
Rights-of-way are measured from lot line to lot line.
APP-C-108
Table 4
Right-of-way Widths
Street
Classification
Average Daily Traffic
(ADT)
Vehicles per Day (VPD)
Right-of-Way
Width (Feet)
Major Arterial 5,000 or more vpd 120 cb
Minor Arterial 2,000 - 5,000 vpd 80 feet
Major Collector 1,000 - 2,000 vpd 70 feet
Minor Collector 500 - 1,000 vpd 60 feet
Local Street 250 - 500 vpd 50 feet
Cul-de-sac or Loop 1-250 vpd 40 feet
Alley less than 250 vpd 20 feet (residential)
30 feet (commercial)
(2) Additional right-of-way width may be required to promote
public safety and convenience, or to ensure adequate access,
circulation and parking in high density residential areas,
commercial areas and industrial areas.
B. Protection and use of rights-of-way.
(1) No encroachment shall be permitted into existing rights-ofway,
except for temporary use authorized by the city.
(2) Use of the right-of-way for public or private utilities,
including, but not limited to sanitary sewer, potable water,
telephone wires, cable television wires, gas lines, or
electricity transmission, shall be allowed subject to the
approval of the city engineer and city transportation
director.
(3) Sidewalks shall be placed within the right-of-way or
dedicated easement.
C. Dedication of rights-of-way.
All rights-of-way shall be designed and constructed to city
specifications and may be dedicated to the city after the city engineer
has approved the construction. A surety must be provided by the
developer for one (1) year after construction is completed to ensure
proper maintenance.
APP-C-109
3.4.4 Off-street parking.
A. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for all development
within the city pursuant to the requirements of this section, except in
the CBD zoning district. The facilities shall be maintained as long as
the use exists that the facilities were designed to serve. (as amended
by Ord. #2011-29, Dec. 2011)
B. The following table indicates the minimum number of required
parking spaces.
Table 5
Minimum Parking Spaces
Land Use Category Minimum Number of Spaces
Residential, Single-family 2 for the first br + .5 for each
additional br
Residential, multi-family1
1 br and efficiency unit
2 br unit
3+ br unit
2/unit
2.25/unit
2.5/unit
Mobile Home Parks 2.0/unit
Institutional
Church
School
Living and Nursing Facilities
Other
1/3 seats
1/classroom + 1/250 sq ft of office
.5/sleeping unit + 1/employee on
largest shift
1/250 sq ft
Outdoor Recreation 1/3 patrons plus 1/employee on
largest shift
Personal Service
Barber/beauty Salons
All Other
3/station
1/250 sq ft
General Office 1/400 sq ft
Medical Office 1/150 sq ft
Neighborhood Commercial 1/250 sq ft
1Ord. #25, Dec. 2002 provides that parking requirements for rooming
houses and dwelling units other than single-family dwellings that were
constructed after November 1, 2002 with more than two unrelated occupants of
legal driving age, be established as two spaces per bedroom. Furthermore, the
parking design requirements of this ordinance shall be in addition to the
requirements of section 3.4.4.
APP-C-110
Land Use Category Minimum Number of Spaces
General Commercial
Theaters/Auditoriums, Places of
Assembly
Commercial Recreation Facilities
Funeral Homes
Hospitals
Hotels and Motels
Restaurants
All Other
1/3 Seats
1/3 patrons + 1/250 sq ft office space
1/3 seats in chapel + 1/250 sq ft office
space
1/bed + 1/250 sq ft office space
1/lodging room + 1/100 sq ft
restaurant
1/100 sq ft
1/200 sq ft
High Intensity Commercial
Vehicles Sales, Rentals, Etc.
Body Shops
Gasoline Stations, Convenience
Stores
Outdoor Arenas
1/500 sq ft building
1/3 bays
1/250 sq ft + 1/3 bays
1/3 patrons
Public Service 1/employee + 1/250 sq ft office space
Industrial 1/employee + 1/250 sq ft office space
C. Computation.
(1) When determination of the number of off-street spaces
required by this section results in a fractional space, the
fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded, a fraction in
excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space.
Any factional space may be disregarded when it is
documented that the dimensions of the site would render
the construction of the additional space impractical.
(2) In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of
assembly in which those in attendance occupy benches,
pews or other similar seating facilities, or which contains an
open assembly area, the occupancy shall be based on the
maximum occupancy rating given the building by the
adopted building code.
(3) Gross floor area shall be the sum of the gross horizontal
area of all floors of a building measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls.
(4) There is no minimum off-street parking requirement in the
CBD zone. For new construction in the CDB zone, the
APP-C-111
parking provided shall not exceed the highest average
parking generation rate for the proposed land use, as found
in the Institute of Transportation Engineer's Parking
Generation, 4th Edition, or any subsequent edition. If a
proposed land use is not listed in this publication, the City
Engineer will set the maximum number of parking spaces
allowed. (as replaced by Ord. #2010-27, July 2010, and
amended by Ord. #2011-29, Dec. 2011)
D. On-street parking.
Approved on-street spaces which abut the property may be counted as
a portion of the required parking spaces.
E. Design requirements.
(1) Minimum parking dimensions for standard vehicles shall be
according to the following table:
Table 6
Minimum Parking Dimensions
(Standard Vehicles)
A B C D E F
Parking
Angle
(Degrees)
Parking
Direction
Stall
Width
Stall Depth
Perpendicul
ar to Aisle3
Width
of
Aisle
Width of
Aisle plus
Two
Stalls
Stall Width
Parallel to
Aisle
45 Drive 9 ft 15 ft 12 ft 42 ft 12.7 ft
60 Drive 9 ft 17 ft 16 ft 50 ft 10.4 ft
75 Drive 9 ft 18 ft 18 ft 54 ft 9.3 ft
90 Drive 9 ft 18.0 ft 20 ft 56 ft 9.0 ft
3Stall depth to be measured at front of vehicle or curb.
APP-C-112
FIGURE 3
Typical parking lot layout
(2) Except as provided in this section, all required off-street
parking spaces and the use they are intended to serve shall
be located on the same parcel.
(3) Unless no other practicable alternative is available, vehicle
accommodation areas shall be designed so that, without
resorting to extraordinary movements, vehicles may exit
such areas without backing onto a public street. This
requirement does not apply to parking areas consisting of
driveways that serve one (1) or two (2) dwelling units,
although backing onto arterial streets is discouraged. No
other uses shall provide parking that requires backing onto
a public street.
(4) Every vehicle parking space shall be designed so that
vehicles cannot extend beyond the perimeter of such area
onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Such areas
APP-C-113
shall also be designed so that vehicles do not extend over
sidewalks or tend to bump against or damage any wall,
vegetation, or other obstruction.
(5) Telephone poles and other obstructions shall be protected
from damage by a landscape island or other protective
device.
(6) The building official with the concurrence of the city
transportation director may approve off-site parking
facilities if the location of the off-site parking spaces will
adequately serve the use for which it is intended and the
location will not create unreasonable hazards to pedestrians
and other traffic. The following factors shall be considered:
a. Proximity of the off-site spaces to the use that they
will serve. Off-street parking shall be provided
within four hundred (400) feet of the principal
entrances thereto, measured along the most direct
pedestrian walkway.
b. Ease of pedestrian access to the off-site parking
spaces.
c. Whether or not off-site parking spaces are compatible
with the use intended to be served, e.g., off-site
parking is not ordinarily compatible with high
turnover uses such as retail.
d. The developer supplies a written agreement,
approved in form by the city attorney, assuring the
continued availability of the off-site parking facilities
for the use they are intended to serve. The city shall
be a party to the agreement with enforcement
authority. The agreement shall contain covenants
running with the lands of both the dominant and
subservient parcels.
(7) Distances shall be measured from a dwelling unit's entry to
the parking space. Where a stairway or elevator provides
access to dwelling units, the stairway or elevator shall be
considered to be the entrance to the dwelling units. Loading
areas shall have direct access to a public street or alley and
APP-C-114
include sufficient off-street maneuvering space so that no
vehicular backing onto or from a public street is required.
(8) The size and layout of parking spaces shall conform to the
engineering design and construction standards of the City
of Cleveland.
(9) Pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, and
off-street parking and loading areas shall be designed to be
safe and convenient.
(10) Parking and loading areas, aisles, pedestrian walks,
landscaping, and open space shall be designed as integral
parts of an overall development plan and shall be properly
related to existing and proposed buildings.
(11) Buildings, parking and loading areas, landscaping and open
spaces shall be designed so that pedestrians moving from
parking areas to buildings and between buildings are not
unreasonably exposed to vehicular traffic.
(12) Landscaped, paved, and gradually inclined or flat
pedestrian walks shall be provided along the lines of the
most intense use, particularly from building entrances to
streets, parking areas, and adjacent buildings. Pedestrian
walks should be designed to discourage incursions into
landscaped areas except at designated crossings.
(13) Aisles and driveways shall not be used for parking vehicles,
except that the driveway of a single-family or two-family
residence shall be counted as a parking space for the
dwelling unit, or as a number of parking spaces as
determined by the building official with the concurrence of
the city transportation director based on the size and
accessibility of the driveway.
(14) The design shall be based on a definite and logical system of
drive lanes to serve the parking and loading spaces. A
physical separation or barrier, such as vertical curbs, may
be required to separate parking spaces from travel lanes.
(15) Parking spaces for all uses, except single-family and twofamily
residences, shall be designed to permit entry and exit
without moving any other motor vehicle.
APP-C-115
(16) No Parking space shall be located so as to block access by
emergency vehicles.
(17) Compact car spaces should be located no more and no less
conveniently than full size car spaces and shall be grouped
in identifiable clusters.
F. Handicap access and parking.
Any parking area to be used by the general public shall provide
suitable, marked parking spaces for handicapped persons. The
number, design, and location of these spaces shall be consistent with
the requirements of applicable state and federal laws. All spaces for
the handicapped shall be paved.
G. Landscape requirements for parking lots.
Landscaping requirements which apply to all multi-family residential
uses of five (5) units or greater, mobile home parks, commercial, office
and industrial developments are provided in section 3.3. Specific
requirements for parking lots in all districts are as follows:
(1) Parking lot perimeters, terminal islands, interior islands,
and dividers shall be landscaped with deciduous shade trees
and natural plant materials. The latter at maturity shall
not exceed thirty (30) inches in height. The use of existing
native species of plant material is strongly encouraged.
(2) Maintenance of all islands, parking spaces and ways,
landscaping, and traffic control devices within the parking
area is the responsibility of the property owner. All
elements shown on the site plan are to be maintained on a
regular schedule.
H. Parking deferral.
(1) To avoid requiring more parking spaces than actually
needed to serve a development, upon application and upon
the recommendation of the city transportation director, the
board of zoning appeals may defer the provision of some
portion of the off-street parking spaces required by this
section if the conditions and requirements of this section are
satisfied.
APP-C-116
(2) At the direction of the city transportation director, a
parking study shall be prepared and submitted which
demonstrates the following:
a. Different parking ratios are appropriate based upon
estimates of parking requirements and
recommendations in studies such as those from
Urban Land Institute (ULI), Institute Traffic
Engineers (ITE), or the traffic institute, and based on
data collected from uses or combinations of uses
which are the same or comparable to the proposed
use. Comparability shall be determined by density,
scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location. The
study shall document the source of data used to
develop recommendations.
b. The Percentage of parking spaces sought to be
deferred corresponds to the percentage of residents,
employees, and customers who regularly walk, use
bicycles and other non-motorized forms of
transportation, or use mass transportation to come to
the facility. Documentation of the source of this data
must be provided.
I. Historic preservation exemption.
The preservation of any property that has been placed on the local
register of historic places, or that is located in a historic district and
contributes to the historic character of the district, may be grounds for
a reduction in, or complete exemption from, the parking requirements
in this section. The reduction or exemption needed to allow a viable
use of the historic structure shall be granted unless a severe parking
shortage or severe traffic congestion will result.
J. Increase or decrease in requirements.
The Number of required parking spaces may be increased by the
building official, with the concurrence of the city transportation
director, if a parking study demonstrates that the proposed use would
have a parking demand in excess of the requirements in this section.
The building official may require the developer to provide a parking
study, as described in section 3.4.4.h(2) when the city transportation
director indicates that an increase or decrease in the number of
parking spaces may be warranted.
APP-C-117
3.4.5 Alternative parking requirements.
A. Shared parking.
Upon the recommendation of the city transportation director, the
board of zoning appeals may authorize a reduction in the total number
of required parking spaces for two (2) or more uses jointly providing
off-street parking when their respective hours of need of maximum
parking do not normally overlap. Reduction of parking requirements
because of joint use shall be approved if the following conditions are
met:
(1) The developer submits sufficient data to demonstrate the
hours of maximum demand for parking and the respective
uses do not normally overlap.
(2) The developer submits a written agreement, to which the
city shall be a party with enforcement authority, approved
by the city attorney, guaranteeing the joint use of the offstreet
parking spaces signed by all property owners involved
as long as the uses requiring parking are in existence and
there is not a conflict of traffic between the uses that would
result in a violation of the minimum standards of this
article or until the required parking is provided elsewhere
in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. The
agreement shall include provisions for maintenance of the
parking facility. The agreement shall contain covenants
running with the lands of both the dominant and
subordinate parcels.
B. Reduction for low percentage of leasable space.
The requirements of this section assume an average percentage of
gross leasable building to total gross building area (approximately
85%). If a use has a much lower percentage of leasable space because
of cafeterias, athletic or covered patios; multiple stairways and
elevator shafts; atriums; conversion of historic residential structures
to commercial use; or for other reasons, the building official, with the
concurrence of the city transportation director, may reduce the
parking requirements if the following conditions are met:
(1) The developer submits a detailed floor plan describing how
all of the floor area in the building will be used.
APP-C-118
(2) The developer agrees in writing that the usage of the square
footage identified as not leasable shall remain as identified,
unless and until additional parking is provided to conform
fully with this section.
3.4.6 Off-street loading/unloading.
Spaces to accommodate off-street loading or business vehicles shall be provided
as required in this section.
A. Spaces required.
(1) Schools, hospitals, nursing homes and other institutional
uses and mid- and high-rise residential uses shall provide
one loading space or bay for the first one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof,
and one space for each additional one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet or fraction thereof.
(2) Auditoriums, gymnasiums, stadiums, theaters, convention
centers and other buildings for public assembly shall
provide one space for the first twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof, and one
space for each additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(3) Offices and financial institutions shall provide one space for
the first seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross
floor area or fraction thereof, and one space for each
additional twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
(4) Retail commercial, service, road service and commercial
entertainment uses shall provide one space for the first ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area, and one
space for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet.
(5) Industrial users shall provide one space for every ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area.
B. The building official may, upon the recommendation of the
transportation engineer, require that a study be done to determine the
actual number of loading spaces needed for a proposed use. The
transportation engineer shall recommend the need for a study when
it appears that the characteristics of the proposed use require a
APP-C-119
greater or lesser number of loading spaces than that required or
proposed.
3.4.7. Parking and storage of non-residential vehicles and equipment
It is the intention of this ordinance to limit the regular parking or storage of
commercial and industrial vehicles and equipment within the RA, R1, R2, R3,
R4, and R5 residential zoning districts. This section is intended to restrict the
use of residentially developed properties in the aforementioned zones for the
parking or storage of commercial or industrial vehicles or equipment that is
picked up by an employee or contractor who comes to the property from off-site
to pick up the vehicle or equipment for a business use taking place off-site. This
section is intended to restrict the size and types and numbers of vehicles and
equipment that can be parked or stored on a residentially developed property
in the aforementioned zones. This section applies to commercial or industrial
vehicles not typically used as personal transportation or in non-business-related
applications and to business-related equipment that is on wheels or transported
on trailers, and which is used in some application typically taking place outdoors
(e.g. commercial lawn mowers, sweepers, cement mixers, grading equipment,
tractors, semi-trucks and trailers, car hauling trailers for multiple vehicles,
brush and stump grinding equipment, tandem wheel trucks other than pick-up
trucks, vehicles with more than two axles, passenger vehicles with seating for
more than 15 persons, and the like). Cars, light trucks (pick-up trucks), vans or
mini-vans, sport utility vehicles, station wagons, and the like that are of a type
commonly used for personal transportation and which are ordinarily driven by
the occupants of a residential property are allowed in the residential zone when
otherwise lawfully parked. Recreational vehicles and watercraft intended for the
use of residents of a residential property are allowed in the residential zone
when otherwise lawfully parked. Apart from the aforementioned personal
transportation-type vehicles, not more than one truck or van with not more than
two axles and not more than one open or enclosed trailer not exceeding 25 feet
in length, are allowed to be parked or stored overnight on each residentially
developed lot or parcel in a residential zoning district. Not more than one
passenger vehicle with seating for 15 or more persons but with not more than
two axles (e.g. a school bus) is allowed to be parked or stored overnight on each
residentially developed lot or parcel. For purposes of this ordinance, the phrase
"parked or stored overnight" shall mean parked or stored for a period of three
or more hours between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. This regulation is not intended
to prohibit occasional overnight parking of vehicles on a residentially zoned
property by a contractor or service business for the purpose of construction,
renovation, repair, or maintenance of the property excluding routine, periodic,
or predictably re-occurring activities such as lawn mowing. This ordinance is not
intended to permit the parking or storage of any junk vehicle on any residential
property in a manner otherwise proscribed by ordinance. It shall be unlawful
APP-C-120
and a violation of the zoning regulations to park or store vehicles on
residentially zoned property in a manner contrary to this ordinance. (as added
by Ord. #2007-36, Sept. 2007, and amended by Ord. #2007-41, Nov. 2007)
3.5 Exterior lighting.
All lights located within twenty (20) feet of residentially used or residentially
zoned property shall meet the following requirements:
A. Lights shall have a pole height, excluding the globe, no greater than
twelve (12) feet above grade.
B. Lights shall be shielded to the extent necessary to prevent
illumination of the adjacent, surrounding, or nearby residentially used
or residentially zoned properties.
C. Lights shall be non-glare.
3.6 Solid Waste Management.
A. Where required by city code all multi-family residential and all nonresidential
development shall provide an on-site dumpster or an
alternative solid-waste collection arrangement approved by the city.
B. All areas designated for dumpsters of solid waste collection shall be
accessible to the garbage truck which must be able to enter in a
forward motion. All maneuvering must be completely on-site to
approach the dumpster or other facility, pick up the solid waste, and
exit the site in a forward motion. The site shall be designed so that
the truck is not required to back onto the site or off of the site, except
that an alley may be used for maneuvering.
C. All dumpster areas shall have an enclosure with a double gate with a
minimum height of six (6) feet. The enclosure shall be made of opaque
material.
D. All restaurants shall provide a used grease storage area separate from
the dumpster enclosure which shall be located in an enclosed gated
area.
E. Title 17, Cleveland Municipal Code, Refuse and Trash Disposal, as
amended, is incorporated by reference for the purpose of solid waste
management policy.
APP-C-121
3.7 Standards for Facilities with Drive thru Service.
All facilities providing drive-up or drive-through service shall provide on-site
stacking lanes in accordance with the following standards:
A. Standards.
(1) The facilities and stacking lanes shall be located and
designed to minimize turning movements in relation
to the driveway access to streets and intersection.
(2) The facilities and stacking lanes shall be located and
designed to minimize or avoid conflicts between
vehicular traffic and pedestrian areas such as
sidewalks, crosswalks, or other pedestrian access
ways.
(3) A by-pass lane shall be provided.
(4) Stacking lane distance shall be measured from the
service window to the property line bordering the
furthest street providing access to the facility.
(5) Minimum stacking lane distance shall be as follows:
a. Financial institutions shall have a minimum
distance of two hundred (200) feet. Two (2) or
more stacking lanes may be provided which
together total two hundred (200) feet.
b. All other uses shall have a minimum distance
of one hundred and twenty (120) feet.
(6) Alleys or driveways in or abutting areas designed,
approved, or developed for residential use shall not
be used for circulation of traffic for drive-up facilities.
(7) Where turns are required in the exit lane, the
minimum distance from any drive-up station to the
beginning point of the curve shall be thirty-four (34)
feet. The minimum inside turning radius shall be
twenty-five (25) feet.
APP-C-122
3.8. Accessory Structures
A. Accessory structures may be located on any parcel which has a
permitted principal structure or development located in full
compliance with the standards of this Ordinance, but this paragraph
is not intended to prohibit otherwise lawful structures not ordinarily
intended for human occupancy or the storage of goods (e.g. utility
equipment buildings, fences, signs, and the like). The total area
covered by accessory structures on any lot or parcel shall not exceed
10% of the total lot area. No accessory structure shall be placed on a
lot so as to cause the total amount of impervious area on the lot to be
increased beyond the maximum that is allowed for the zoning district.
No accessory structure of any type shall be located in a manner such
that it interferes with a utility or utility easement or such that it
presents a public safety problem, e.g. interfering with motorists' view
of oncoming traffic, as determined by the Director of Public Works.
B. Accessory Buildings
(1) Accessory buildings shall be located in a manner that meets
all site design requirements. Generally speaking, accessory
buildings are allowed only in side and rear yards and not
within front yards. Accessory buildings shall in no case be
located between the required front yard setback line and the
front property line. Accessory buildings shall be located
behind the front of the principal structure on site, except
that one detached garage or carport not exceeding 24 feet in
width may be located to the front of the principal structure
but behind the required front yard setback for the principal
structure. An accessory building located behind an
otherwise lawful privacy fence and behind the front of the
principal structure on the site, will be deemed to comply
with the requirements of this paragraph.
(2) Accessory buildings shall be limited to two (2) stories in
height.
(3) Detached Accessory Dwelling
"Accessory dwelling, detached," also referred to as detached
accessory dwelling, means a detached dwelling unit
separate from the principal single family structure. The
dwelling shall be clearly subordinate in size, height, and
purpose to the principal structure, it shall be located on the
same lot as the principal structure, but may be served by
APP-C-123
separate utility meter(s) and is detached from the principal
structure. A detached accessory dwelling can be an
independent structure or it can be a dwelling unit above a
garage, or it can be attached to a workshop or other
accessory structure on the same lot as the principal
structure. Detached accessory dwellings are not permitted
within any historic overlay district.
a) Density and Bulking
i. On lots less than 10,000 square feet, a
detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed
seven hundred fifty square feet.
ii. On lots 10,000 square feet or greater, a
detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed
one thousand square feet.
iii. The footprint of a single-story detached
accessory dwelling shall not exceed 750 square
feet or 50 percent of the first floor area of the
principal structure, whichever is less.
iv. The footprint of a two-story detached accessory
dwelling shall not exceed 550 square feet or 40
percent of the first floor area of the principal
structure, whichever is less.
v. If the accessory dwelling unit is located within
a larger accessory building such as a garage or
poolhouse the footprint requirements shall not
apply but the structure shall be subject to
other size requirements of accessory
structures.
vi. The detached accessory dwelling shall
maintain a proportional mass, size, and height
to ensure it is not taller than the principal
structure on the lot. The detached accessory
dwelling height shall not exceed the height of
the principal structure as measured to the
eave line.
b. Driveway Access.
i. On lots with no alley access, the lot shall have
no more than one curb cut from any public
street for driveway access to the principal
structure as well as the detached accessory
dwelling.
APP-C-124
ii. On lots with alley access, any additional access
shall be from the alley and no new curb cuts
shall be provided from public streets.
iii. One parking space for each sleeping area
within the unit shall be provided in addition to
parking for the principle structure. (as
replaced by Ord. #2015-24, Sept. 2015)
C. Fences
(1) Reserved
(2) The word "fence" as used in this section is intended to
include fences and walls that extend substantially above
grade on both sides of the fence or wall, but this section is
not intended to govern the placement of retaining walls.
(3) On any residentially zoned or residentially used property,
no fence shall be constructed within 15 feet of any public
street with a right-of-way more than 20 feet wide, except the
following:
a) Brick or stone columns, preferably not larger than
two feet by two feet by four feet, with chain, pipe,
open wrought iron or split rails, pipes or chains
between the vertical columns;
b) Open wrought iron fencing four feet in height, with a
minimum of 50 percent open area;
c) Split rail fencing not exceeding four feet in height,
with not more than four horizontal rails between the
vertical posts; or
d) Open chain link fencing, not exceeding four feet in
height.
e) Masonry fencing, with a maximum height of two feet,
six inches.
f) A wood, simulated wood, or masonry privacy fence
not exceeding 8 feet in height is allowed on
residentially zoned or residentially used property but
any installation within 15 feet of a public street
APP-C-125
requires approval by the Public Works Director who
will consider the impact on traffic safety, utilities,
and utility easements when evaluating the proposed
fence. Any such privacy fence must be located behind
the front of the principal structure (see illustration).
Where an historic preservation zoning district is in
effect, no privacy fence shall be allowed except in
compliance with the requirements of that historic
preservation zoning district.
(4) There is no maximum height for fences in commercial and
industrial districts.
(5) Electrical fences are not permitted.
D. Awnings
With the exception of the CBD district, the following shall apply.
(1) All awnings attached to a building shall be set back at least
four feet from any property line.
(2) No pole or other obstruction attached to the awning for the
support thereof shall be closer than ten feet from the front
property line.
APP-C-126
(3) Awnings shall not be less than eight feet above the ground.
(as amended by Ord. #5, April 1999, Ord. #2008-02, Jan.
2008, and Ord. #2008-34, July 2008)
3.9 Special Site Conditions.
3.9.1 Steep Slopes.
A. The maximum slope allowed for development shall be twenty-five (25)
percent, unless there shall be no feasible alternative for development
of the land.
B. Street and private access ways grades shall conform as closely as
possible to natural topography, but shall not exceed fifteen (15)
percent, except when a variance is requested and is approved by the
planning commission upon the recommendation of the city engineer.
C. Street grades exceeding twelve (12) percent shall have a maximum
length of six hundred (600) feet.
D. Vertical curbs shall be required on the downhill side of streets having
grades of six (6) percent or greater; concrete u or v gutter may be
installed in lieu of conventional rolled or vertical curb elsewhere.
E. Maximum driveway grades shall not exceed twenty (20) percent.
3.9.2 Water Bodies.
A. Lakes, creeks and ponds shall be protected during periods of
construction to prevent debris, silt, and concrete or concrete byproducts
from entering the water body.
B. A riparian buffer zone which retains the natural landscape shall be
maintained within twenty-five (25) feet of any water body. Exceptions
may be granted by the planning commission when acceptable plans
are presented which details how the soil will be protected from
erosion, and how the filtering capacity of the vegetation will be
maintained.
APP-C-127
3.10 Regulations for Home Occupations.
A. Conditions under which such occupations may be permitted:
(1) No more than one person other than members of the family
residing on the premises shall be engaged in such
occupation.
(2) The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall
be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for
residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than
twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
(3) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the
building or premises, nor outdoor storage of any type, nor
other visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation other than one sign not exceeding four (4) square
feet in area and non-illuminated.
(4) No home occupation shall occupy more than one-thousand
(1000) square feet of any accessory building, and such use
shall not conflict with any applicable fire code, building
code, or other code.
(5) There shall be no sales in connection with such home
occupation other than sales of the following types: sales of
services produced on the premises; or sales of products that
are shipped from other off-premise locations directly to
customers without coming to the site of the home
occupation; or sales of small, non-hazardous items delivered
off-site by the business owner where there is a minor
storage of inventory (e.g. in the corner of a garage) that does
not affect the residential appearance or functioning of the
property (in no case should the area of the residence devoted
to the business including such inventory exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the home or otherwise be in violation of any
applicable fire code, building code, or other code).
(6) No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a
residential neighborhood, and any need for parking
generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be
offstreet in other than the required front yard. This
APP-C-128
paragraph is not intended to prohibit home occupations that
would generate minor amounts of traffic that is not out of
character with a residential neighborhood such as a onechair
hair salon, in-home teaching of piano lessons or
similar instruction in other subject areas, in-home
photography, or book keeping, typing, or similar services
where customers or clients may come to the home in small
numbers throughout the workday but not in sufficient
concentration to be disruptive to the neighborhood and its
traffic and parking pattern.
(7) No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which increases noise, vibration, glare, fumes,
odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal
senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single
family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted
in other than a single family residence. In the case of
electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be
used which creates visual or audible interference in any
radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes
fluctuations in the line voltage off the premises. The home
occupation shall not increase the type or volume of solid
waste for at-curb disposal beyond that which is otherwise
allowed by ordinance. The home occupation shall not
introduce any wastes into the sanitary sewer system in any
type, manner, or amount not permitted by Cleveland
Utilities. The home occupation shall be conducted in
compliance with all applicable stormwater regulations.
(8) The parking of vehicles used in a residents line of work (a
school bus, a heavy truck, etc.) when such vehicles are
parked at home for the resident's convenience and when
such vehicles are parked in a paved or gravel parking area
that otherwise complies with applicable codes, are not
considered a violation of this section. However, this section
does not permit the storage of junk vehicles, repossessed or
impounded vehicles, or vehicles for sale by a licensed dealer.
B. The following uses are specifically prohibited as home occupations:
(1) Tea rooms, restaurants, and the like
(2) Real estate offices
APP-C-129
(3) Convalescent home
(4) Daycare for more than four adults or children
(5) Funeral or mortuary establishments
(6) Animal hospitals
(7) Repair shops
C. The conduct of a home occupation shall require a home occupation
permit to be issued by the Community Development Director or the
Director's designee. A change in ownership or tenant at the residence
shall void the permit. The Director may void the permit, or take
intermediate steps such as placing the permit in probationary status
for a period of time, if it is determined by the Director that the home
occupation is being conducted in a manner that is contrary to this
ordinance. Violations of this ordinance are hereby declared unlawful
and subject to penalties prescribed for the violation of the zoning
ordinance. Conduct of a home occupation without a valid permit is a
violation of this ordinance.
D. The Community Development Director shall develop and implement
uniform procedures for the issuance of home occupation permits,
including the application of this ordinance and the disposition of
complaints concerning alleged violations of this ordinance. (as
amended by Ord. #2006-11, May 2006, and Ord. #2007-41, Nov. 2007)
3.11 Supplemental standards for townhouse development.
[Reserved.]
3.12 MS4 Phase II Stormwater Management Program.
All construction, development, and redevelopment resulting in land
disturbance activity shall conform to the requirements of the "MS4
Phase II Stormwater Management Program" requirements as codified
in Cleveland Municipal Code Title 18, Chapter 3 Sections 18-301
thorough 18-312. (as amended by Ord. #2005-21, June 2005)
3.13 Minimum standards for siting cellular communication towers.
A. PURPOSE. Establish minimum standards and location requirements
for siting wireless communication (cellular) towers and antennas
APP-C-130
within the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee in
order to protect the public health and safety.
B. DEFINITION. For the purpose of this ordinance, the word "tower"
shall be defined as "any outdoor structure designed and constructed
to support one (1) or more transmitting or receiving devises for
telephone, radio or any similar wireless communication facilities, with
the following exceptions:"
(1) Any citizens band or amateur radio station antenna;
(2) A ground or building mounted citizens band radio antenna
less than forty feet (40') in height or an amateur radio
antenna not more than seventy-five feet (75') in height,
provided there is adequate clearance with adjacent
structures; an antenna in this category that exceeds
seventy-five feet (75') in height must be reviewed and
approved by the Cleveland Municipal Planning Commission;
(3) Satellite dish type antenna or a conventional type television
antenna for the exclusive use of a residential occupancy;
(4) Mobile news or public information service antennas;
(5) Hand-held communication devices such as walkie-talkies,
cell phones and similar type devices;
(6) Antennas owned by public agency or its members and used
for emergency services, public utilities, operation or
maintenance services.
C. Permit application requirements
(1) The applicant for a permit to locate a tower is responsible
for providing the following information to the chief building
official.
(a) A site plan drawn to scale that shows the
property lines of the site, the location of the
tower in relation to the property lines,
adjoining property within three hundred feet
(300') of the site by owner and use; distances
from the base of the tower to adjoining
property lines and the nearest habitable
structure, proposed easement(s) by location
and type and, the location of any accessory
buildings proposed to be located on the site
APP-C-131
include building setbacks from the property
lines.
(b) A grading and drainage plan that indicates the
existing and proposed elevation of the site and
methods proposed to manage and control
erosion during construction as well as
permanent drainage methods and/or facilities.
(c) Proof of ownership or legal interest in the
property.
(d) Engineering drawings that describe the design
and structural integrity of the tower, its
supports and attachments.
(e) A statement describing the general capability
of the tower to serve more than one (1) user
and whether space will be available for lease
to additional users.
(2) Permit application review shall be coordinated by the
planning director or a designee and conducted in the same
procedure as subdivision plat review.
D. Co-location: Towers shall be required to accommodate the maximum
number of transmitting facilities subject to the design capacity of the
tower for the purpose of reducing the number of potential tower
locations within the corporate limits. Applicants for a tower permit
are required to provide a statement that documents their efforts to
secure a co-location on an existing tower.
E. Permitted locations, by zoning district: Tower shall be permitted in a
Local Highway Business, Professional or Manufacturing zoning
district within the corporate limits. A tower, without exception, is not
permitted in a Residential (R-1,2, 3, 4, 5 or A) zoning district, the
Floodway district or the Central Business District (CBD).
F. Separation of tower to off-site uses: Tower separation shall be
measured in straight line distance from the base of the tower
structure to nearest zoning district boundary line. The tower location
shall, without exception, maintain a minimum distance of two
hundred feet (200') or three hundred percent (300%) of the height of
the tower; whichever is greater, from any adjoining district where a
APP-C-132
tower is not a permitted use. Accessory uses shall maintain building
setbacks as prescribed by the applicable zoning district.
(1) If the adjoining district is a district where a tower is
permitted, the building setbacks applicable to the zoning
district wherein the tower is located shall apply.
G. Security fencing: The area surrounding the tower location, but not
necessarily the entire lot, shall be enclosed with fencing adequate to
secure the tower under normal circumstances.
H. Landscaping and aesthetics: Plant materials suitable to screen the
tower location shall be incorporated into the design of the facility. As
a general criteria, plant species that are native or commonly utilized
in the area shall be considered in order to maintain compatibility with
adjoining property. A general landscape plan shall be submitted
concurrent with the site plan and is subject to the review of the
Cleveland Urban Forester.
I. Tower prohibited in airport approach zone: No tower shall be located
within the Cleveland Municipal Airport approach surface zone, the
horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or transitional zone as
shown on the Airport Zoning Map, dated October 7, 1959, as amended.
J. Abandoned tower policy: In the event a tower becomes obsolete or is
out of service for any reason for six (6) consecutive months, the owner
or record shall cause the tower to be dismantled and removed from
site and disposed of in the manner appropriate for disposal or re-use
of the tower materials. A time period of one (1) year shall be provided
from the time the tower is deemed to be out of service for the owner to
either activate the tower or remove it from the site.
(1) Failure to comply with the terms of this section concerning
removal of abandoned towers shall be subject to penalties as
provided by the Cleveland Municipal Code. (as added by
Ord. #7, Aug. 1998)
4.0 Alternative Development Standards.
The purpose of this section is to describe certain overlay zones used to allow
certain types of development.
APP-C-133
4.1 Planned Unit Development.
4.1.1 Purpose.
A. It is the purpose of the PUD Planned Unit Development District to
provide flexible land use and design regulations and to permit planned
diversification and integration of uses and structures, while retaining
in the City Council the absolute authority to establish limitations and
regulations thereon for the benefit of the public health, welfare and
safety. These provisions are designed to:
(1) Promote more efficient and economic residential and
non-residential uses of land, and encourage appropriate
mixed use development.
(2) Lower development and building costs by permitting
smaller networks of utilities and streets and the use of more
economical building types and shared facilities.
(3) Provide for open spaces and common areas and provide
usable and suitably located recreational facilities within the
development.
(4) Allow the controlled development of land uses most suitable
to the proposed site and surrounding neighborhoods.
(5) Provide design and location criteria to encourage innovative
development.
(6) Encourage small area planning, beneficial coordination in
private and public investment, and site assembly for
planned development.
B. The PUD District designation is a two-step process consisting of a
PUD Conceptual Plan and a PUD Development Plan. The PUD
Conceptual Plan is intended to communicate a proposed development
concept for a project area greater than three (3) acres that may or may
not be under unified ownership and/or control (a PUD with only
residential uses may be as small as 1 acre). PUD Conceptual Plan
approval would not constitute a change in the zoning map or
otherwise alter the existing development rights of property in the
affected area. The PUD Conceptual Plan approval process would
identify desirable parameters for future development pursuant to a
PUD Development Plan. The PUD Conceptual Plan and the PUD
APP-C-134
Development Plan may be approved concurrently if all necessary
conditions PUD Development Plan are met. Approval of a PUD
Development Plan shall be through the rezoning process, requiring a
recommendation from the Planning Commission and approval by the
City Council. PUD Development Plan approval shall be done by
ordinance specifying uses, development standards, conditions, and
limitations; and amending the official zoning map designating the
area affected as a distinctly numbered PUD District. (as amended by
Ord. #10, Jan. 2001, and Ord. #2008-21, June 2008)
4.1.2 PUD Process.
4.1.2.A PUD Conceptual Plan Process
The PUD Conceptual Plan process consists of the completion of an application
and a conceptual plan by the applicant, a review and recommendation regarding
the proposed conceptual plan by staff, and approval or denial by the Planning
Commission.
(1) PUD Conceptual Plan Application. The City of Cleveland or
an owner of property within an area where the PUD is
proposed to be applied may make application for the PUD
Conceptual Plan approval. The area to which the PUD
Conceptual Plan is to be applied shall be at least three (3)
acres in size, or at least one (1) acre for a residential -only
PUD. The application must contain a statement of
justification based upon the purposes of the PUD as
described above. The application must show the boundaries
of the proposed PUD area on a tax map. The application
must also identify for each parcel to be included: the
property owner(s); current zoning; current use of the
property. The application must include any existing deed
restrictions or covenants affecting the proposed PUD area.
The application must contain a PUD Conceptual Plan
drawn by a professional engineer at a legible scale. The
application must identify the proposed uses and locations of
those uses; the uses may be a range of possible uses and
they should be identified according to the classification
contained in the North American Industrial Classification
System (NAICS) for non-residential uses. Residential uses
should be identified by density and a description of the
housing units (number of units, number of units per
building, size of units, number of bedrooms, ownership
structure [apartments, fee-simple townhome subdivision,
APP-C-135
condominium, etc.] along with any common amenity
features to be shared by residents.
(2) PUD Conceptual Plan Content. The conceptual plan must
show proposed property lines, proposed rights of way,
proposed easements, proposed utilities and other
infrastructure including the approximate size and location
of anticipated site features such as stormwater treatment
facilities, decorative outdoor plazas or entranceways,
parking lots, landscape buffer areas, etc. The conceptual
plan must contain the most recent Bradley County Property
Appraiser's aerial photograph with the boundaries of the
proposed PUD area drawn in. Existing topography of the
site must be provided. Any floodway or floodplain areas
within the proposed PUD area must be shown in the
conceptual plan with reference to the appropriate Flood
Insurance Rate Map panel. Existing right-of-way
improvements, traffic control devices, driveway connections,
utilities, fire hydrants, and drainage systems on-site and
within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed PUD area are
to be shown in the conceptual plan. At a minimum the
conceptual plan must identify general appearance standards
that would be adhered to in the development for building
facades, exterior lighting, landscaping, etc. The conceptual
plan must show building areas and locations, building
heights, and parking lots and other impervious area
features. The conceptual plan must show all internal traffic
circulation, including pedestrian, and connections to the
existing street and sidewalk systems. The conceptual plan
must indicate all buffering at the project boundaries to
include landscaping, walls, fences, berms, water features,
etc. (where site constraints limit the width of such buffering,
parking lots and minor accessory structures may be located
so as to lessen impacts on adjoining property). The
conceptual plan must show the proposed setbacks from
internal and external property lines and building
separation. It is understood that the foregoing conceptual
plan contents describing future improvements are
illustrative and that these may change as the project design
advances, but the representations made in the conceptual
plan should fairly depict the proposed project in terms of
location, type, scale, orientation, quality, and performance.
Additional information will be required for the conceptual
plan review if warranted by the circumstances of the
APP-C-136
proposed development: if the project is located on an arterial
street and exceeds five acres or if the project is located on
other than arterial street and it generates more than two
hundred (200) vehicle trips in the peak hour a traffic impact
study is to be provided; if the project site contains or is
adjacent to any documented historical or archaeological
resources, protected species or habitats, or wetlands such
resources are to be described along with the potential
project impacts, proposed mitigation, and compliance with
any applicable laws; and if the proposed project involves
heavy industrial or other processes that could be anticipated
to have off-site impacts in terms of noise, vibrations, odors,
or hazards (thermal, explosive, chemical), those impacts and
their mitigation are to be described in accordance with
professional standards. At the applicant's option, the
conceptual plan may also include supplementary
information such as architectural elevations, perspective
drawings, proposed improvements in public spaces such as
streetscapes, etc.
(3) PUD Conceptual Plan Approval. The conceptual plan is to
be submitted to the planning director for review. The
planning director will have the conceptual plan reviewed by
the site plan review team and plat review teams as
established by the zoning ordinance and subdivision
regulations. After staff review, the planning director shall
schedule the conceptual development plan for review by the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission will hear
public comment and make a determination regarding the
approval of the PUD Conceptual Plan. The Planning
Commission may deny approval to the PUD Conceptual
Plan, approve it subject to conditions, or approve it as
submitted. Approval by the Planning Commission shall be
specific as to the required content of the PUD Conceptual
Plan including the area of the proposed PUD, the land uses
allowed, the setbacks required, building height limitations,
buffering and landscaping requirements, and any required
performance standards deemed necessary (e.g. noise, light,
odors, truck traffic restrictions, hours of operation, outdoor
storage restrictions, etc.).
(4) Effect of Approving PUD Conceptual Plan. In no way would
such approval by the Planning Commission exempt any
eventual development from compliance with site plan,
APP-C-137
building permit, soil erosion, and flood protection
requirements nor would it obligate the City of Cleveland to
construct any public improvements in support of the
proposed development. Such approval does not change the
underlying zoning of the property affected or otherwise
place additional development rights or restrictions on the
property. Such approval does not alter the rights of any
owners or tenants of affected property as these may pertain
to the use, sale, or subdivision of the property. Such
approval does not authorize the eminent domain purchase
of property by the City of Cleveland. Such approval does
not obligate the City of Cleveland to approve a PUD
Development Plan without any further stipulations or
changes beyond those established in the PUD Conceptual
Plan approval. Such approval does not constitute a
reservation of capacity in public facilities or infrastructure.
Such approval does authorize the property owners in the
affected area, or a developer acting on their behalf, to
pursue approval of a PUD Final Plan through the Planning
Commission and the City Council. Approval of the PUD
Conceptual Plan does result in an informational resource
that may be used by City Council in planning, budgeting,
and constructing public improvements, or in carrying out
other planning activities. The PUD Conceptual Plan
approval shall be in effect for a period of five (5) years after
Planning Commission approval after which time it shall
automatically sunset unless continued by the Planning
Commission.
4.1.2.B PUD Development Plan Process
(1) Content and Effect of the PUD Development Plan. The
PUD Development Plan is the means by which new zoning
and other land development controls are enacted for an area
where a PUD Conceptual Plan has been approved. The
ordinance implementing the PUD will constitute the zoning
classification of the area affected by the PUD. The PUD
Development Plan may also encompass a subdivision of land
and commitments by the owner(s) and developer(s) to
construct various public infrastructure improvements. The
PUD Development Plan is to be a recorded legal instrument,
adopted by ordinance of the City Council, and binding upon
the property owner(s), developer(s), heirs, and assigns. The
PUD Development Plan will include information describing
APP-C-138
the permitted uses, buffering and screening requirements,
building setbacks, any necessary performance related
standards (noise, lighting, hours of operation, etc.) any
necessary monitoring, and reporting requirements
(landscape maintenance, litter control, stormwater
treatment maintenance, etc.), any necessary phasing
schedule, any necessary public improvements to be installed
by the developer, an acknowledgment that the owner is
responsible to obtain and comply with all applicable federal,
state, and local permits, and an expiration date after which
the PUD Development Plan may expire. The PUD
Development Plan would also include a master site plan,
and subdivision plan if applicable, with all of the normal
requirements for site plans and plats except as altered by
the PUD. An approved PUD Development Plan does not
constitute a reservation of public facility or infrastructure
capacity.
(2) PUD Expiration, Phasing, Deviations, and Amendments. A
PUD Development Plan may be allowed to expire after the
expiration date if City Council determines that substantial
progress has not been made, or is unlikely to be made, and
that the public interest would be better served by reverting
to the previous zoning. Prior to a City Council
determination regarding such expiration, the matter is to be
reviewed by the Planning Commission following the
procedures for a rezoning. An existing PUD would not
expire without an ordinance to that effect and City Council
may extend the stated expiration date of a PUD by
amending the ordinance. The PUD Development Plan
maybe structured in one or more phases with appropriate
engineering, architectural, and other drawings and
documents to be submitted at the appropriate time before
the construction of each phase. However, the PUD
Development Plan shall control future phases and any
substantial deviations will require amending the PUD
Development Plan ordinance. Proposed changes in
permitted uses, proposed decreases in approved setbacks by
more than twenty percent (20%), proposed increases in
approved building heights by more than twenty percent
(20%),significant relocation or redesign of proposed public
rights-of-way, significant stormwater management changes,
and changes deemed to be substantial deviations by the
Planning Commission will require an amendment to the
APP-C-139
PUD Development Plan to be approved by the City Council
after a review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission. Changes to the PUD Development Plan that
are not substantial deviations can be approved by the
Planning Commission. The PUD Development Plan shall be
advertised, posted, and heard by the Planning Commission
and the City Council in the same manner as are zoning, and
any amendment to an approved PUD Development Plan
shall be processed in the same manner. (as amended by Ord.
# 10, Jan. 2001, and Ord. #2008-21, June 2008)
4.2 Flood area overlay.
A. There is hereby created a flood area overlay zone. The extent of this
zone shall be as defined in the Cleveland Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance.
B. All construction and development shall conform to the requirements
of the Cleveland Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
4.3 Greenway overlay. [Reserved.]
4.4 Airport overlay. [Reserved.]
4.5 Infill development.
4.5.1 Purpose.
A. The infill development overlay district provides a means of varying
site design requirements on smaller sites. Infill development is that
development which occurs on scattered, non-contiguous sites where
surrounding properties have been developed under site design
standards which have been replaced by the current ordinance. These
sites often have development problems through the inability of the site
to meet current minimum requirements for lot area, lot width,
building placement in conformance with setbacks or buffer
requirements, or other standards. The purpose of infill development
standards is to provide a means to vary site design requirements from
current ordinance requirements and maintain compatibility with the
development style and patterns of the surround area.
B. Designation of an infill development district shall not be a rezoning.
APP-C-140
4.5.2 Site design requirements.
A. The maximum size to be considered for infill development shall be
1.99 acres.
B. The following site design standards may be varied.
(1) Lot width;
(2) Lot area;
(3) Front, side, and rear setbacks;
(4) Building orientation.
C. Each of the site design features in 4.5.2.b may be varied from the
requirements for the zoning district. The new infill development
standard shall be the average of the actual dimension for all lots on
the same and opposing block within three hundred feet (300') of the
boundary of the property in question.
(1) Actual setbacks, lot dimensions, and lot areas shall be
determined for each lot on the same and opposing block
within three hundred feet (300') of the boundary infill
development lot for purposes of calculating an average
(mean) for each standard to be imposed.
(2) These average standards shall be the minimum standards
required for proposed development.
(3) Where there is any uncertainty on an applicable standard,
the decision shall be in favor of the stricter standard.
(4) Building orientation shall conform to that for the
streetscape where the proposed infill development is
located. (as amended by Ord. #2013-48, Oct. 2013)
D. An infill development shall be compatible with adjacent and
surrounding uses. A compatibility analysis shall be provided which
demonstrates that the project does not create a greater impact on
adjacent and surrounding properties than other uses in the same
zoning district. Compatibility shall be measured according to scale of
development (setbacks, building widths and heights), building
orientation, building style and design, outdoor lighting, off-street
APP-C-141
parking, and normal hours of operation. The compatibility analysis
shall demonstrate that the proposed infill development use can exist
in harmony with the neighborhood through a positive finding on each
component of measurement.
4.6 Mobile homes and mobile home parks.
A. Definitions:
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used have their
customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the
context. For this purpose certain words or terms are defined as
follows:
1. Buffer strip shall mean an evergreen buffer which shall
consist of a greenbelt planted strip not less than ten (10)
feet in width. Such a greenbelt shall be composed of one
row of evergreen trees, spaced not more than forty (40) feet
apart and not less than two (2) rows of shrubs or hedge,
spaced not more than five (5) feet apart and which grow to
a height of five (5) feet or more after one full growing season
and which shrubs will eventually grow to not less than ten
(10) feet.
2. Lot of record is a lot the boundaries of which are filed as a
legal record in the Bradley County Register of Deeds office
prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
3. Mobile home (trailer) shall mean a detached single-family
dwelling unit with any or all of the following characteristics:
a. Is not self-propelled, but is transportable on its own
or detachable wheels, or on a flat bedded or other
trailer, in one or more sections which in the traveling
mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width, or thirtyfive
(35) feet or more in length, or when erected on
site is three hundred twenty (320) feet or more
square feet;
b. A single, self-contained unit that is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling unit with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities;
APP-C-142
c. Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained therein; and
d. Includes any units which meet the definition of a
mobile home as defined by National Codes, Federal
Legislation, or Tennessee Code Annotated.
Except that such terms shall also include any
structure which meets all of the requirements of this
section, except the size requirements, provided the
manufacturer complies with the standards
established under Tennessee State Law.
4. Mobile home park is an area of land used by the landowner
for the accommodation of three (3) or more mobile homes to
be used for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
5. Mobile home space is an area of land used or intended for
the use of one mobile home.
6. Mobile home subdivision is a subdivision of land specifically
created to accommodate mobile homes on individual lots
which are sold in fee simple.
7. Non-conforming use is a mobile home that is not located
either on a single lot of record as the principal structure or
in an approved mobile home park prior to the effective date
of this ordinance.
8. Principal structure is the mobile home used as the main
residential structure on the lot.
9. Skirting is the permanent enclosure of the space between
the ground and the floor of the mobile home unit with
weather resistant, compatible materials.
B. Plan R-4 zoning, permits required. A process is required for mobile
home parks and travel parks. Fees charged under the permit
requirement are for inspection and the administration. Property must
be zoned R-4 and a mobile home park plan approved by the Cleveland
Municipal Planning Commission prior to the issuance of a permit.
APP-C-143
C. Location of mobile homes restricted. The location of a mobile home is
allowed inside the Cleveland Corporate Limits only in either of the
following situations:
1. An existing mobile home, located on a single lot as the
principal structure and serviced by public utilities on the
effective date of this ordinance; or
2. An approved mobile home park.
D. Upgrade of substandard or single lot mobile home. A single mobile
home, located on a lot of record as the principal structure on the
effective date of this ordinance, may be upgraded by replacement
under the following conditions:
1. The replacement mobile home unit is five (5) years old or
less on the date the unit is placed on the lot;
2. Complete skirting of the replacement unit, using weather
resistant materials that are similar to the new mobile home.
E. Non-conforming use--remedy. The owner or occupant of any nonconforming
mobile home already placed on a lot, on or before
will be permitted to reside at the present location. However, if at any
time the ownership or occupancy of either the lot or mobile home shall
change or if such mobile home owner shall change, the owner shall be
given a period not to exceed thirty (30) days in which to remove such
mobile home and to comply with all provisions of this chapter.
F. Administration and enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city
building inspector to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The city building inspector is hereby authorized and directed
to make inspections to determine the condition of mobile home parks.
The city building inspector shall have the power to enter at reasonable
times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting
and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this
ordinance.
G. Compliance. To insure compliance with the provisions of the mobile
home ordinance, utility services will be connected only when the
mobile home has been found by the chief building inspector to meet
applicable code requirements and the chief building inspector has
issued the appropriate permit(s).
APP-C-144
Cleveland Utilities, Electric and Water Division, shall be presented
with a copy of the mobile home permit, signed by the chief building
inspector, as part of the owner(s) application for utility services.
Should the owner or applicant fail to provide a signed copy of the
permit, Cleveland Utilities shall deny service until the proper
procedure to acquire permit(s) is completed.
H. AUTHORIZATION. The chief building inspector is authorized to
suspend or revoke a mobile home or mobile home park permit in cases
where the owner(s) failure to comply with the provisions of this
ordinance or other applicable city code has resulted in a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
I. MINIMUM SIZE. The tract of land for the mobile home park shall
comprise an area of not less than one and one-half (1 ½) acres. The
tract of land shall consist of a single plot so dimensioned and related
as to facilitate efficient design and management.
J. MINIMUM NUMBER OF SPACES. Minimum number of spaces
completed and ready for occupancy before first occupancy is three (3).
K. MOBILE HOME PARK DESIGN STANDARDS.
1. SITE REQUIREMENTS. Each mobile home park shall be
located outside of flood hazard areas on a well-drained site.
2. MINIMUM MOBILE HOME PARK SIZE. One and one-half
(1 ½) acres.
3. SIZE OF MOBILE HOME SPACES. Each mobile home
space shall be at least four thousand (4,000) square feet,
including parking area, with a minimum width of forty (40)
feet. Each mobile home located in a mobile home park shall
be situated such that there is at least:
a. Ten (10) feet from the mobile home to any adjacent
property line;
b. Twenty-five (25) feet from the mobile home to any
public street right-of-way;
c. Ten (10) feet from the mobile home to any private
roads or access drives within the mobile home park;
APP-C-145
d. Ten (10) feet of clear and open space between the
mobile home and any adjacent mobile home and its
attachments, and between the mobile home and any
other buildings;
4. Applications for a mobile home park shall be filed with and
issued by the city building inspector subject to the planning
commission's approval of the mobile home park plan.
Applications shall be in writing and signed by the applicant
and shall be accompanied with an approved plan of the
proposed mobile home park. The plan shall contain the
following information and conform to the following
requirements:
a. The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale
not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one inch;
b. Name and address of owner of record;
c. Proposed name of park;
d. North point and graphic scale and date;
e. Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the
mobile home park;
f. Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and
distance;
g. Names of owners of record of adjoining land;
h. Existing streets, utilities, easements, and
watercourses on and adjacent to the tract;
i. Proposed design including streets, proposed street
names, lot lines with approximate dimensions,
easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public
uses, and any land to be used for purposes other than
mobile home spaces;
j. Provisions for water supply, sewerage and drainage;
APP-C-146
k. Such information as may be required by such city to
enable it to determine if the proposed park will
comply with legal requirements;
l. The applications and all accompanying plans and
specifications shall be filed in triplicate.
5. Certificates that shall be required are:
a. Owners certification;
b. Planning commission's approval signed by the
chairman; and
c. Any other certification deemed necessary by the
planning commission.
L. STREET CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. Same as city minimum
construction standards for acceptance of streets dedicated to the city
for use and maintenance of public ways.
M. APPEALS. Any party aggrieved because of an alleged error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building
inspector in the enforcement of this ordinance may appeal for and
receive a hearing by the Cleveland Board on Zoning Appeals (BZA),
(advised by the city attorney) for an interpretation of pertinent
chapter provisions. In exercising this power of interpretation of the
chapter, the Cleveland Board on Zoning Appeals, with advice from the
city attorney, may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance,
reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the building inspector.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the BZA may seek review by
a court of records of such decision in the manner provided by the laws
of the state.
N. MOBILE HOMES OR PARKS IN ANNEXED AREAS. A mobile home
or mobile home park that is annexed into the Cleveland corporate
limits and is found to be of substandard condition or not in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance and/or the Standard Housing
Code, Southern Building Code Congress International, as amended
shall be provided a period of not to exceed two (2) years from the
effective date of annexation to comply with applicable law. Should the
owner(s) fail to comply within the time provided, the unit(s) shall be
APP-C-147
declared as a non-conforming use by the chief building inspector or
housing official, as appropriate, and the provisions of the Cleveland
Municipal Zoning Ordinance, § 10-206, non-conforming uses shall
apply to remedy the non-conforming use.
O. CHARGES. Fees shall be charged as follows for mobile home park
permits:
1. PERMIT FEE. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per
mobile home unit space in addition to the basic permits as
provided by city law as amended.
2. ANNUAL OPERATING FEE. An annual fee of ten dollars
($10.00) per mobile home unit space, payable by June 30 of
each year is required to operate a mobile home park inside
the city limits.
4.6.1 Animal hospitals, sound transmission class.
"Animal hospitals, as permitted see Table 1, provided that the finished structure
attain a Sound Transmission Class rating of a minimum of 50 db, except for
areas designed for office, administrative or other areas where animals are not
treated or boarded...sanitary facilities design to aid in cleansing, and
maintaining the building's interior shall be incorporated into the materials used
to construct the building."
4.7 NONCONFORMING USES AND DEVELOPMENT.
Any lawful use of building or land existing at the time of the enactment of this
ordinance, or whenever a district is changed by an amendment thereafter, may
be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of this
ordinance, with the following limitations:
4.7.1 Continuation of nonconforming use. No building or land containing
a nonconforming use, except commercial and industrial uses as
provided by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-7-208, shall hereafter be
extended unless such extension shall conform with the provisions of
this ordinance for the district in which it is located; provided, however,
that a nonconforming use may be extended throughout those parts of
a building which were manifestly designed for such use prior to the
time of enactment of this ordinance;
Any building or site containing a lawful nonconforming use shall not
be changed to any other nonconforming use unless it is determined by
APP-C-148
the Planning Commission that such use is less offensive than the
previous use;
4.7.2 Rebuilding of nonconforming use. Any nonconforming building which
has been damaged by fire or other cause may be reconstructed and
used as before unless the building inspector determines that the
building is damaged to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its
appraised value for tax purposes, in which case any repair or
reconstruction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance;
4.7.3 Amortization of nonconforming uses.
Any salvage yard and recycling center meeting the requirements of
section 2.11 and continuing to operate in accordance with section 2.22
may continue for a period of 2 years from May 9, 2016. (as replaced by
Ord. #2016-17, June 2016)
4.7.4 Special policy within central city area. In the area bounded by Inman
Street to the north, APD-40 to the south, Wildwood Avenue and
Dalton Pike to the east, and Ocoee Street and Blue Springs Road to
the west, there are areas of single-family residential development that
are zoned for industrial use. This was done when Cleveland had a
pyramid zoning structure that allowed residential development in
industrial zones but this is no longer the case so these homes have
become non-conforming uses. Decades of economic and technological
change together with relocation of nearby industry indicate the need
for redevelopment within this area, including new and rehabilitated
housing. Industrially zoned residential sites that have long been in
residential use, especially where these are clustered and not located
adjacent to the railroad, arterial streets, or truck routes, can be
important areas for reinvestment in housing that will support
area-wide redevelopment and assist current residents in staying in
the area should they so choose as well as new residents who may wish
to move into the area. Therefore, where the Cleveland Municipal
Planning Commission has determined that an industrially zoned oneor
two-family dwelling meets the locational criteria described in this
paragraph, and that the aforesaid dwelling has received substantial
recent upgrades or repairs, the Planning Commission will issue a
written determination that the dwelling can be re-built if damaged
beyond 50% of its appraised value, paragraph 4.7.2 notwithstanding.
In order to obtain such a determination from the Planning
Commission, it is the responsibility of the owner to make the request
in writing and to supply all necessary documentation of recent
APP-C-149
upgrades and repairs. (as amended by Ord. #2013-38, Aug. 2013, and
Ord. #2014-04, Feb. 2014)
4.8 YARD PARKING OVERLAY
Based upon a petition from property owners within a defined neighborhood area
and the advice of the Cleveland Municipal Planning Commission, the City
Council may amend the official zoning map, following proper procedures for such
an amendment, to apply the Yard Parking Overlay district described herein. It
is the intent of this district to protect the public welfare by mitigating the effects
of heavy parking use in historically single-family neighborhoods by controlling
parking in street-side yard areas and limiting the conversion of yard areas into
gravel or hard surface parking areas so as to protect neighborhood aesthetics
and environmental quality.
A. Vehicle parking in front or side yard areas of a lot or parcel lying
between a single-family residential structure and a property line that
adjoins a public right-of-way shall be limited to the area of the
hard-surface or gravel driveway unless such parking occurs within a
garage or under a carport. Vehicle parking in side yards not adjoining
public rights-of-way or in rear yards shall be screened by means of a
hedge or privacy fence. Nothing herein shall be construed as allowing
the location of a garage or carport or fence except where otherwise
allowed by the zoning ordinance.
B. Hard-surface or gravel driveway or parking areas shall not be
constructed such that these cause the lot or parcel to be in violation
APP-C-150
of the zoning ordinance requirements related to impervious or
pervious surfaces or green space.
C. The total of hard-surface or gravel driveway or parking areas on the
lot or parcel with a single-family home shall not exceed 15% of the lot
area, excluding any area in the "flag stem" of a flag stem lot and any
area underneath the roof of a permanently constructed garage or
carport. The area of the house, excluding the garage or carport, shall
not be counted toward the 15% of the lot area for purposes of this
paragraph.
(as added by Ord. #2008-12, April 2008)
APP-C-151
5.0 SIGN REGULATIONS.
5.1. Purpose and Intent of the Sign Regulations
The purpose and intent of these regulations is to provide for the public health,
safety, convenience, and general welfare through the regulation of signs within
the City of Cleveland, Tennessee. Among the specific intentions are to limit
visibility hazards along and adjacent to roadways, to protect utilities and
drainage structures from encroachment and damage from sign installation, to
protect the community and its roadway corridors from visual clutter, and to
protect the community and its environment from discarded, damaged, or
improperly installed signs. It is not the purpose of these sign regulations to
regulate speech.
5.2. Sign Standards
Section 5.2.1 below presents general standards for all signs and standards for
specific types of signs under various circumstances. These general standards are
each denoted by an alphabetic character and are shown in bold type. Text
beneath each general standard provides guidance for implementing the
standard. Critical to understanding the application of these standards in
particular circumstances are the administration and definitions sections found
further below.
5.2.1. General Sign Standards
5.2.1.A. No part of any sign shall be located within 5 feet of any public
right-of-way except as expressly provided herein.
No part of any sign that is regulated by this ordinance shall be located
in any public right-of-way or within 5 feet of any public right-of-way
(actual or presumed right-of-way location as described herein). In the
absence of survey information to establish the actual right-of-way
location, the presumed location of the right-of-way (see drawing below)
will be determined by a line, curve, or series of line segments that
approximately parallels the roadway edge of pavement and is tangent
to the inside (opposite the roadway) of public utility poles on either
side of the existing or proposed sign location. If the presumed
right-of-way location can not be determined in the previously
described manner due to unusually complicating factors, the
presumed right-of-way will be assumed to be not less than 10 feet
from the existing edge of pavement of the adjacent roadway. The
presumed right-of-way method may be used to determine the proper
location of portable signs and other signs except ground signs that
APP-C-152
require building permits and engineered plans. Ground signs
requiring building permits and engineered plans shall require a
survey meeting the requirements of this ordinance.
5.2.1.B. No sign shall be located so as to impede the travel of pedestrians.
No sign shall be located so as to impede the travel of pedestrians,
including those in wheelchairs and motorized chairs, who are
traveling in public sidewalks, or so as to force pedestrians to detour
around the sign by using a travel or turning lane of a public street
where there is no adjacent public sidewalk.
5.2.1.C. No sign shall be produced or built or erected or installed or located in
a manner that violates any applicable building, electrical, fire, or life
safety code.
Where required by any applicable building, electrical, fire, or life
safety code, any mandatory plan review, permit, or approval shall be
obtained prior to the installation of a sign. Any sign requiring a
building permit shall also require a sign permit.
5.2.1.D. No sign shall be located in a manner that would interfere with the
safe and convenient operation and maintenance of a utility.
Compliance with this standard with respect to electrical facilities shall
be determined by the application of clearance standards found in the
2007 National Electric Safety Code. Any sign installation which would
otherwise be required to go through the Tennessee One Call system
for the protection of underground utilities must go through that
process for underground utility location. In the absence of stricter
conditions of any utility easement or applicable code, no part of any
sign structure may be located within 4 feet of any above-ground or
APP-C-153
underground utility facility or any public or privately maintained
drainage structure, unless specifically approved in writing by the
affected utility and the City Engineer (the foregoing prohibition does
not affect the separation of portable signs from above ground drainage
facilities and utility facilities except energized above-ground electrical
facilities).
5.2.1.E. No sign shall be located so as to impede visibility by turning motorists.
Observance of required setbacks is important to maintaining visibility
but the topography and other features near a sign may also affect
where it is possible to safely locate the sign. At an exit drive where the
view of oncoming traffic or a conflicting turn movement could be
obscured by the location of a sign, the sign face is to be located not
higher than 30 inches from the ground or not lower than 7 feet from
the ground.
APP-C-154
Visibility triangles on adjacent streets are to be preserved in accordance with
the drawing below:
5.2.1.F. No sign shall be an animated sign as defined herein.
This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, flashing lights and
strobe lights inside building windows that are visible from the public
right-of-way. Also prohibited are sign designs that incorporate motion
through mechanical, electrical, wind-activated, water-activated, or
similar means. These prohibitions apply to billboards and all other
types of signs visible from the public right-of-way except as otherwise
provided herein.
5.2.1.G. No sign of any type that is situated on private property and visible
from a public right-of-way shall be made to resemble a traffic control
device.
APP-C-155
Traffic control devices are described in the Uniform Manual of Traffic
Control Devices (can be viewed in the City Engineer's office). What is
prohibited here is the use of devices like stop signs or traffic signals
as a sign to attract attention to a business, property, product, or
service rather than for their proper use in traffic control. This is not
intended to preclude the placement of appropriate signage for the
purpose of traffic control on private driveways (e.g. "stop", "yield to
pedestrians", etc.), including in those areas near the intersection of
such private driveways with public rights-of-way.
5.2.1.H. No sign of any type shall be allowed to be situated on any property
except as allowed by this ordinance.
This ordinance regulates signs that are intended by their size,
placement, or other characteristics to be read from the public
right-of-way or to attract the attention of persons in the public
right-of-way. This rule is not intended to prohibit signs that otherwise
comply with this ordinance where their visibility from the public
right-of-way is merely incidental and it is evident from the size and
placement of the sign and/or the size of the sign copy that it is
intended exclusively for persons on the property where it is located.
5.2.1.I. Signs shall be kept in good repair, or replaced or removed.
No part of the sign copy, sign backing, or sign structure shall be
allowed to remain in place if it is bent, torn, ripped, tattered, frayed,
broken, cracked, faded, dirty, rusted, rotted, warped, or with blistered
or peeling paint, or otherwise visibly damaged or damaged in any
other way. This rule is not intended to create an unreasonable
requirement that signs be kept in a pristine state but it is intended to
require that they remain safe, functional, and reasonably
well-maintained so as to not become a hazard or a blighting influence.
If a sign is bent over, illegible due to fading, in danger of falling,
unsafe in its electrical connections, full of holes, blowing loose, or
otherwise showing clear signs of a lack of reasonable maintenance, it
must be repaired, replaced, or removed.
5.2.1.J Sign display area for a given sign shall not exceed the maximum
allowed by this ordinance.
The maximum allowable area in square feet is given for the sign
display area or sign backing for each sign types in the rules specific to
each sign type. A procedure for measurement is described below.
APP-C-156
Sign display area shall be measured according to the procedures
outlined herein. (In the several illustrations that follow, height is
denoted by a and length is denoted by b, with a times b being the
formula for a rectangle used to calculate the sign display area.) In
cases where a permit is required the applicant must submit an
elevation drawing of the proposed sign with the necessary dimensions
and calculation of the sign display area. Where a permit is not
required, the Building Official may perform a courtesy check of the
proposed sign display area if a drawing with the appropriate
information is supplied (signs are not allowed to exceed the maximum
allowable size regardless of whether a permit is required).
(1) Where there is a discernable sign display area that is
distinguished from other parts of the sign structure by a
frame or border, or by a variation in color, texture, or
material so that the sign display area can be distinguished
as a polygon from the rest of the sign structure, draw the
smallest rectangle that will fit around the polygon [see
below for specific instructions on sign cabinets]. Where one
or more frames or borders are used to form the polygon, the
measurement shall be from the inside edge of outermost
frame or border. Within a single sign structure, there may
be more than one such polygon, i.e. more than one
discernable sign display area, and the total of the areas for
the rectangles drawn around these polygons will be the sign
display area. When calculating the sign display area,
subtract any overlapping area between two or more of the
rectangles.
APP-C-157
(2) Where there is no discernable sign display area and sign
copy is painted on or affixed to a surface such as a wall or
monument sign structure, the sign area measurement shall
be done through the grouping of individual elements of the
sign copy. Symbols and drawings, and text and numeric sign
copy, including any words, letters, numerals, and
punctuation, that can be connected by line segments of 10
feet or less in length will be grouped together and the
smallest rectangle that will fit around this grouping will be
drawn. Beginning with the symbol, drawing, word, letter,
numeral, or punctuation closest to the upper left edge of the
sign structure, work downward and to the right drawing
connecting line segments of not more than ten feet in length
between any two symbols, drawings, words, letters,
numerals and punctuation that can be connected in this
manner to form a sign copy grouping. This sign copy
grouping is to be enclosed in the smallest possible rectangle.
Continue this process until rectangles have been formed
around all words, letters, numerals, and punctuation on the
sign structure. The combined area of the rectangles drawn
for all sign copy groupings on a sign structure is the sign
display area. When calculating the sign display area,
subtract any overlapping area between two or more of the
rectangles.
APP-C-158
(3) Sign display areas may exist on more than one sign face on
a single sign structure; this is particularly the case with
ground signs, canopy signs, and projecting signs but could
also exist with other sign types. Sign display area should be
calculated for all sign faces to determine the total sign
display area for a given sign but where two sign faces
overlap such that they are back-to-back or separated by an
interior angle of 30 degrees or less the total sign display
area should be adjusted to count the sign display area on
only one of these sign faces in the overlapping area.
APP-C-159
(4) In the case of a banner sign, the sign display area is the
smallest rectangle into which the banner will fit when
pulled taut.
APP-C-160
(5) In the case of signs with sign cabinets with interior lighting
or backlighting, e.g. most Type C portable signs, the method
described above for a discernable sign display area shall be
followed for calculating the sign display area except that the
polygon will be determined by the interior dimensions of the
sign display cabinet.
(6) Where sign copy is to be located on a curved or other
irregular surface, the dimensions of the sign display area
are to be measured as if a flexible measuring tape were
stretched across the surface and these dimensions are to be
transferred to a single plane and enclosed by the smallest
rectangle that will include them, otherwise following the
procedures described above for signs with or without a
discernable sign display area, as the case may be.
APP-C-161
5.2.1.K. Lighting of signs shall not be such that it causes discomfort or
distraction for passing motorists and pedestrians or such that it
otherwise violates this ordinance or other applicable law. Lighting of
signs, whether internally or externally lighted, and lighted copy signs
are subjects of these sign regulations. Brightness of the illumination
of signs shall not be such that it causes discomfort or distraction for
passing motorists and pedestrians, and LED (light emitting diode) and
similar electronic signs shall be deemed to be causing discomfort and
distraction if they fail to meet the guidelines described herein.
Electronic reader boards, electronic message centers, LED (light
emitting diode) signs and the like shall be equipped with and operated
with automatic dimming devices that reduce the brightness of the
display during cloudy or dark conditions. It is intended that such LED
signs and similar signs be no brighter than is necessary to be visible
and legible to motorists and pedestrians in the immediate vicinity
during daylight or dark conditions and it is not intended that such
signs would be substantially more visible and legible from a greater
distance than traditional on-site signs with back-lighting. [Guidelines
for LED and similar technology: maximum brightness for signs using
LED (light-emitting diode) or other lighting technology where the light
source is used to compose the sign copy should not exceed 300 nits
under nighttime conditions. A nit equals Candelas per meter squared
(cd/m2). A Candela is the amount of luminous flux (total luminous
power emitted from a source and expressed in Lumens) per unit solid
angle in a given direction. A Lumen is the luminous flux emitted per
unit solid angle from a uniform point source whose luminous intensity
is 1 Candela. D e f i n i t i o n s f r o m M a r k t e c h O p t o e l e c t r
o n i c s www.marktechopto.com/Engineering-Services.]
Electronic reader boards, electronic message centers, LED (light
emitting diode) signs, and the like shall not be within 300' of any
residential zoning district unless the view from residences is obscured.
The sign display area shall be no more than 50 square feet.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned size requirement, commercial
complexes with over 100,000 square feet of finished floor space that is
either under common ownership or part of a common development
plan that includes a signage agreement that allots the allowable LED
signage area, and is located within the Commercial Highway zoning
district shall be permitted one square foot of LED wall signs and the
like for every 1000 square foot of finished floor space but not exceeding
over 200 square feet total nor 100 square feet in any one sign.
Lighting of signs shall not be done in a manner so as to produce
motion or animation as defined herein; however, this is not intended
APP-C-162
to prohibit the scrolling of an image onto a sign face provided that the
entirety of the sign copy remains stationary for a period of at least six
seconds. The lighting of the sign shall be sustained and not flashing
or blinking or pulsing. The focus of external lighting shall be on the
sign backing and shall be shielded so as to prevent glare onto an
adjacent public right-of-way or into the eyes of motorists or onto
adjacent property. Where external lights are mounted below a sign, at
or near ground level, they shall be shielded by landscaping on the side
opposite the sign. Monument signs, pole signs, wall signs, canopy
signs, awning signs, roof signs, and Type C portable signs are allowed
to be internally or externally illuminated except where otherwise
prohibited by this ordinance. (as amended by Ord. #2014-24, June
2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-07, March 2015)
5.2.1.L. No sign that is regulated by this ordinance and which is an
off-premise sign with a sign display area greater than 32 square feet
is allowed unless it conforms to the regulations in this ordinance for
billboards.
5.2.2. Specific Standards by Sign Type
5.2.2.A. Ground Signs (not Portable)
(1) Sign permits are required.
(2) Building permits shall be obtained for ground signs where
required by the Building Code. The Building Official may
require plans sealed and signed by a Tennessee-registered
professional engineer (criteria for determining whether
engineered plans are required are if the sign display area
exceeds 100 square feet, or if the sign will be over 20 feet
tall, or if engineered plans are otherwise required by the
Building Code or by Tennessee's Board of Architectural and
Engineering Examiners). Ground signs requiring building
permits and engineered plans shall require a survey of the
property frontage along which the sign is to be located
showing the center line of the roadway, the existing edge of
pavement, any utilities and utility easements, any drainage
structures, any driveways and sidewalks, and any other
permanent structures, signs and traffic control devices. The
survey shall identify the location of the proposed sign and
cover the property to a depth of at least 5 feet behind all
parts of the proposed sign along the entire width of the
APP-C-163
property frontage. In the case of a corner lot, the foregoing
survey information shall be provided for both frontages.
(3) Sign structures exceeding 15 feet in height from the ground
shall not have a width as measured horizontally in an
exterior elevation view at any point above the ground,
exclusive of any sign display area or sign backing, which is
more than 50% of the sign's height.
(4) Developments with residential or non-residential uses may
have monument or pole signs subject to the provisions of
this ordinance (mixed uses that are 25% or more residential
by land area or floor area are treated as non-residential
development for ground signage calculation). Each
development is entitled to at least one monument or pole
sign along its primary street frontage, with the maximum
sign display area of said sign to be determined by the table
below, provided that the building(s) is at least 10 feet
behind the public right-of-way along that frontage. The
limits on the number and size of allowable ground signs are
determined by considering the rules in this section
governing ground signs in conjunction with the following
table:
Allowable Ground
Sign(s)
Development Type Development Size Adjacent Roadway
Frontage(s)
2 (but zero if fewer
than 10 dwelling units
or residential lots).
Sign display area 32
sq. ft. or less per sign
Residential
subdivision or
multi-unit residential
development
10 or more dwelling
units or residential
lots
NA
1 per adjoining 2-lane
street with at least
100 feet of frontage.
Sign display area not
to exceed 100 sq. ft.
Non-residential Less than 3 ac or less
than 100,000 under
single roof
2 travel lanes
1 per adjoining 4-lane
street with at least
100 feet of frontage.
Sign display area not
to exceed 150 sq. ft.
Non-residential Less than 3 ac or less
than 100,000 sq. ft.
under single roof
4 or more travel lanes
APP-C-164
1 per adjoining street
with at least 100 feet
of frontage. Sign
display area not to
exceed 300 sq. ft. in 1
ground sign and not
more than 150 sq. ft.
in other ground
sign(s).
Non-residential 3 ac or more or at least
100,000 sq. ft. under a
single roof
NA
(5) Where there is a tract, parcel, or lot of at least two acres in
size with commercial or industrial zoning (zoning for these
uses may also be through PUD process) that is within 1000
feet of an I-75 interchange, it is entitled to one (1) on-site
interstate-oriented sign that is at least 75 feet high provided
that no other sign on the property exceeds 60 feet in height.
A portion of the sign display area for this on-site
interstate-oriented sign may be a changeable copy sign that
can be an electronic sign presenting a monochromatic
display of alphanumeric characters without flashing,
motion, or the appearance of motion. This sign is in addition
to other ground sign(s) that may be located on the property.
However, this provision allowing an additional
interstate-oriented sign shall not apply if any other sign on
the property exceeds 60 feet in height. No sign installed in
accordance with this paragraph shall be an off-premise sign.
No sign installed under this paragraph shall be in violation
of the Tennessee Department of Transportation rules for
on-premise signs as promulgated in the administrative rules
for the control of outdoor advertising, most particularly in
1680-2-3-.06 of Tennessee's Administrative Rules. It is the
intent of this paragraph to allow a larger interstate-oriented
on-site sign with a larger changeable copy area for a larger
site if that sign advertises more than one on-site business
located on a larger site that otherwise meets the zoning and
distance criteria of this paragraph, in accordance with the
parameters in the table below:
On-Site Interstate Oriented Signs
Minimum Site Size
(Acres)
Minimum on-site
businesses on sign
Maximum sign display
area (square feet)
Maximum Changeable
Copy Area (square feet)
2.00-2.99 1 350 100
APP-C-165
3.00-3.99 2 600 200
4.00 and above 3 1000 300
(as amended by Ord. #2012-02, Feb. 2012)
5.2.2.B. Wall Signs, Canopy Signs, and Awning Signs
(1) The signable square footage for all wall signs, canopy signs,
and awning signs, individually or in combination, shall not
exceed 40% of the area of the facade on which they are
located. The signable square footage may be allocated over
the façade in one or more sign display areas. The sign
backing for any portable signs (e.g. banners) displayed as
wall signs would count toward the 40%. The sign display
area of any mansard sign and/or roof sign shall be counted
against the maximum allowable wall signage.
(2) No sign backing or sign structure for a wall sign, canopy
sign, or awning sign shall be located so as prevent a door or
window from operating as designed, or in a manner which
blocks any fire escape, building drainage, ventilation, or any
required clearance for any mechanical equipment, or any
utility connection or fire department connection.
(3) Building permits shall be obtained for wall signs, canopy
signs, and awning signs where required by the Building
Code. The sign installer or property owner will be required
to demonstrate that the existing and proposed wall signage
do not exceed the maximum allowable wall signage. An
engineered plan will be required by the Building Official if
an engineered plan is otherwise required by the Building
Code or the requirements of Tennessee's Board of
Architectural and Engineering Examiners.
(4) Wall signs, canopy signs, and awning signs in R1, R2, R3,
R4, and RA zoning districts are not allowed on residential
structures containing fewer than five dwelling units and are
not allowed to be internally or externally lighted.
APP-C-166
5.2.2.C. Portable Signs
Characteristics of Portable Sign Types
Size Lighting Electronics
Type A 4 square feet or less Not Allowed Not Allowed
Type B More than 4 sq. ft. but
not more than 32 sq.
ft.
Not Allowed Not Allowed
Type C 32 sq. ft. or less Allowed Allowed
For purposes of this ordinance, all portable signs which have four
square feet or less of sign backing and which are not designed to
incorporate lighting or other electronics shall be classified as Type A
portable signs; portable signs which have more than four square feet
of sign backing and which are not designed to incorporate lighting or
other electronics shall be classified as Type B portable signs; and
portable signs which are designed to incorporate lighting or other
electronics shall be classified as Type C portable signs.
(1) No portable sign of any type shall have a sign display area
greater than 32 square feet.
(2) All Type C portable signs shall be legibly marked with the
name, address, and telephone number of the sign owner.
(3) No flashing or intermittent lights shall be activated on or
within a Type C portable sign. Type A and Type B signs
shall not be lighted or illuminated in any way except
through incidental ambient light in the sign location.
(4) No part of any portable sign shall be at a height of greater
than 10 feet from the ground except within five feet of a
building or building canopy.
(5) No part of any portable sign shall be within 10 feet of a
driveway entrance to a public street.
(6) Type B and Type C portable signs shall be configured and
installed so as not to present a hazard during wind events.
Type B portable signs with a sign backing of more than 16
square feet must utilize a lightweight sign backing and
APP-C-167
avoid heavy, dense material such as plywood. Type C
portable signs must be installed according to the
instructions of the manufacturer so as to avoid being blown
over or torn down in a 80 mph wind event, or installed so as
to turn over once and then remain in place in such a wind
event (in such case, installation shall allow a clear area
equal to the height of the sign on either side of it).
(7) The sign backing of portable signs that are displayed as wall
signs will be counted in determining whether the sign
display area for wall signs is being exceeded.
(8) Type A, Type B, and Type C portable signs do not require
building permits or sign permits but they must otherwise
comply with the requirements of this ordinance.
(9) No portable sign of any type shall be located on any
property without the express permission of the owner of
that property.
(10) This paragraph addresses standards for portable signs of all
types. Unless otherwise stated, or unless modified by a
zoning overlay district, the sign standards stated for each
land use type shall apply in all zoning districts. No portable
sign of any type that is on a lot, tract, or parcel developed
with only residential use(s) shall be more than 4 feet in
height.. The table below gives the number of portable signs
of each type that are allowed on a tract, lot, or parcel of a
given size and a given land use (for purposes of this table
home occupations do count as non-residential uses):
Type A Type B Type C
0.49 ac. Or less 4 if residential land
use; 5 if
non-residential land
use; 1 if vacant land
0 if residential land
use or vacant land; 1 if
non-residential land
use
0 if residential land
use or vacant land; 1 if
non-residential land
use
0.5 to 0.99 ac. 5 if residential land
use; 6 if
non-residential land
use; 2 if vacant land
1 if residential land
use or vacant land; 2 if
non-residential land
use
0 if residential land
use or vacant land; 1 if
non-residential land
use
APP-C-168
Type A Type B Type C
1.0 to 2.99 ac. 6 if residential land
use; 8 if
non-residential land
use; 3 if vacant land
1 if residential land
use or vacant land; 3 if
non-residential land
use
0 if residential land
use or vacant land; 2 if
non-residential land
use
3.0 ac. or more 7 if residential land
use; 12 if
non-residential land
use; 4 if vacant land
2 if residential land
use or vacant land; 4 if
non-residential land
use
0 if residential land
use or vacant land; 3 if
non-residential land
use
5.2.2.D. Projecting signs
(1) Projecting signs shall not extend outward from the building,
canopy, or awning to which they are attached by a distance
of more than two feet.
(2) The lowest portion of any projecting sign over a public or
private sidewalk shall not be lower than eight feet and shall
not extend lower than the opening of a door if said sign is
located above a door.
(3) Projecting signs shall not extend into an area that is above
or below overhead electric lines unless approved by the
utility.
(4) Building permits shall be obtained if required by the
Building Code. Engineered plans will be required by the
Building Official if the sign display area exceeds 10 square
feet or if engineered plans are otherwise required by the
Building Code or by the Tennessee Board of Architectural
and Engineering Examiners.
(5) The maximum sign display area for a projecting sign is 50
square feet. Projecting signs are not allowed in the R1, R2,
R3, R4, and RA zoning districts.
5.2.2.E. Roof Signs and Mansard Signs
(1) Building permits are required for roof signs and mansard
signs and these permits shall require plans by a
Tennessee-licensed professional engineer. The plans must
demonstrate that the roof or mansard is capable of
APP-C-169
supporting the proposed sign and that other building code
requirements are met.
(2) Neither a roof sign nor a mansard sign shall exceed 150
square feet in sign display area.
(3) Roof signs and mansard signs are not allowed in the R1, R2,
R3, R4, R5, and RA zoning districts.
(4) The sign display area of any roof and/or mansard sign shall
be counted against the maximum allowable sign display
area for the façade that is visible in the same elevation as
the roof and/or mansard sign.
5.2.2.F. Window Signs
There is no limit on the size or number of window signs as defined by
this ordinance. Window signs are subject to general standards of this
ordinance. In the case of window sign that requires building or
electrical permits by an applicable building or electrical code, those
permits shall be obtained. If the code requiring a building or electrical
permit also requires an engineered plan or if such plan is required by
the Tennessee Board of Architectural and Engineering Examiners,
then an engineered plan will be required.
5.2.2.G. Incidental Signs
Incidental signs as defined in this ordinance are allowed and they are
not counted toward any other limits imposed by this ordinance in
terms of the total number of signs or total amount of sign display area.
Incidental signs shall otherwise conform to the general sign standards
of this ordinance.
5.2.2.H. Entrance/Exit Signs
One of these signs may be located on each side of each driveway
serving a non-residential land use or multi-family residential
development. These signs cannot exceed 30 inches in height or 2
square feet in sign display area. If illuminated, they must be
internally illuminated and only bright enough to be seen by vehicles
in the immediate vicinity. A permit is required unless the property
owner installs a two-square-foot Type A portable sign to serve as an
entrance/exit sign (such a portable sign would not be counted against
the limits on the numbers of portable signs). These signs may be
APP-C-170
located within 5 feet of the right-of-way or presumed right-of-way but
not within such right-of-way.
5.3. Wall Murals
Wall murals are allowed in non-residential zoning districts but not in
any historic zoning overlay district or PUD unless specifically
authorized by the City Council. Wall murals are not allowed in the R1,
R2, R3, R4, R5, and RA zoning districts. No permit is required to
install a wall mural. Any wall mural that is installed must be kept in
good repair, including the removal of graffiti and the repair of peeling,
damaged, and defaced areas. Wall murals that are not kept in good
repair must be removed or repaired.
5.4. Bench Signs, Bus Shelter Signs, and Street Furniture Signs
Bench signs, bus shelter signs, and street furniture signs are
prohibited in public right-of-ways and within public parks and
greenways except as part of a signage plan or streetscape plan or
transit stop plan approved by the City Council, including any lawful
revenues to the City of Cleveland and/or its transit operator through
the lease of advertising space in such venues or lawful public/private
ventures to provide such benches, bus shelters, or other street
furniture.
5.5. Kiosks
Kiosks are not to be located within 10 feet of a public right-of-way
without review and approval of an engineered site plan by the City's
Site Plan Review Committee. Kiosks shall be designed and
constructed to meet an 80 mph wind load and other requirements of
the applicable building codes. A building permit is required for the
construction of a kiosk. Except as modified by this section, kiosks shall
conform to the general standards of the sign regulations as these
concern location, protection of utilities, maintenance of the kiosk in
good repair, and visibility for motorists. The owner of the kiosk shall
ensure that the messages posted on it are removed every 30 days to
maintain the appearance of the kiosk and to prevent litter. The sign
display area within a kiosk shall not exceed 40 square feet. Animation
and animated sign copy shall not be allowed within a kiosk, except a
single-screen display not exceeding 20 square inches.
APP-C-171
5.6. Billboards
Billboards are allowed in the CH, IL, and IH zoning districts as
principally permitted uses. Billboards are allowed as principally
permitted uses in those portions of the CG and PI zoning districts
which are within 200 feet of the Interstate 75 right-of-way, and in that
portion of the CG zoning district within 1200 feet of the Interstate 75
right-of-way where there is frontage on a street with four or more
lanes if the aforesaid street directly connects with an I-75 interchange.
Billboards are allowed as a conditional use in the B zone. Billboards
can be allowed in a PUD district if specified as a permitted use.
Though not considered an accessory use, they may be co-located with
other uses on the same site. The following rules are specific to
billboards:
5.6.1. Billboards must be spaced a minimum of five hundred (500) feet apart
measured in a straight line distance on the same side of a street and
a minimum of four hundred (400) feet apart measured from a radius
of each billboard location. In applying this rule "same side of a street"
shall mean the primary public street toward which a sign display area
or sign face of a billboard is oriented and from which it is intended to
be observed by passing motorists, and the intent is that any part of
any two billboards along the same side of such street would be at least
500 feet apart. Likewise it is intended that no part of any billboard
shall be within a 400 foot radius of any part of another billboard.
5.6.2. No part of any billboard shall be located within three hundred feet
(300) feet of any R1, R2, R3, R4, or R5 zoning district. No part of any
billboard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any historic
site listed on the National Register of Historic Places or within five
hundred (500) feet of any historic preservation zoning district.
5.6.3. No part of any billboard shall overhang or be within 5 feet of the
public right-of-way and no part of any billboard shall overhang or be
within any utility easement.
5.6.4. No sign display area on a billboard sign face shall be greater than
three hundred (300) square feet. However, where billboards are
permitted within 660 feet of I-75 the maximum size of the total sign
display area shall be the maximum size for billboards set forth in the
State of Tennessee Department of Transportation Rules and
Regulations for the Control of Outdoor Advertising.
APP-C-172
5.6.5. The maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet measured from the
ground level, except in a location where permitted within 660 feet of
I-75 where the height shall be the same as those set forth in the State
of Tennessee Department of Transportation Rules and Regulations for
the Control of Outdoor Advertising. In no case shall the bottom of the
sign display area be less than 18 feet from the ground.
5.6.6. Billboards shall be constructed in accordance with the Building Code;
however, wood structures are prohibited. Billboards shall not be built,
installed or displayed except as free-standing structures. Billboards
shall not be built, installed, or displayed as wall signs, awning signs,
or roof signs.
5.6.7. A building permit and a sign permit are required to install a billboard.
Billboards must be installed by properly licensed contractors and
permits will be issued by the Building Official only to such
contractors. Permits require a set of plans drawn by a Tennessee
licensed professional engineer. Plans will include electrical and
lighting details, as well as details on the foundation, the billboard
structure, fastening, and windload. The Building Official may require
additional information, such as soils testing, as he or she deems
necessary.
5.6.8. Billboards are subject to inspection by the Building Official. Billboard
owners shall correct, with maintenance and/or repair or removal or
replacement of the billboard, problems found during an inspection.
5.6.9. Billboards shall not be constructed so as to have two or more sign
display areas stacked vertically with one on top of the other, or located
side by side, or otherwise located on the same supporting structure
except as provided herein. A "V" shaped billboard is allowed with not
more than one (1) sign face on each side of the "V" and where the
interior angle of the "V" is not more than 35 degrees. Notwithstanding
the description of a "V" shape, it is not intended to preclude the
back-to-back location of two sign faces in a billboard as opposed to the
"V" design.
Notwithstanding the above paragraph, three-sided billboards shall be
permitted when the subject billboard is situated such that the third
side is directed toward an on or off ramp accessing Interstate 75 onto
a local or state road. No billboards shall be allowed to be located
within 1000' of a three sided billboard on the "same side of the street"
adjoining Interstate 75. (as amended by Ord. #2017-04, Feb. 2017)
APP-C-173
5.6.10. The use of LEDs or other types of lights to produce sign copy on
billboards are permitted provided they conform to the requirements
of section 5.2.1.K. of the zoning ordinance. LED billboards shall
additionally have a spacing distance of 750 linear feet on the traveled
roadway between digital billboards on the same road and traveling in
the same direction. Furthermore, LED billboards shall not be
permitted within five hundred feet (500') of any historic zoning
district. Billboards may be internally or externally lighted. The
lighting of billboards shall not produce glare or excessive light on
adjacent properties or public rights-of-way or interfere with motorists'
vision. No flashing or intermittent light source shall be used on a
billboard, and neither shall any lighting that creates the appearance
or motion. Billboards are allowed to incorporate changeable copy
through mechanical means. (as amended by Ord. #2014-10, March
2014, and replaced by Ord. #2015-07, March 2015)
5.6.11. No billboard shall incorporate any sign copy that has been determined
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be obscene under the laws of
Tennessee. (as replaced by Ord. #2009-39, May 2009, and Ord.
#2015-07, March 2015)
5.7. Administration of Sign Regulations
5.7.1 The allowable number, size, and other characteristics for signs of a
given type shall be as described in the sign standards of this
ordinance.
5.7.2. Exclusions
5.7.2.A. Nothing in these sign regulations is intended to encourage the use of
the United States flag or the Tennessee flag as advertising devices or
to prohibit the display of the United States flag or the Tennessee flag,
however such flags shall not be located so as to impair visibility by
motorists or so as to create any hazards or impairments with respect
to public utilities.
5.7.2.B. Travel signs as defined herein are not intended to be regulated by this
ordinance.
5.7.2.C. Gravestones and historical markers and historic monuments are not
intended to be regulated by this ordinance.
5.7.2.D. Horticultural displays which may be configured so as to convey
messages or images in living plant material are not intended to be
regulated by this ordinance.
APP-C-174
5.7.2.E. Specialized seasonal decorative banners that are displayed for a
limited time on certain utility poles in a manner pre-approved by
Cleveland Utilities and the City Council in a program coordinated by
the Cleveland-Bradley County Chamber of Commerce (Ordinance
2005-48) are not intended to be regulated by this ordinance.
5.7.2.F. Signs located in the interior of buildings and which are sized, located,
and displayed such that they are not visible from public rights-of-way
through ordinary observation are not intended to be regulated by this
ordinance.
5.7.2.G. It is not the intention of this ordinance to prohibit the display of any
free-standing, traditionally recognized religious symbol on private
property by counting such display in any limitation on the square
footage and number of signs that may be displayed on such property;
however, other restrictions pertaining to the safety of signs and
structures would apply. Such restrictions include, but are not
necessarily limited to, compliance with applicable sections of the
building code, separation from public utilities, utility easements, and
rights-of-way, and protection of visibility and access for motorists and
pedestrians. However, religious symbols that are incorporated into the
sign copy within a sign face would be counted as part of the sign
display area.
5.7.2.H. It is not the intention of this ordinance to prohibit the display of any
outdoor decoration that does not contain more than very brief,
non-commercial and context-related sign copy (e.g. red, white, and
blue balloons with "Happy July 4th"; a shamrock with "Happy St.
Patrick's Day"; or an earth globe with "Protect the Environment"; or
baby shoes with "Choose Life", etc.) on private property by counting
such decoration in any limitation on the square footage and number
of signs that may be displayed on such property; however, other
restrictions pertaining to the safety of signs and structures shall
apply. Such restrictions include, but are not necessarily limited to,
compliance with applicable sections of the building code, separation
from public utilities, utility easements, and rights-of-way, and
protection of visibility and access for motorists and pedestrians.
5.7.2.I. It is not the intention of this ordinance to prohibit the use of lights,
flashing or otherwise, on private property when these are activated as
part of an emergency alarm system, an alerting system on residential
property occupied by a hearing impaired person, or a hazard warning
system mandated by law or recommended in writing by an authorized
APP-C-175
government emergency response official acting in his or her official
capacity.
5.7.2.J. It is not the intent of this ordinance to prohibit the use of architectural
details in otherwise lawful buildings where these architectural details
are representative of the goods or services offered on-premises or of
some other theme (e.g. the doghouse motif around the City's animal
shelter entrance).
5.7.2.K. Faux painting of architectural details such as columns to create the
illusion of depth on an otherwise generally flat surface, and the use of
a coordinated scheme of different wall and trim colors are not
considered a mural and are not regulated by this ordinance.
5.7.3. Violations of Sign Regulations and Appeals
5.7.3.A. Violations Unlawful
It shall be unlawful to install, erect, display, expand, or maintain a
sign in the City of Cleveland, Tennessee except in compliance with
this ordinance. Violations of this ordinance are subject to any and all
penalties prescribed in the Cleveland Municipal Code and the zoning
regulations and as allowed by State law.
5.7.3.B. Non-conforming Signs
Nothing herein is to be interpreted so as to conflict with the
pre-existing non-conforming use provisions of the City's zoning
regulations. Signs that are not lawful pre-existing non-conforming
uses, and which are either not included in the signs allowed by this
ordinance or which are otherwise not in conformance with the
requirements of this ordinance, are unlawful.
5.7.3.C. Penalties
Any person or entity who violates any provision of these sign
regulations, or any person who fails or refuses to comply with any
notice to abate a violation or other notice issued by the Building
Official or code enforcement officer within the time specified by such
notice, shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $50 per violation.
Each day of such violation or failure or refusal to comply shall be
deemed a separate offense and punishable accordingly by a civil
penalty of $50 per day per violation.
APP-C-176
5.7.3.D. Nuisance
In addition to the foregoing civil penalties, the maintenance of any
sign and/or its supporting structure or any violation of the provisions
of these sign regulations by any person or entity is declared to be a
public nuisance dangerous to the public safety and may be abated as
set forth in herein.
5.7.3.E. Notice to Abate
If the Building Official or a code enforcement officer determines that
any sign is in violation of any provision of these sign regulations, a
Building Official or a code enforcement officer shall, consistent with
the nature and seriousness of the violation, notify the offender, or his
agent, and the owner, or his agent, or the occupant(s) of the property
where the sign is located, by giving notice to abate the violation.
5.7.3.F. Removal Without Notice
Nothing contained herein shall require the City to give notice of a
violation prior to removal of any sign located on public property or
which otherwise constitutes a safety hazard.
5.7.3.G. Content of Notice
Any written notice given shall describe the conditions or violations
constituting a nuisance under these sign regulations, and state that
the nuisance may be abated by the City at the expense of the offender,
and/or the owner, and/or the occupant of the property after the
expiration of not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30)
days from the date of such notice if such condition is not corrected or
in the process of being corrected (with substantial progress being
made) by the offender, or the owner, or the occupant, or the person in
control of the property by the time specified in the notice.
5.7.3.H. Correction or Abatement by City Of Cleveland
If, after the expiration of the time given to abate the nuisance the
condition constituting a nuisance has not been corrected or abated,
then such condition may be corrected or the nuisance abated by the
City at the expense of the offender and/or the owner and/or the
occupant of the premises under the directions of the Building Official
or code enforcement officer.
APP-C-177
5.7.3.I. Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals
Because many types of signs that are governed by these regulations
do not require the issuance of permits, appeals may arise for sign
regulation enforcement decisions that do not involve the denial or
revocation of a permit. Persons properly entitled to seek relief from
the decision of the Building Official or code enforcement officer
carrying out or enforcing the provisions of these sign regulations that
are zoning regulations, may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals as
provided in Section 6.1.2. of the zoning regulations. Appeals involving
the denial or revocation of a permit are addressed in Section 5.7.5 of
the sign regulations.
5.7.4. Sign Regulations in Zoning Districts and Special Areas
These sign regulations shall be generally applicable within all
Cleveland zoning districts. For Planned Unit Development zoning
districts (PUD1, PUD2, and so forth) with an effective ordinance prior
to the effective date of this ordinance it is not intended that these
regulations should contravene any sign regulation specific to the PUD
in terms of the number, type, size, or location of signs allowed, but
that these regulations would be applicable as to definitions and permit
requirements and procedures. For PUD zoning districts established
after the effective date of this ordinance, it is intended that these sign
regulations apply except as specifically altered by the ordinance
establishing the PUD. From time to time the City may establish
special districts for various purposes and these districts may include
special regulations concerning signs. The City has established a
historic preservation zoning district and any signs, except temporary
signs, that are erected within this district are subject to review and
approval by the City's Historic Preservation Commission. The City
has also established a special sign control district along Paul Huff
Parkway generally between Keith Street/ North Lee Highway to
South Mouse Creek (Cleveland Municipal Code Title 14 Chapter 5).
Where the provisions of the aforementioned special sign control
district directly address a matter, those provisions will control;
otherwise, signs in that district are governed by this ordinance. Upon
review and recommendation by the Cleveland Municipal Planning
Commission, the City Council may adopt plans for one or more special
streetscape districts which may include one or more design elements
within the public right-of-way and on adjoining private property, such
as signs, landscaping, lighting, street furniture, etc., where there can
be a cooperative public and private effort to create more attractive and
APP-C-178
vibrant commercial areas. It is anticipated that these sign regulations
could be modified by such a streetscape district plan.
5.7.5. Building Permits, Sign Permits, and Appeals of Permit Denials
5.7.5.1. The following types of signs require a building permit prior to
construction: Ground signs (not portable); wall signs, canopy signs and
awning signs, unless otherwise exempted under the sign regulations;
Projecting signs; Roof signs; Mansard signs; Kiosks; Entrance/Exit
signs; and Billboards.
5.7.5.2. Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of
the applicable building code adopted by the City of Cleveland, which
is currently the Building Code. For those signs that require a building
permit, the applicant shall pay the fees applicable to such building
permit.
5.7.5.3. A separate sign permit is required under these sign regulations for
those signs for which a building permit is required by the applicable
building code(s). If no building permit is required, then a separate sign
permit shall not be required. There is no additional fee charged to the
applicant for any required sign permit. A sign permit shall be subject
to revocation by the Building Official if at any time any conditions
required by this ordinance for the issuance of the sign permit or any
conditions necessary for the compliance of the sign with the
requirements of this ordinance, are determined not to be met.
5.7.5.4. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the Building Official shall
determine that the proposed sign complies with the sign regulations.
If the Building Official determines that the sign complies with the
sign regulations, then the Building Official shall issue a sign permit.
5.7.5.5. If the Building Official determines that the sign does not qualify for
a building permit under the applicable building code(s), the Building
Official shall advise the applicant in writing of the reason(s) for the
denial for the building permit as well as the applicant's right to appeal
the denial of the building permit to the Building Board of Adjustment
and Appeals.
5.7.5.6. If the Building Official determines that the sign does not qualify for
a sign permit under these sign regulations or that a sign permit must
be revoked, the Building Official shall advise the applicant in writing
of the reason(s) for the denial or revocation of the sign permit as well
APP-C-179
as the applicant's right to appeal the denial or revocation of the sign
permit to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
5.7.5.7. In the event a building permit is denied by the Building Official for
any sign required to have a building permit under the applicable
building code, then the applicant shall be entitled to appeal that
denial to the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals in accordance
with the appeals provisions set forth in the Building Code or the
applicable building code in effect at the time of the permit denial.
Copies of the applicable building code(s) are on file in the City Clerk's
office.
5.7.5.8. If an applicant for a building permit is denied a sign permit due to a
determination by the Building Official that the sign does not meet the
requirements of these sign regulations, then the applicant shall be
entitled to appeal that determination by the Building Official to the
Board of Zoning Appeals, which shall hear the appeal and determine
whether the applicant should be granted a sign permit.
5.7.5.9. In the event the Board of Zoning Appeals upholds the Building
Official's determination that the proposed sign does not comply with
the provisions of the City's sign regulations, then the applicant may
file a petition for a writ of certiorari with a court of competent
jurisdiction to review the determination of the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
5.7.5.10. In conducting a review of an appeal of the denial of a sign permit by
the Building Official, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall follow the
procedures set forth in Cleveland Municipal Code, Title 14, Chapter
2, Sections 6.1.2 et seq, as well as Tennessee Code Annotated Title 13,
Chapter 7, Part 2.
5.7.5.11. An appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals from a denial of a sign
permit by the Building Official must be filed in writing in accordance
with the procedures established in Cleveland Municipal Code, Title
14, Chapter 2, Sections 6.1.2 et seq, as well as Tennessee Code
Annotated Title 13, Chapter 7, Part 2.
5.8. Definitions
The definitions in this section are applicable to the interpretation of
the sign regulations. Words used within the sign regulations that are
not otherwise defined herein should be interpreted according to their
ordinary meaning, informed by Webster's Ninth New Collegiate
APP-C-180
Dictionary: A Merriam-Webster (Merriam-Webster, Inc., Springfield,
MA, publisher, 1987) and the context of their usage. The definitions
are as follows:
Advertising device shall mean any physical object or device
or light source designed principally as a means of attracting
attention through visual means and but which may or may
not convey a written message through words, letters,
numbers, or other symbols. Examples would include, but are
not limited to, balloons, flags, streamers, pennants, devices
that spin in the wind, large stationary or moving objects
inflated by forced air, strobe lights, etc. This definition does
not include such objects, devices, or light sources that are
inside buildings and not noticeable from a public
right-of-way.
Animation or animated shall mean the movement or the
optical illusion of movement of any part of a sign or
advertising device, including the movement of any
illumination or the flashing or varying of light intensity or
the automatic changing of all or any part of the facing of a
sign.
Awning shall mean a cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural
covering that either is permanently attached to a building
or can be raised or retracted to a position. Typically, an
awning is for the purpose of providing shade or shelter for
a door, window, porch, patio, or entryway.
Balloon sign shall mean any sign painted onto or otherwise
attached to or suspended from a balloon, whether such
balloon is anchored or affixed to a building or any other
portion of the premises or tethered to and floating above any
portion of the premises.
Banner sign shall mean a sign made of cloth, canvas, plastic
sheeting or any other flexible material, which is not rigidly
and permanently attached to a building or the ground
through a permanent support structure. A banner sign
could be tied or otherwise affixed at one end, in the manner
of a flag, or from more than one location on the banner.
Bench sign shall mean a sign incorporated into the seating
area or back-support area of an outdoor bench.
APP-C-181
Billboard shall mean an off-premise sign with a sign
structure that is permanently attached or anchored to the
ground or another permanent structure.
Building shall mean a structure having a roof supported by
columns or walls. A building may contain one or more units
or tenant spaces that could be addressed separately and
could have separate utility services but which would share
common exterior walls and/or a roof.
Building Code shall mean the building code(s) that have
been adopted by the City of Cleveland, Tennessee and which
are currently in force at the time of permitting.
Bus shelter sign shall mean a sign displayed on the sides or
roof of a bus shelter designated as a bus stop by a public
transit provider.
Canopy shall mean a marquee or permanent roof-like
structure providing protection against the weather, whether
attached to or detached from a building, but excluding any
column, pole or other supporting structure to which the
canopy may be attached.
Commercial sign copy shall mean sign copy that specifies a
particular business, industry, or trade association or which
specifies products, goods, commodities, or services that are
available for sale on-site or off-site, regardless of whether or
not a seller's or agent's name, location, and contact
information is provided.
Development shall mean a building or buildings on one or
more lots or parcels together with associated common site
development or subdivisions attributes such as parking,
internal streets or drives, landscaping and site amenities,
and drainage and utility features.
Exterior elevation drawing shall mean a drawing showing
the visible exterior vertical elements of a building or
structure projected directly to a vertical plane.
Entrance/Exit sign shall mean a ground sign located at the
driveway(s) of a premises and bearing one or more of the
APP-C-182
words "entrance", "enter", "exit", or "only" as the most
prominent sign copy.
Externally lighted sign shall mean a sign that is illuminated
by an external artificial light source that is focused on the
sign backing or sign copy from a location to the bottom,
sides, or top of the sign backing.
Façade shall mean the side of a building below the eaves,
and that portion of a building's side that would extend above
a portion of the roof, as with a parapet wall or gable-end
design, and any mansard on the same building side. A
façade shall include the total external surface area of a
vertical side of a building, canopy, awning or mechanical
equipment used to dispense a product outside a building. A
facade shall include that area of a building that would be
visible in a single exterior elevation drawing, regardless of
any curved surfaces or angles that would be apparent in its
exterior walls or other predominantly vertical elements
when seen from above in a plan view or in a perspective
drawing. The term façade is intended to encompass any
windows, doors, awning, canopy, mansard, or other building
features visible in the same elevation view.
Ground sign shall mean a sign supported by one or more
uprights, posts, or bases placed upon or affixed in the
ground and not attached to any part of a building. However,
this definition encompasses signs attached to a decorative
wing wall, or retaining wall, or similar projection that is not
underneath the building roof and that does not enclose an
interior space, when such walls or projections are attached
to a building. Monument signs and pole signs are types of
ground signs.
Incidental sign shall mean an on-premise sign, emblem or
decal mounted flush with the facade to which it is attached
and not exceeding two (2) square feet in sign area informing
the public of goods, facilities or services available on the
premises (e.g., a credit card sign, ice machine sign, vending
machine sign or a sign indicating hours of business) or an
on-premise sign which is affixed to mechanical equipment
used to dispense a product and which is less than two (2)
square feet in sign area.
APP-C-183
Internally lighted sign shall mean a sign wherein the sign
backing or sign copy is illuminated by an artificial light
source behind it or within an enclosed sign cabinet
containing the sign copy, or wherein the sign copy consists
of neon tubes or similar material that would cause the sign
copy to appear to glow from an internal source.
Kiosk shall mean a message board or message center
designed for posting and up-close viewing of messages at eye
level by pedestrians who would be within five feet of the
posted message.
Land use shall mean three broad categories of land use
referred to in this ordinance: residential; non-residential;
and vacant. Residential land use refers to developments
wherein the land uses consist exclusively of dwelling units
(exclusive of bed and breakfast facilities, boarding homes,
and various forms of transient lodging regulated by the
State of Tennessee) and ancillary amenities such as tennis
courts, golf courses, club houses, etc. that are integrated
within the residential development. Non-residential land
use refers to developments wherein the land uses consist of
commercial, industrial, or institutional land uses or one or
more of these with or without residential land uses (e.g.
upper story loft apartments over ground floor retail). Vacant
land consists of lots, parcels, or tracts that are unimproved
land or land which may have been cleared, graded, or served
with roads or utilities, but on which there are no permanent
buildings exclusive of barns, sheds, or similar outbuildings
or utility structures such as water tanks or communication
towers.
Lighted copy sign shall mean a sign wherein the light
source or series of light sources [e.g. light-emitting diode
(LED), neon, etc.] are used to form letters or other images
in sign copy.
Mansard shall mean the lower portion of a roof with two
pitches, including a flat-top roof with a mansard portion.
Mansard sign shall mean any sign attached to the mansard
portion of a roof.
APP-C-184
Monument sign shall mean ground sign permanently affixed
to the ground at its base, supported entirely by a base
structure, and not mounted on a pole. Typically, the base of
the monument sign is a decorative feature of brick, wood,
metal or other material, which is intended to serve as an
entry feature or focal point.
Movement shall mean physical movement or revolution up
or down, around, or sideways that completes a cycle of
change at intervals of less than six (6) seconds, or irregular
motion of a physical object such as fluttering or spinning in
response to wind or other energy source. Movement shall
not include incidental swaying in response to wind loads or
other natural conditions that is necessary to support the
sign.
Non-commercial sign copy shall mean sign copy that is not
commercial sign copy.
Non-residential zoning district shall mean any zoning
district where the principally permitted and conditional
uses allowed by the zoning ordinance are not primarily
residential dwelling units. The zoning districts that are
primarily residential are R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, and RA so
these would not be non-residential zoning districts.
Off-premise sign shall mean any sign that is not an
on-premise sign.
On-premise sign shall mean any sign whose content relates
to the premises on which it is located, referring exclusively
to the name, location, products, persons, accommodations,
services or activities conducted on or offered from or on
those premises, or the sale, lease or construction of those
premises.
Pole sign shall mean a ground sign that is permanently
supported in a fixed location from the ground by a structure
of poles, uprights, braces, or other structure not as wide as
the sign backing. A pole sign is not supported by a building
or a wall-like base structure that is at least as wide as the
sign backing.
APP-C-185
Portable sign shall mean any sign which is placed on or
affixed to real property in such a manner that its removal
would not cause damage to the property or the sign backing
or the sign structure. Portable signs are designed to be
readily removed or relocated. A portable sign has no
mounting hardware that attaches to the building or other
portion of the property in a permanent fashion. Examples of
portable signs include, but are not limited to, single or
multi-faced sandwich boards, wheel-mounted mobile signs,
sidewalk and curb signs, banners, balloon signs, yard signs
on stakes or rigid wire. For purposes of this ordinance, all
portable signs which have four square feet or less of sign
backing and which are not designed to incorporate lighting
or other electronics shall be classified as Type A portable
signs; portable signs which have more than four square feet
of sign backing and which are not designed to incorporate
lighting or other electronics shall be classified as Type B
portable signs; and portable signs which are designed to
incorporate lighting or other electronics shall be classified
as Type C portable signs.
Premise or premises shall mean all contiguous land in the
same ownership and/or control which is not divided by any
public highway, street or alley or right-of-way. As part of a
dominant parcel of property, premises shall also include a
permanent easement to the dominant parcel which (1)
connects the dominant parcel to a public right-of-way, (2) is
the sole means of ingress and egress to and from a public
right-of-way for vehicular traffic to the dominant parcel, and
(3) is regularly used for ingress and egress to the dominant
parcel by vehicular traffic.
Primary street frontage shall mean the public street from
which a residential development has its primary vehicular
access by design as evidenced by the width of the entrance
or other design features (for a residential subdivision this
would be a street to which its internal street network is
connected). For developments containing non-residential
uses, the primary street frontage will be that street front
toward which the front wall of the building(s) is oriented as
evidenced by the placement of entryways and other features
of the building façade. In most but not all cases for
developments containing non-residential uses, the primary
street frontage will also be on the street to which the
APP-C-186
development is addressed and the street from which the
development has its primary vehicular access.
Projecting sign shall mean an on-premise sign attached to
a building, canopy, awning or marquee.
Roof sign shall mean a sign erected over or on, and wholly
or partially dependent upon, the roof of any building for
support, or attached to the roof in any way.
Sign shall mean a lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, or
illuminated visual display designed to identify, announce,
direct, or inform that is visible from a public right-of-way,
and shall include advertising devices as defined herein.
Sign area measurement shall mean the calculated square
footage of sign display area for a given sign where such
calculation is done according to the method prescribed by
this ordinance.
Sign backing shall mean the rigid (wall, sign board, back-lit
sign surface in a sign cabinet, etc.) or non-rigid (as in the
case of a banner) material or surface on which the sign copy
is displayed. The sign backing is considered to be part of the
sign structure and it would be inclusive of the sign display
area.
Sign copy shall mean the letters, numbers, symbols,
pictures, drawings, logo, or other graphic information within
signs.
Sign display area shall mean the area of the sign backing on
which sign copy is displayed or could be displayed for a
given sign.
Sign envelope shall mean the location within a development
or on a lot, parcel, tract, or building(s), or portion of a
building(s) over which an allowed number of signs and/or an
allowed square foot area of signs of a given type can be
allocated. The sign envelope is understood to be inclusive of
any height restrictions, setback requirements, and other
stated requirements of this ordinance that would affect the
location of a given sign of a given type.
APP-C-187
Sign face shall mean a sign display area visible in an
external elevation drawing such that the sign copy would be
in a plane perpendicular to plane of the viewer's line of
sight, i.e. the sign display area is viewed straight-on and not
at an angle such that copy on more than one side of the sign
could be visible if not legible.
Sign structure shall mean the sign backing together with all
framework, anchors, cords, chains, wires, poles, bases,
foundations, brackets, lighting, electrical connections and
apparatus, cabinets, carriage assembly (wheels, axles, etc.),
and all other hardware necessary to move, attach, erect,
secure, and otherwise display the sign as designed.
Signable square footage shall mean the maximum allowable
value for the sign display area measurements of all signs of
a given type allowed within a sign envelope.
Sign type shall mean any of the various categories and
subcategories of signs that are defined in this ordinance.
Streetscape shall mean the visual aspects of what is
contained in the public right-of-way and the immediately
surrounding land to a depth of 20 feet from the right-of-way,
and including elements such as landscaping, utilities,
sidewalks, street furniture, and other functional and
ornamental design elements within or immediately adjacent
to the streetscape.
Street furniture sign shall mean any sign incorporated into
or posted upon any street furnishing or fixture in any public
right-of-way for motorized and non-motorized travel
including streets, sidewalks, greenways, and areas within
public parks. Examples of street furniture signs in public
right-of-ways and public parks would include, but are not
limited to, signs displayed in such areas on benches,
shelters, trash receptacles, and fences.
Travel sign shall mean a sign placed within a public
right-of-way or authorized to be placed within or within 5
feet of a public right by an official government agency
charged with maintaining the aforesaid public right -of-way.
Travel signs include signs described in the Uniform Manual
of Traffic Control Devices and other signs primarily for
APP-C-188
traffic management and way-finding that influence the
speed, direction, and travel path choice of motorists.
Wall mural shall mean a scene, figure or decorative design
painted on a wall of a building so as to enhance the building
architecture, and which does not include sign copy, and
which is distinctly separated from any sign backing or sign
copy by a monochromatic border at least 12 inches wide.
Wall sign shall mean a sign that is attached, painted, or
displayed on a façade, including signs oriented so as to be
viewed and interpreted with the façade. This definition
would also include projecting signs and signs located on an
awning, canopy, or mansard, when these contain sign
structure or sign copy visible on the façade.
Window sign shall mean a sign located inside a building but
mounted and oriented so as to so as to be visible from the
exterior of the building from a public right-of-way.
(amended by Ord. of #7/8/85, Ord. #4, Jan. 1999, Ord. #6,
April 2000, replaced by Ord. #2007-35, Sept. 2007, and
amended by Ord. #2008-56, Sept. 2008)
6.0 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
6.0.1 Administration and enforcement. The provisions of this ordinance
shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector(s). These
officials shall have the right to enter upon any premises for the
purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to
carry out his duties in the enforcement of this ordinance.
6.0.2 Building permit. No land or structure shall be changed in use and no
structure shall be erected, moved or altered until the chief building
inspector has given written approval of same, and has issued a
building permit certifying that the plans and intended use of land,
buildings and structure are in conformity with this ordinance, and
other valid ordinances of the City of Cleveland. Building permits shall
be void after three (3) months from date of issue unless substantial
progress has been made on the project by that time.
6.0.3 Certificate of occupancy. No land or structure hereafter erected,
moved, or altered in its use shall be used until the chief building
inspector shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such
land or structure is found to be in conformity with the provisions of all
applicable ordinances. It is expressly provided that the moving or
relocation of any trailer, prefabricated structure, or other structure to
APP-C-189
any premises shall require a building permit and certificate of
occupancy.
6.0.4 Enforcement by city clerk. The provisions of this ordinance shall also
be administered and enforced by the city clerk insofar as the same
concerns the issuance of privilege licenses for businesses or
occupations required to be licensed by the City of Cleveland, and no
such license shall be issued by the clerk for the privilege of carrying
on a business or occupation in violation of the provisions of this
ordinance.
6.0.5 Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall,
upon conviction, be fined not less than two (2) nor more than fifty (50)
dollars for each offense and court costs. Each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. It is further provided
that the foregoing penal provisions are not intended to be the
exclusive means of enforcing this ordinance, and violation of the
provisions hereof is expressly declared to be a nuisance, and, in
addition to the fines hereinabove provided, the nuisance shall be
abatable in law or in equity as in the case of other nuisances.
6.0.6 Scheduling and postponement of zoning cases. For a rezoning on a
planning commission agenda, the applicant may request a
postponement until the next planning commission meeting or a future
planning commission meeting on a specified date not later than the
second month following the meeting date from which the item is to be
postponed. The applicant may request and the planning commission
may grant two (2) such postponements for a given requests during a
one year period beginning with the date that the item is first on the
planning commission agenda. Failure of the applicant to appear at the
planning commission meeting without the approval of the planning
commission chairman shall constitute a request for postponement by
the applicant. In the case of a rezoning request recommended for
denial by the planning commission, the same request shall not be
heard again by the planning commission for a period of one year
unless recommended by the planning director based upon a
substantial change in the request. (as added by Ord. #18, Oct. 2001,
and replaced by Ord. #2011-07, June 2011)
6.1 BOARD AND AGENCIES.
6.1.1 Planning commission.
Title 14, chapter 1 of the City Code of Cleveland, Tennessee, creates the
Planning Commission, and establishes its membership; organization, rules and
staff; and powers and duties.
APP-C-190
6.1.2 Board of zoning appeals.
A. Establishment. A Board of Zoning Appeals, the "new board''
for purposes of this paragraph, is hereby established in
accordance with Section 13-7-205 of the Tennessee Code
Annotated as amended. The membership, powers, and
procedures of the new board shall be as described in this
ordinance. The Board of Zoning Appeals in existence prior
to this ordinance, the "old board" for purposes of this
paragraph, shall be dissolved upon the initial appointment
of the new board. The requirements of this ordinance
notwithstanding, any appeals, variance requests, or other
business or proceedings that may be before the old board at
the time of its dissolution shall be concluded by the new
board in accordance with the requirements of the old board.
B. Membership. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of
five (5) members appointed subsequent to the adoption of
this ordinance in the manner prescribed herein. Members
are to be appointed by the City Council. Initial
appointments are to be made for staggered terms as follows:
two seats for a term of one year; two seats for a term of two
years; and one seat for a term of three years. Subsequent
appointments to each seat are to be for terms of four years.
If a member leaves the board before his or her term is
expired, he or she is to be replaced for the remainder of the
term in the manner prescribed herein. Members of the
board may be appointed from among the members of the
Cleveland Municipal Planning Commission. Relevant
abilities or expertise, commitment to public service, and
community diversity are factors to be considered in making
appointments, but none of these is to be a sole controlling
factor for any particular appointment. A member of the
board may be removed from the board at any time by a
majority vote of the City Council when it is demonstrated
that such board member has a pattern of repeated absences
from board meetings, or when such board member exhibits
disregard for controlling laws and ordinances or the purpose
and intent of the zoning ordinance, or when such board
member fails to declare a conflict of interest in a given case
and votes on the case.
C. (1) Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error
APP-C-191
in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or
refusal made by the Building Inspector(s) or other
administrative official(s) in carrying out or enforcing
of any provision of the zoning regulations as found in
Title 14 Chapter 2 of the City of Cleveland,
Tennessee Code of Ordinances, as amended.
(2) Special Exceptions (Conditional Uses). To hear and
decide requests for special exceptions in accordance
with the provisions of the paragraph. A special
exception request is a request for approval of a
Conditional Use as defined in Section 1.6 of the
zoning regulations. The process for review and
approval or denial of conditional use requests shall be
as described in Section 1.7 of the zoning regulations.
(3) Zoning District Boundary Disputes. The Board of
Zoning Appeals is authorized to rule in cases where
the Planning Director's determination of a zoning
district boundary is disputed. Boundary
determinations shall be made in accordance with the
principles set forth in Section 1.4.1. of the zoning
ordinance.
(4) Zoning Variance Requests. The Board of Zoning
Appeals is authorized to grant variances from the
strict application of zoning regulations that are
dimensional, proportional, or quantitative in nature
(e.g. distance, area, height, bulk, quantity,
proportion, and the like) where the standards
required by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-7-207(3)
are met. By way of summary, these standards
require: first, that application of the development
standard present a substantial problem because of
the narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography, or
other exceptional condition of the property; second,
that application of the development standard present
exceptional practical difficulties or undue hardship
on the property owner; and third, that the variance
requested would not substantially harm the public
good or the purpose and intent of the zoning
ordinance. The applicant for a variance shall provide
sufficient information for a staff review and review by
the board, including but not limited to, a survey
APP-C-192
showing existing or proposed property lines, building
footprints, and impervious surfaces.
(5) Right of Entry Upon Land. For purposes of carrying
out the requirements of this ordinance, the Board
and Zoning Appeals, its members and City of
Cleveland, Tennessee employees or agents acting in
support of the board shall have the right to enter
upon any land within the City of Cleveland for the
purposes of making examinations or surveys or for
the purpose of posting or removing public notices if
such are required by this ordinance.
(6) Right to Request Assistance. In the discharge of its
responsibilities under this ordinance, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall have the right to request
through the City Manager assistance from any City
department.
(7) Public Notification--- Signage. A sign for the purpose
of public notification shall be placed on the site
affected by a conditional use or variance request
scheduled to be heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals
(BZA) at least 7 days before the hearing. (as added by
Ord. #2011-16, Sept. 2011)
(8) Resubmission and Reconsideration. In the case of a
conditional use or variance request that has been
denied, no such request shall be resubmitted and
considered again by the Board within six months of
the Board's decision to deny the request, unless:
(a) Within 30 days after a denial, the Board votes
to reconsider the matter, and the Board finds
that there has been a substantial and material
change in the request. Reconsideration under
these circumstances requires that a Motion to
reconsider be made by a member previously
voting with the majority to deny the request.
Before reconsidering any previous denial, the
motion to reconsider must be approved by a
majority of the Board members present and
voting. If the Board votes to reconsider the
matter, the Board shall also state upon the
record the basis of the Board's finding that
APP-C-193
there has been a substantial and material
change in the request.
(b) Resubmission and reconsideration occurs
pursuant to court order. (as added by
Ord. #2011-16, Sept. 2011)
D. Procedures. The following are rules and procedures for the
Board of Zoning Appeals. The board may adopt such other
rules and procedures for the conduct of business as the
board deems appropriate provided that these are not in
conflict with the rules and procedures described herein.
(1) Initial meeting. Within thirty (30) days of the initial
appointment of the board, the board shall hold an
initial meeting. At the initial meeting the board will
elect officers as required by this ordinance; it will
address any business that was before the former
Board of Zoning Appeals; and it will address any new
business that is to come before the board.
(2) Election of Officers. The board shall elect from among
its own members a chairperson, and a
vice-chairperson. Secretarial services shall be
provided by the City of Cleveland, Tennessee in a
manner to be prescribed by the City Manager.
(3) Regular Meetings. Regular meetings shall be held at
a time and place chosen by the Board of Zoning
Appeals. Regular meetings shall be held at least
monthly following the initial meeting unless there is
no business to be conducted apart from the approval
of minutes in which case the meeting may be
postponed until the next regular meeting or called
meeting. Unless otherwise determined by the board,
regular meetings shall be at noon on the second
Tuesday of each month in the City Council
Chambers. The chairperson or vice-chairperson may
reschedule regular meetings as may be necessary
from time to time.
(4) Called meetings. For meetings that meet the
requirements of subsection 6.1.2.D(6) in which
enough members cannot attend to form a quorum.
APP-C-194
The chairperson or vice-chairperson or any two
members may schedule called meetings of the Board
of Zoning Appeals as deemed necessary provided that
notice is given to each board member at least fortyeight
(48) hours in advance. For purposes of this
ordinance, notice to board members include verbal
notification or leaving written, audio or electronic
messages at locations where the board member can
usually be reached.
(5) Called meetings for any other reason. The
chairperson or vice-chairperson or any two members
may schedule called meetings of the Board of Zoning
Appeals as deemed necessary provided that the
advertisement requirements of subsection 6.1.2.D(6)
below are met.
(6) Notice of meetings. Notice of regular meetings shall
be by publication of the meeting agenda in a
newspaper of general circulation. Meetings wherein
an administrative review, special exception, or
variance is to be considered are to be advertised at
least five days in advance of the meeting with a
description of what is to be considered.
(7) Quorum and Voting. The presence of three members
of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall constitute a
quorum. If the chairperson and vice-chairperson are
absent from the meeting in which there is a quorum,
the members present shall elect from among
themselves a chairperson of the meeting. If only three
members are present and one cannot vote due to a
conflict of interest on a particular item, the
remaining two members shall constitute a quorum
for the purpose of that item. In the event of a tie vote
on any motion the motion shall fail. A motion shall
have passed upon the affirmative vote of a majority
of the quorum of board members present and voting.
(8) Open Meetings. All meetings of the board shall be
open to the public.
(9) Conduct of Meetings. Unless otherwise specified by
this ordinance or the specific determination of the
APP-C-195
board that does not conflict with this ordinance,
conduct of meetings shall be generally in accordance
with Roberts Rules of Order.
(10) Application. Appeals for administrative review,
special exceptions, and variances shall be by written
application from the property owner, or property
buyer with agreement of the owner, or the City of
Cleveland. The form and specific content of the
application shall be as determined by the board as
shall submittal deadlines, application sufficiency
standards, and review procedures. Applications shall
at a minimum contain all information necessary to
make determinations required by this ordinance. No
applicant shall be guaranteed a review by staff in less
than ten working days. Falsification, omission, or
misrepresentation of a material fact shall be grounds
for revocation of any appeal for administrative
review, special exception or variance granted by the
board.
(11) Oath of Office. Before beginning a term of service on
the Board of Zoning Appeals, a member shall take
the following oath of office:
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of
the State of Tennessee, and that I will perform with
fidelity the duties of the office to which I have been
appointed and which I am about to assume."
E. Applicants for conditional uses, variances, or other hearings
before the Board of Zoning Appeals shall submit a fee of one
hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars for each item to be heard.
(as amended by Ord. #2003-29, Nov. 2003, Ord. #2004-22,
June 2004, Ord. #2005-20, June 2005, Ord. #2005-37. Sept.
2005)
APP-C-196
6.1.3 Code enforcement board. [Reserved.]
6.2 SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS
In order to promote careful and systematic review of future
development within the community, to ensure compliance with all
applicable zoning requirements, 40 CFR 122.26 pursuant to the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to the
City of Cleveland, other engineering and development related
ordinances and standards, and to promote the general health, safety,
and welfare of the community, the following site plan review process
shall apply. It is the general purpose and intent of this section to
require site plan review and approval for all new developments and
redevelopments of commercial, industrial, public and institutional and
multi-family residential uses with a building area of five thousand
(5000) square feet or larger for all buildings contained within the site
or for any use containing a drive-through service window or lane, or
for land disturbance activities as defined by Title 18 Chapter 3 Section
18-304 (1) of the Cleveland Municipal Code, and to provide for the
lessening of traffic congestion and the securing of adequate light, air,
and aesthetic conditions for residents of Cleveland. Unless otherwise
stated herein the term "site plan" shall mean a final site plan, which
requires approval prior to the issuance of a building permit.
6.2.1 Administrative Procedures. Site plans reviewed pursuant to this
Subsection 6.2 shall be reviewed by a Site Plan Review Committee
comprised of the Director of Community Development, the Building
Official, the Traffic Engineer, the City Engineer, the Stormwater
Engineer, the Urban Forester, and representatives of emergency
services (Fire and Police) and the Public Works Director or his
designee. The Site Plan Review Committee may seek input from other
City departments and utility providers and governmental agencies, as
it deems necessary. The Plan Review Committee shall review each
month the site plans submitted by the last working day of the
previous month. Six sets of the (one each for the city engineer,
stormwater engineer, traffic engineer, building
department/community development, fire department, urban forester)
site plan are to be submitted for review to the Department of
Community Development with a letter requesting site plan review.
The Site Plan Review Committee will have thirty (30) days from the
date of submittal to review each site plan submitted and provide
comments. The Site Plan Review Committee will communicate the
results of its review to the applicant in writing. The Director of
Community Development shall be responsible for the day-to-day
APP-C-197
administration of the Site Plan Review Committees work. The site
plan review will check for completeness according to the required site
plan content in 6.2.3 below, for conformity with MS4 Phase I1
Stormwater requirements in conjunction with Title 18, Chapter 3,
Sections 18-301 through 18-312, and for applicable planning,
engineering, and safety standards, and for whether the site plan has
fulfilled the purpose and intent of the site plan review process. Any
site plan revisions required as a result of the site plan review must be
addressed to the satisfaction of the Site Plan Review Committee prior
to the issuance of a building permit. All revisions have a one (1) week
(7- calendar days) review period from date of revision submission. In
situations requiring site plan approval, developers are encouraged to
submit preliminary site plans for comments by the Site Plan Review
Committee. The Site Plan Review Committee will review the
preliminary site plan within two weeks (14-calendar days) from the
date of submittal and provide comments to the applicant.
6.2.2 Exemptions. Site plans for small additions to existing buildings may
be exempted from review by the Site Plan Review Committee, by the
Director of Community Development and the Public Works Director
(or their designees) , when they determine that the purpose and intent
of these regulations would not be adversely affected. Considerations
for making such a determination would include, but not necessarily be
limited to the following: whether the total square footage increase
would be less than ten percent (10%) of the existing floor area,
whether any driveway redesign is contemplated, whether a significant
increase in traffic generation is expected, whether any utilities
easements are impacted, the use of the proposed expansion area, and
whether the proposed site improvements would otherwise generally
conform to the zoning ordinance and other applicable city ordinances.
6.2.3 Site Plan Requirements. Site plans (and preliminary site plans if
submitted for review) shall be prepared by a licensed architect,
engineer, or surveyor, but within the limits of professional licensure
under Tennessee law. Preliminary site plans should be complete to a
schematic design phase. Site plan minimum requirements include all
existing and proposed conditions, which shall include but shall not be
limited to: a tax map and parcel identification, a location map showing
streets and street names, boundary survey data including bearings
and distances for site boundaries, site attributes, the location of site
features (existing structures, existing utilities, existing easements),
the location of features adjacent to the site (building line of existing
buildings on adjacent property if within required setback, existing
streets, existing sidewalks, existing utilities, nearest, existing fire
APP-C-198
hydrant, existing rights-of-way, existing easements), any covenants
affecting the site, a north arrow, site acreage, pervious and impervious
area acreage (areas both pre and post development conditions), a
graphic scale not less than 1" = 100' (one inch equals one hundred
feet), topography of existing and finished grades at two-foot intervals
based upon survey data, flood data (FEMA map and panel number
and location of areas subject to flooding identified as the 100-year
floodway, if applicable, and the 100-year floodplain), vehicular and
pedestrian access and circulation (includes ingress, egress, frontage
roads, parallel access streets, joint driveways, modifications or
improvements to adjacent streets and traffic control devices), location
of all proposed structure on site including signs, parking spaces and
structures (include signing and marking detail for
handicapped-accessible parking spaces), stormwater management
plan, landscaping and open space plan satisfying the MS4 Phase II
Stormwater Ordinance, proposed screening (walls, fences, berms, or
other opaque barriers), and solid waste collection facilities including
required screening. Based upon its professional judgment, the Site
Plan Review Committee may require additional appropriate data such
as traffic impact studies, environmental studies, parking studies, and
the like. Such additional data shall only be required were the
proposed development can reasonably be anticipated to have
significant or adverse impacts in terms of roadway capacity, roadway
safety, flood hazard, public infrastructure, or an environmental
resource regulated by the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation. Conformity with site design standards in Section 3.0 of
the zoning ordinance is required. (as amended by Ord. #2005-21, June
2005)
6.2.4 Appeals. In the event that an applicant is aggrieved by the decision
of the site plan review committee as it pertains to a particular site
plan, the applicant may appeal the decision of the site plan review
committee to the planning commission. The final appeal is to the city
council. (as replaced by Ord. #7, Aug. 2000)
6.3 Council actions.
6.3.1 Adoption of the zoning ordinance.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
effective date. All zoning ordinances heretofore adopted for the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee, are hereby repealed upon adoption of this ordinance.
APP-C-199
6.3.2 Amendment of the zoning ordinance.
A. Procedure. As provided in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 13-7-203, such regulations, restrictions, and boundaries of
districts as provided for in this ordinance and/or as shown
on the official zoning map may be amended, supplemented,
changed, modified, or repealed by ordinance by the
Cleveland City Council. All changes and amendments shall
be effective only after official notice and a public hearing
held by the council. At least fifteen (15) days notice of the
time and place of the public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.
B. APPROVAL BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION. As
provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 13-7-203 and
13-7-204, no amendment shall become effective unless it is
first submitted to and approved by the Cleveland Planning
Commission; if disapproved by the planning commission,
the amendment must receive a majority vote of the entire
membership of the Cleveland City Council.
6.4 APPEALS.
6.4.1. Denial of permit of license. Any person or persons aggrieved by a
decision of the chief building inspector denying a permit or certificate
of occupancy or persons aggrieved by the act of the city clerk in
denying a privilege license because of the violation of the provisions
of this ordinance may within thirty (30) days after decision appeal
said decision to the board of zoning appeals.
6.4.2 Granting of permit or license. Any person or persons aggrieved by a
decision of the chief building inspector in granting a permit or
certificate of occupancy may within thirty (30) days after visible
commencement of construction, in the case of a building permit, and
within thirty (30) days from visible occupation in the case of a
certificate of occupancy, appeal said decision to the board of zoning
appeals. Any person or persons aggrieved by the act of the city clerk
in granting a privilege license in violation of the terms of this
ordinance may within thirty (30) days after the visible commencement
of exercising of the licensed privilege, appeal said decision to the board
of zoning appeals.
6.4.3 Procedures. A written application for appeal must be provided by the
applicant describing the specific reasons for appealing the granting or
APP-C-200
denial of a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or privilege
license denied under this ordinance. A written appeal must be
submitted in advance of a regularly scheduled or called meeting
within a reasonable time established by the board of zoning appeals.
Following receipt of a written appeal by the planning director, the
board of zoning appeals shall schedule consideration of his appeal at
a duly advertised public hearing. A written record of the decision of
the board of zoning appeals shall be kept which includes the written
application and any supporting documents, including maps, and the
reasons for granting the appeal.
6.5 FEES.
Fees for requesting approvals, appeals (administrative review, special
exceptions, variances) and applications for amendments (rezonings)
to this ordinance shall be established by the planning commission and
posted in the city planning department. Fees shall be payable upon
application to the planning commission or to the board of zoning
appeals.
6.6 Airport zoning.
6.6.1 Hardwick Field--- all airport zoning regulations and maps adopted
prior to July 1, 2009 that are applicable to the environs of Hardwick
Field shall remain in full force and effect until such time as the City
Council of the City of Cleveland, Tennessee determines that Hardwick
Field shall have ceased to be an airport requiring such airport zoning
protection under laws and regulations applicable to airports in the
State of Tennessee.
6.6.2 Definitions. As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise
requires:
(1) AIRPORT --- the Cleveland Municipal Airport located, or to
be located, in the vicinity of Dry Valley Road and Michigan
Avenue Road in Bradley County, Tennessee.
(2) AIRPORT ELEVATION - 860 feet above mean sea level.
(3) APPROACH SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered
on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and
upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same
slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth
in below in this ordinance (see Section 6.6.4). In plan the
APP-C-201
perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the
perimeter of the approach zone.
(4) APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND
CONICAL ZONES - These zones are as set forth below in
this ordinance (see Section 6.6.3).
(5) BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS - The City of Cleveland
Board of Zoning Appeals established in Title 14 Chapter 2
Zoning Regulations of the Municipal Code of the City of
Cleveland, Tennessee in accordance with the laws of the
State of Tennessee.
(6) CONICAL SURFACE - A surface extending outward and
upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a
slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
(7) HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION - An obstruction
determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe
and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
(8) HEIGHT - For the purpose of determining the height limits
in all zones set forth in the Ordinance and shown on the
airport zoning map adopted by the Ordinance; the datum
shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
(9) HORIZONTAL SURFACE - A horizontal plane 150 feet
above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of
which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal
zone.
(10) LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is
constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven
aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross
weight and jet powered aircraft.
(11) NONCONFORMING USE - Any pre-existing structure,
object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent
with the provisions of this Ordinance or an amendment
thereto.
(12) NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway
having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing
air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or
APP-C-202
area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been
approved or planned.
(13) OBSTRUCTION - Any structure, growth, or other object,
including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height
set forth in this ordinance (see Section 6.6.4).
(14) PERSON - An individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
company, association, joint stock association, or government
entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a
similar representative of any of them.
(15) PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway, having
an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an
Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a Precision Approach
Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision
approach system is planned and is so indicated on an
approved airport layout plan or any other planning
document.
(16) PRIMARY SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on
a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard
surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each
end of the runway; for military runways or when the surface
has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard
surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that
runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in this
ordinance under 6.6.3 Airport Zones and Airport Zoning
Map. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is
the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway centerline.
(17) RUNWAY - A defined area on an airport prepared for
landing and take-off of aircraft along its length.
(18) STRUCTURE - An object, including a mobile object,
constructed or installed by man, including but without
limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestack, earth
formation, and overhead transmission lines.
(19) TRANSITIONAL SURFACES - These surfaces extend
outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and
the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet
APP-C-203
horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the
primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the
horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for
those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which
project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface,
extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from
the edge of the approach surface and at 90 degree angles to
the extended runway centerline.
(20) TREE - Any object of natural growth.
(21) UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and less.
(22) VISUAL RUNWAY - A runway intended solely for the
operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.
6.6.3 Airport Zones and Airport Zoning Map
In order to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which include all of the land
lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal
surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Cleveland Municipal
Airport. Such zones are shown on Cleveland Municipal Airport
Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, prepared by the Airport
Authority, dated September 2006, which is attached this Ordinance
and made a part hereof (see Appendix A to this ordinance which also
contains an illustrative map highlighting the street network within
the airport zoning area). An area located in more than one of the
following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitation. The regulations prescribed herein shall
apply only to those portions of zones which are located inside of the
corporate limits of the City of Cleveland or which become located
inside the corporate limits of the City of Cleveland due to annexation.
The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
(1) Approach Zone - Runway Larger Than Utility With A
Visibility Minimum Greater Than ¾ Mile Nonprecision
Instrument Approach Zone. The inner edge of this approach
zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of
APP-C-204
10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(2) Transitional Zones - The transitional zones are the areas
beneath the transitional surfaces.
(3) Horizontal Zone - The horizontal zone is established by
swinging arcs of 10,000 feet from the center of each end of
the primary surface of each runway and connecting the
adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The
horizontal zone does not include the approach and
transitional zones.
(4) Conical Zone - The conical zone is established as the area
that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and
extends outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000
feet.
6.6.4 Airport Zone Height Limitations
Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no structure shall be
erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow
in any airport approach surface zone, transitional surface zone, or
horizontal surface zone to a height in excess of the applicable height
herein established for such zone. Additionally, no structure shall be
erected or altered within the conical surface zone to a height in excess
of the height limit herein established for zone. Such applicable height
limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as
follows:
(1) Approach Zone - Runway Larger Than Utility With A
Visibility Minimum Greater Than ¾ Mile Nonprecision
Instrument Approach Zone. Slopes thirty-four (34) feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to
a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended
runway centerline.
(2) Transitional Zones - Slope seven (7) feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface,
and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport
elevation which is 860 feet above mean sea level. In
addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits
APP-C-205
sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the
approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the
conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway
approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are
established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for
each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same
elevation as the approach surface, and extending a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree
angles to the extended runway centerline.
(3) Horizontal Zone - Established at a height of 150 feet above
the airport elevation or at a height of 1010 feet above mean
sea level.
(4) Conical Zone - Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone
and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to
a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
(5) Excepted Height Limitations - Nothing in this Ordinance
shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or
maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a
height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land.
6.6.5 Use Restrictions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, no use may
be made of land or water within any zone established by this
Ordinance in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between airport and
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport
lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport,
impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike
hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the
landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the
airport.
6.6.6 Nonconforming Uses
(1) Regulations Not Retroactive--- the regulations prescribed in
this Ordinance are not retroactive and the ordinance shall
not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other
change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming
APP-C-206
to the regulations as of the effective date of this Ordinance,
or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a
nonconforming use in place prior to the ordinance. Nothing
contained herein shall require any change in the
construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure;
the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance, and is diligently
prosecuted.
(2) Marking and Lighting - Notwithstanding the preceding
provision of the Section, the owner of any existing
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to
permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon
of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by
the Airport Manager to indicate to the operators of aircraft
in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport
obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed,
operated, and maintained at the expense of the Cleveland
Municipal Airport Authority.
6.6.7 Permits (1) Future Uses - In addition to any prerequisites for
obtaining any permit already established by the City of
Cleveland and/or Bradley County, all permits issued by the
City of Cleveland and Bradley County will additionally be
reviewed for conformity with the requirements of this
Ordinance. Furthermore, nothing in this ordinance shall
require a permit not otherwise required for any tree or
structure meeting the provisions of a, b, and c hereunder.
a. In the area lying within the limits of the
horizontal zone and conical zone, any tree or
structure less than seventy-five feet of vertical
height above the ground, except when, because
of terrain, land contour, or topographic
features, such tree or structure would extend
above the height limit prescribed for such
zones.
b. In areas lying within the limits of the
approach zones but at a horizontal distance of
not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the
runway, any tree or structure less than
seventy-five feet of vertical height above the
ground, except when such tree or structure
APP-C-207
would extend above the height limit prescribed
for such approach zones.
c. In the areas lying within the limits of the
transition zones beyond the perimeter of the
horizontal zone, for any tree or structure less
than seventy-five feet of vertical height above
the ground, except when such tree or
structure, because of terrain, land contour, or
topographic features, would extend above the
height limit prescribed for such transition
zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or
alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of
the height limits established by the Ordinance except as set forth in
this ordinance (see Section 6.6.4). Additionally, no permit for any use
inconsistent with the provisions of this resolution shall be granted
unless a variance has been approved in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance [see Section 6.6.7(4)].
(2) Existing Uses - No permit shall be granted that would allow
the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a
nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater
hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of
this Ordinance or any amendments thereto or than it is
when the application for a permit is made. Except as
indicated, all applications for a permit otherwise complying
with all of the requirements of the permitting jurisdiction,
the City of Cleveland or Bradley County as the case may be,
will be granted.
(3) Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed - Whenever
the City of Cleveland Building Official determines that a
nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or
more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or
decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such
structure to be reconstructed or replaced to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning
regulations.
(4) Variances- Any person desiring to erect or increase the
height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or
APP-C-208
use property, not in accordance with the regulations
prescribed in this Ordinance, may apply to the Board of
Zoning Appeals for a variance from such regulations. The
application for variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as
to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air
navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable
airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly
found that a literal application or enforcement of the
regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief
granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not
create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice,
and will be in accordance with the spirit of the Ordinance.
Additionally, no application for variance to the
requirements of this Ordinance may be considered by the
Board of Zoning Appeals unless a copy of the application has
been furnished to the Airport Manager for advice as to the
aeronautical effects of the variance. If the Airport Manager
does not respond to the application within 15 days after
receipt, the Board of Zoning Appeals may act on its own to
grant or deny said application.
(5) Obstruction Marking and Lighting - Any permit or variance
granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to
effectuate the purpose of this Ordinance and be reasonable
in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate,
and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and
lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the Board
of Zoning Appeals, this condition may be modified to require
the owner to permit the Cleveland Municipal Airport
Authority, at its own expense, to install, operate, and
maintain the necessary markings and lights.
6.6.8 Violations Unlawful, Enforcement, and Penalties
Violations of this ordinance are declared to be unlawful. It shall be the
duty of the City of Cleveland Community Development Department
to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein.
Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the City of
Cleveland Community Development Department upon a form
published for that purpose. Applications required by this ordinance
to be submitted to the City of Cleveland Community Development
Department shall be promptly considered and granted or denied.
APP-C-209
Application for action by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
forthwith transmitted by the City of Cleveland Community
Development Department. Each violation of this ordinance or of any
regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall be
punishable in accordance with the guidelines established elsewhere
in the City of Cleveland, Tennessee zoning regulations.
6.6.9 Board of Zoning Appeals and Judicial Review
In addition to the powers and duties elsewhere conferred upon the
Board of Zoning Appeals by the City of Cleveland, Tennessee's zoning
ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall also have and exercise
the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Community
Development Department staff, including but not limited to
the Building Official, or their agents in the enforcement of
this ordinance; and
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this
ordinance upon which such Board of Zoning Appeals under
such regulations may be required to pass; and
(3) To hear and decide specific variances.
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals, may appeal to either the Circuit Court or
Chancery Court as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 27
Chapter 9.
APP-C-210
APP-C-211
(Ord. #4-26-60, July 1998, as replaced by Ord. #2008-29, June 2008, and
Ord. #2010-09, April 2010)

