
Collierville, TN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF COLLIERVILLE, TENNESSEE
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-20 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-18, passed 1-14-19










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




TOWN OFFICIALS



 




Stan Joyner, Mayor








Board of Mayor and Aldermen




Tom Allen




Maureen Fraser




John Stamps




Billy Patton




John Worley








James H. Lewellen, Town Administrator




Nathan Bicks, Town Attorney




Lynn Carmack, Town Clerk










ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE 2004-15




   AN ORDINANCE TO ADOPT AND ENACT A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF
COLLIERVILLE, TENNESSEE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT
INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING
FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR A COPY OF THE CODE TO BE
KEPT AVAILABLE; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.





   WHEREAS, Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 6-54-501 et seq. authorize and
empower each incorporated municipality in Tennessee to prepare and update a
code of all ordinances on a periodic basis; and,





   WHEREAS, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Collierville,
Tennessee, has caused its ordinances to be revised and re-codified, and the
same are embodied in a code of ordinances entitled "Town of Collierville,
Tennessee, Code of Ordinances" (the "Code"); and,





   WHEREAS, a public hearing was held on the 23rd day of August, 2004,
pursuant to a publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
community on August 11, 2004.





NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN FOR THE
TOWN OF COLLIERVILLE, TENNESSEE:





Section 1.   The Code, published by American Legal Publishing Corporation,
consisting of Chapters 1 through 151, each inclusive, is adopted.





Section 2.   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature or of a
penal nature enacted before December 8, 2003, and not included in the Code or
recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.





Section 3.   The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance, or part thereof, that has been repealed by
a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.





Section 4.   Wherever in the Code any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, the violation of any
such provision of the Code by any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
other legal entity shall be punishable by a penalty of not more than $50 or
the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.





Section 5.   Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in such form
as to indicate the intention of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to make the
same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so
that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.





Section 6.   Ordinances adopted after December 8, 2003, that amend or
refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed to
amend the Code.





Section 7.   A copy of the Code shall be kept available in the Town
Clerk's office and at the Collierville branch of the Shelby County Library
System, for public use and inspection at all reasonable times.





Section 8.   BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that this ordinance shall become
effective immediately after its passage, in accordance with the Charter of
the Town of Collierville, the public welfare requiring it.





         Passed First Reading August 9, 2004





         Passed Second Reading August 23, 2004





         Passed Third Reading September 13, 2004





Linda Kerley /s/              Lynn Carmack /s/             
   





Linda Kerley, Mayor      Lynn Carmack, Town Clerk




CHARTER



   Article I   Incorporation, Name, and Corporate Boundaries



   Article II   Corporate Powers



   Article III   Elections



   Article IV   Board of Mayor and Aldermen



   Article V   Town Administrator



   Article VI   Town Attorney



   Article VII   Town Clerk



   Article VIII   Administration



   Article IX   Finance and Budget



   Article X   Taxation



   Article XI   Judicial Department



   Article XII   Miscellaneous




State of Tennessee
PRIVATE CHAPTER NO. 43
HOUSE BILL NO. 1989





By Representatives Scroggs, Todd, Chumney





Substituted for: Senate Bill No. 1951





By Senators Norris, Person




   AN ACT to revise and re-enact the charter of the Town of Collierville,
as enacted by Chapter 230 of the Private Acts of 1988, as amended, and to
repeal Chapter 230 of the Private Acts of 1988 and all acts amendatory
thereto.



BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF TENNESSEE:



   SECTION 1. The Charter of the Town of Collierville, being Chapter 230
of the Private Acts of 1988, as amended by Chapter 35 of the Private Acts of
1991, Chapters 174 and 175 of the Private Acts of 1992, Chapter 187 of the
Private Acts of 1996, Chapter 41 of the Private Acts of 1999, and all acts
preceding and amendatory thereto, is amended in its entirety to read as
follows:



ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION, NAME, AND CORPORATE BOUNDARIES



   SECTION 1.01.  INCORPORATION; NAME. The inhabitants of the Town of
Collierville, in the County of Shelby and State of Tennessee, be, and they
are hereby, constituted a body politic and corporate under the name and style
of the town of Collierville, hereinafter sometimes referred to as the
“Town”.



   SECTION 1.02.  CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.  The Town, located in Shelby
County, Tennessee, hereby is bounded as described in Chapter 217 of the Acts
of 1870, all Acts amendatory thereof, and annexations made pursuant to
general law.



ARTICLE II
CORPORATE POWERS



   SECTION 2.01.  GENERAL POWERS.  The Town shall have perpetual
succession, may sue and be sued, grant, receive, purchase and hold real,
mixed and personal property, and may have and use a corporate seal and may
alter the same at its pleasure.



   SECTION 2.02.  MISCELLANEOUS POWERS.



      (a)   The Town shall have the power to:



         (1)   Assess, levy, and collect taxes for all general
and special purposes on all subjects and objects of taxation authorized by
law;



         (2)   Adopt such classifications of subjects and objects
of taxation as may not be contrary to law;



         (3)   Make special assessments for local improvements;



         (4)   Contract and be contracted with;



         (5)   Incur debts by borrowing money or otherwise and to
give any appropriate evidence thereof;



         (6)   Issue and give, sell, pledge, or in any manner
dispose of negotiable or non-negotiable interest-bearing or non-interest
bearing bonds, warrants, promissory notes, or orders of the Town, upon the
credit of the Town or solely upon the credit of specific property owned by
the Town or solely upon the credit of income derived from any property used
in connection with any public utility owned or operated by the Town or solely
upon the credit of the proceeds of special assessments for local improvements
or upon any two (2) or more such credits;



         (7)   Expend the money of the Town for all lawful
purposes;



         (8)   Acquire or receive and hold, maintain, improve,
sell, lease, mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of property, real or
personal, mixed, and any estate or interest therein, including the
acquisition of property for recreational use, within or without the Town or
state. Furthermore, to regulate all public grounds belonging to the Town, to
provide for the erection and repairing of all buildings and other
improvements necessary for the use of the Town, and the power to convey
property by sale to any purchaser thereof in any manner provided by the
ordinances of the Town, when a property is no longer required for public use.
The Town shall also make all necessary rules and regulations for the use of
public grounds and property;



         (9)   Condemn property, real or personal, or any
easement, interest, estate, or use therein, either within or without the
Town, for present or future public use. Such condemnation shall be made and
effected in accordance with the terms and provisions of general law;



         (10)   Take and hold property within or without the Town
or state upon trust and to administer trusts for the public benefit;



         (11)   Acquire, construct, own, operate, maintain, sell,
lease, mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of public utilities or any
estate or interest therein, or any other utility or service to the Town, its
inhabitants, or any part thereof, whether within or without the corporate
limits;



         (12)   Grant any person, firm, association, corporation
or other legal entity franchises and/or contracts for public utilities and
public services to be furnished to the Town and those therein. Such power to
grant franchises and make contracts shall embrace the power hereby expressly
conferred to grant exclusive franchises and make exclusive contracts; and
whenever an exclusive franchise or contract is granted, it shall be exclusive
not only as against any other person, firm, association, corporation, or
other legal entity but also as against the Town itself. The board of mayor
and aldermen may prescribe in each grant of a franchise, or in each contract
respecting same, the rates, fares, charges, the method of determining same,
and regulations that may be made by the grantee of the franchise or contract.
Franchises or contracts may, by their terms, apply to the territory within
the corporate limits of the Town at the date of the franchises or contracts
and to such corporate limits thereafter as same may be enlarged and to the
then existing streets, alleys, and to other thoroughfares which may be
opened; provided, however, this paragraph shall not affect existing contracts
or franchises;



         (13)   Prescribe reasonable regulations regarding the
construction, maintenance, equipment, operation, and service of public
utilities and compel from time to time reasonable extensions of facilities
for such services, but nothing herein shall be construed to permit the
alteration or impairment of any of the terms or provisions of any exclusive
franchise granted or of any exclusive contract entered into under subsection
12 of Section 2.02;



         (14)   Establish, open, relocate, vacate, alter, widen,
extend, grade, improve, repair, construct, reconstruct, maintain, light,
sprinkle, and clean public highways, streets, boulevards, parkways,
sidewalks, alleys, parks, golf courses, public grounds, and squares, bridges,
viaducts, subways, sewers, and drains within or without the corporate limits,
and to take any appropriate property for such uses as may be provided by
general law;



         (15)   Construct, and improve any streets, highways,
avenues, alleys, or other public places within the corporate limits, to take
all other action necessary and incidental thereto, and to assess a portion of
the cost of such improvements upon the property abutting upon,or adjacent to,
such streets, highways, or alleys under and as provided by general law;



         (16)   Establish the limits of street, road and alley
rights-of-way when necessary;



         (17)   Assess against abutting property within the
corporate limits the cost of removing from sidewalks and other public
property all accumulations of snow, ice, and earth; cutting and removing
obnoxious weeds and rubbish; street lighting, street sweeping, street
sprinkling, street flushing, and oiling; and cleaning and rendering sanitary,
or removing, abolishing, or prohibiting of unsanitary conditions in such
manner as may be provided by general law or by ordinance of the board of
mayor and aldermen;



         (18)   License and regulate, in accordance with
applicable law, all persons, firms, corporations, companies, associations and
other legal entities engaged in any business, occupation, calling,
profession, or trade;



         (19)   Impose a license tax upon any animal, thing,
business, vocation, pursuit, privilege, or calling unless prohibited by law;



         (20)   Define, prohibit, abate, suppress, prevent, and
regulate all acts, practices, conduct, business, occupations, callings,
trades, uses of property, and all other things whatsoever detrimental or
liable to be detrimental to health, morals, comfort, safety, convenience or
welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and to exercise general police powers;



         (21)   Prescribe limits within which business
occupations and practices liable to be nuisances or detrimental to the
health, morals, security, or general welfare of the people may be lawfully
established, conducted or maintained;



         (22)   Inspect, test, measure and weigh any article for
consumption or use within the Town and to charge reasonable fees therefor;
and to provide standards of weights, tests and measures;



         (23)   Establish, regulate, license, and inspect weights
and measures;



         (24)   Regulate the location, bulk, occupancy, area,
lot, location, height, construction, and materials of all buildings and
structures and to inspect all buildings, lands, and places as to their
condition for health, cleanliness, and safety, and, when necessary, to
prevent the use thereof and require any alteration or changes necessary to
make them healthful, clean, or safe;



         (25)   Provide and maintain charitable, educational,
recreative, curative, corrective, detention, or penal institutions,
departments, functions, facilities, instrumentalities, conveniences, and
services;



         (26)   Purchase or construct, maintain, and establish a
penal facility for the confinement or detention of any person convicted in
Town Court of offenses against the laws and ordinances of the Town and who is
required to be confined as a result of such conviction or to contract with
other governments to keep said persons in their penal facility(s) and to
provide by said contract and by ordinance for the commitment of such persons
to the penal facility(s) so provided;



         (27)   Enforce any ordinance, rule or regulation by
means of fines, forfeitures, and penalties, or by action or proceedings in
any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any one or more of such means and
to impose costs as a part thereof, but no fine, forfeiture or penalty shall
exceed five hundred dollars ($500) per violation, or as provided by State
law, whichever is greater;



         (28)   Establish schools, determine the necessary
boards, officers, and teachers required therefor, and fix their compensation;
to purchase or otherwise acquire land for schoolhouses, playgrounds and other
purposes connected with the schools; to purchase or erect all necessary
buildings and to do all other acts necessary to establish, maintain, and
operate a complete educational system within the Town;



         (29)   Regulate, tax, license, or suppress keeping or
going at large of animals within the Town, to impound the same and in default
of redemption, to sell or dispose of the same;



         (30)   Call elections as hereinafter provided;



         (31)   Determine the boundaries of the Town by
appropriate survey or other acceptable method when necessary;



         (32)   Provide compensation and benefits program for the
welfare of the employees and elected officials of the Town;



         (33)   Provide for the establishment and operation of
all offices, boards, divisions, and departments not herein enumerated which
may be deemed necessary or expedient in the interest of the Town;



         (34)   Provide for and establish a planning commission
and a board of zoning appeals pursuant to, and consistent with, the general
law and to invest such bodies with all the powers conferred by general law;
and to act upon the plans, plats, decisions, and recommendations made by such
bodies, respectively, as in the general law provided;



         (35)   Do all things necessary to provide the Town
sufficient and safe water; to provide for the regulation, construction, and
maintenance of water works, settling basins, pumping stations, water pipes,
mains, rights-of-way for the same, reservoirs, and all appurtenances, whether
within or without the corporate limits of the Town; to provide for rates and
assessments for water service and to provide and fix liens or penalties
including withdrawal of services for refusal or failure of the party served
to pay for same;



         (36)   Provide for a sewerage collection, treatment, and
disposal facility, whether within or without the corporate limits of the
Town; to provide for rates and assessments for water service and to provide
and fix liens or penalties including withdrawal of service for refusal or
failure of the party served to pay for same;



         (37)   Collect and dispose of drainage, including storm
water drainage, sewage, offal, ashes, garbage, and refuse, and to impose a
compulsory service charge for such, or to license and regulate such
collection and disposal;



         (38)   Provide an electric utility;



         (39)   Provide a gas utility system;



         (40)   Provide for health and safety of citizens, and
preservation of property;



         (41)   Provide for and establish a design review
commission for the purpose of developing aesthetic and architectural controls
for the community, ensuring compatible development, promoting functional
utility and property values, and maintaining balanced uses of land.



         (42)   Impose a historical preservation privilege tax on
persons or entities constructing commercial and office developments on land
within the corporate limits, as the Town deems appropriate, to pay the cost
of capital improvements in the historic town square business district and
other expenses related to such developments, including, but not limited to,
incentive programs for private improvements and the providing of
administrative services; and



         (43)   Have and exercise all powers that now or
hereafter it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate,
as fully and completely as though these powers were specifically enumerated
herein.



      (b)   In addition, if the present or any future provisions of
the general law of the State of Tennessee would grant powers to the Town that
are not specifically set forth herein, the Town shall also have such powers.



   SECTION 2.03.  INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.  The Town may exercise
any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the
financing, by contract or otherwise, jointly or in cooperation with any one
or more states, political subdivisions, or civil divisions or agencies
thereof of the government of the United States.



   SECTION 2.04.  CONSTRUCTION.  The powers of the Town under this
charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the Town, and the specific
mention of particular powers in this charter shall not be construed as
limiting in any way the general powers stated in this article or those
otherwise available to the Town by general law.



ARTICLE III
ELECTIONS



   SECTION 3.01.  DATE OF GENERAL TOWN ELECTION. The general Town
election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of
November of each even-numbered year. (As amended by Priv. Acts 2001, ch. 43)



   SECTION 3.02  GENERAL ELECTION LAWS APPLY.  All elections shall be
conducted in accordance with the general election laws and this charter.



   SECTION 3.03.  VOTER QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.  All persons who are
qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly of the State of
Tennessee and who have been actual bona fide residents and citizens of the
Town for thirty (30) days next preceding the election shall be entitled to
vote in all municipal elections.



   SECTION 3.04.  CERTAIN POLITICAL ACTIVITY PROHIBITED.  No employee of
the Town shall continue in the employment of the Town and hold office as
mayor or alderman. Any employee who seeks elected office in the Town shall
resign his position effective as of the date of the filing of his nominating
petition. For purposes of this section only, a person holding the office of
mayor or alderman shall not be considered an employee of the Town. (As
amended by Priv. Acts 2001, ch. 43)



ARTICLE IV
BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN



   SECTION 4.01.  COMPOSITION, ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE, RE-ELECTION, AND
RUNOFFS.  The governing body of the Town shall consist of a mayor and five
(5) aldermen to be known officially as the “board of mayor and aldermen,”
in which is vested all corporate, legislative and other powers of the Town,
except as otherwise provided in this charter. The board of mayor and aldermen
shall hereinafter be referred to as the “board.”



   The mayor and aldermen shall be elected for a term of four (4) years.
The aldermen positions shall be numbered one (1) through five (5). Elections
for the mayor and aldermen shall be held on a staggered schedule such that
the mayor and aldermen positions 3 and 5 shall be held on the same election
cycle, and elections for aldermen positions 1, 2, and 4 shall be held on a
different election cycle but simultaneously with one another. At the time of
filing a qualifying petition, any candidate for mayor or alderman shall
select and designate the one position being sought.



   Elections for mayor and aldermen shall be held on the date of the
regular state election on the Tuesday following the first Monday of November
of even-numbered years.



   In all elections, the mayor and aldermen shall be elected from the Town
at large. In the event that no candidate receives a majority of the votes
cast for a particular office, a runoff election shall be held between the two
(2) candidates receiving the largest number of votes for that office. A
runoff election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the expiration of
thirty (30) days next following the election in  which no candidate received
the majority of the votes cast for a particular office.



   The board, in January of each year, shall elect an alderman to serve as
vice mayor for a term of one (1) year. The vice mayor shall be eligible for
re-election to such office.



   The mayor and any alderman shall be eligible for re-election, subject
to the limitations contained in Section 4.03, infra. (As amended by Priv.
Acts 2001, ch. 43)



   SECTION 4.02.  TAKING OF OFFICE. Persons elected to the office of
mayor and aldermen shall take office at an Oath of Office Ceremony following
certification of their election by the Shelby County Election Commission;
provided, however, that in the event of a runoff election, no newly elected
member of the board shall take office until after the results of such runoff
election are certified, following which all newly elected members of the
board shall take office at an Oath of Office Ceremony after such
certification. The Town Administrator shall set the date for the Oath of
Office Ceremony within fourteen days (14) following certification of the
election results by the Shelby County Election Commission.  (As amended by
Priv. Acts 2001, ch. 43)



   SECTION 4.03  QUALIFICATIONS FOR OFFICE. No person shall be eligible
to hold the office of mayor or alderman unless he is a qualified voter under
the laws of the state of Tennessee, and has been a bona fide resident of the
Town for at least twelve (12) months next preceding the election in which he
is a candidate.



   (a)   No individual shall be eligible to be elected or qualified for
the offices of mayor or alderman for more than three (3) cumulative four-year
terms in the same office, not including parts of terms that could result from
appointment to that position or election for less than the full four-year
term. For purposes of this section, the offices of mayor and alderman shall
be considered separate elected offices, but the offices of vice mayor and
alderman shall not be considered separate elected offices.



   This term limitation provision shall apply to each office as it becomes
open for its next election following the effective date of this amendment.
The previous service of an incumbent alderman or mayor (or any other
individual who has previously served on the board) shall not count toward the
application of these term limits.



   (b)   Any person who currently holds the position of mayor or
alderman who files a nominating petition to run for a mayor or alderman
position other than his own and whose own position is not up for reelection
must, at least thirty (30) days prior to the filing deadline for nominating
petitions for the next general Town election, submit a sworn letter of
resignation to become effective on the date of the Oath of Office Ceremony
following the next general Town election. Such resignation is irrevocable.
For purposes of Sections 4.03 and 4.12 of this Article, a vacancy shall exist
in the applicable office of mayor or alderman no earlier than the Oath of
Office Ceremony following the next general Town election.  (As amended by
Priv. Acts 2001, ch. 43)



   SECTION 4.04.  SALARIES AND REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES OF OFFICIALS.
The board is hereby authorized, by resolution upon the minutes, to establish
the salaries for the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and Aldermen; provided, however, that
no such increase shall take effect until there shall have occurred an
election or elections such that all positions of the board have been subject
to re-election following the passage of such resolution. At any time, the
board may establish, increase or decrease the benefits, other than salaries,
that are incidental to the office of mayor and aldermen; provided that such
benefits are commensurate with like benefits being furnished to employees of
the Town, such as, but not limited to, insurance under a group plan.



   The board shall have the full right, power and authority to reimburse
any elected official for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by them in
travel and for expenses actually incurred by elected officials in serving the
Town. (As amended by Priv. Acts 2014, ch. 46)



   SECTION 4.05.  TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS.  The board shall, by
ordinance, fix the time and place at which the regular meetings of the board
shall be held. Regular meetings of the board shall be held at least monthly
for the conduct of such business as may properly come before the board.
Adequate public notice of such meetings shall be given.



   SECTION 4.06.  QUORUM AND ADJOURNMENT. A quorum for the purpose of
conducting business shall be a majority of the membership of the board.  In
the absence of the mayor and vice mayor, the four (4) aldermen present shall
appoint one (1) of their number to be the presiding alderman. The mayor, vice
mayor or the presiding alderman shall have a vote on all questions and shall
have the authority to introduce or second motions, as shall all aldermen. A
regular meeting at which a quorum is present may be adjourned by a majority
vote, either from day to day or from time to time; but no such adjournment
shall be taken to a date beyond the day preceding the next regular meeting;
and any adjourned meeting shall continue as a regular meeting through said
adjournment. The foregoing provisions notwithstanding, in the event there
exists on the board vacancies of more than two (2) members, a quorum shall be
the entire membership of the board.  (As amended by Priv. Acts 2001, ch. 43)



   SECTION 4.07.  CALLED MEETINGS. The board shall meet in special
session on written notice of the mayor or any three (3) aldermen. Such notice
shall be served on the parties entitled thereto, which service may be
accomplished by personal delivery, electronic mail, or U.S. mail. Adequate
public notice of called meetings shall be given.  (As amended by Priv. Acts
2001, ch. 43)



   SECTION 4.08.  ORDINANCE PROCEDURE. All ordinances passed heretofore
for the Town are hereby declared valid and binding and are continued in
effect unless they conflict with this charter. Ordinances hereafter shall be
passed in the following manner:



      All ordinances shall be passed on three (3) different days at a
regular, adjourned, or called meeting of the board. Ordinances may be amended
up to and at the third and final reading. A public hearing shall be held
prior to or at the third and final reading of an ordinance, and notice of
such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the community and posted at the town hall. Ordinances shall be made available
for public inspection in accordance with general law. Each ordinance shall be
effective upon final passage unless by its terms the effective date is
deferred. Ordinances shall be signed by the mayor and shall be immediately
taken charge of by the town clerk and by him numbered, placed in an ordinance
book, and there authenticated by the signature of the town clerk and filed
and preserved.  (As amended by Priv. Acts 2001, ch. 43)



   SECTION 4.09.  OFFICIALS’ OATH OF OFFICE.  The mayor, aldermen, and
judge(s) of the Town shall, before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices, take an oath, before a person authorized to administer
oaths in this state, to faithfully, uprightly, and honestly demean themselves
as such officers of the Town during their continuance in office.



   SECTION 4.10.  DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.  The mayor shall be the executive
head of the Town, responsible for the efficient and orderly administration of
the affairs of the Town and the enforcement of the ordinances of the Town and
the laws of the state within the Town limits. The mayor shall have such
powers and duties as are specified in this charter, as may be provided by
ordinance not inconsistent with this charter and as are otherwise provided by
law. It shall be the duty of the mayor to preside at all meetings of the
board.



   SECTION 4.11.  DUTIES OF THE VICE MAYOR.  The vice mayor of the Town
of Collierville, in the absence, sickness, or the inability or
disqualification of the mayor for any reason to perform his official duties,
shall be authorized to act in the room and stead of the mayor, and all powers
and authority that are in this charter conferred on the mayor are hereby
conferred on the vice mayor when he is acting as mayor as fully and
completely as if the same were set out in detail.



   SECTION 4.12.  VACANCY IN THE OFFICE OF MAYOR, VICE MAYOR OR
ALDERMAN.  A vacancy shall exist in the applicable office if the mayor or an
alderman resigns, dies, moves his residence from the Town, has been
continuously disabled for a period of six (6) months so as to prevent him
from discharging the duties of his office, accepts any federal, state,
county, or other municipal office, which is filled by public election,
accepts employment with the Town, or is convicted of malfeasance or
misfeasance in office, a felony, or a violation of the election laws of the
state, or is adjudicated to have violated the charter of the Town. The
foregoing provisions notwithstanding, the office of any person resigning
pursuant to Section 4.03(b) is deemed vacant no earlier than the effective
date of the resignation submitted by the official in his or her letter of
resignation.



   The declaration of a vacancy, as defined herein, in the office of mayor
or in the office of alderman may be made by motion of any member of the board
at any meeting thereof. Such vacancy shall be deemed to have occurred upon
the passage of such motion by the board.



      (a)   Procedure for filling vacancy in office of mayor. When a
vacancy occurs in the office of the mayor, the vice mayor shall temporarily
assume the office of mayor. Within thirty (30) days after a vacancy occurs in
the office of mayor, the board shall appoint to such office an alderman to
serve for the remainder of the unexpired term thereof; provided that if the
balance of the existing term at the time of the vacancy is more than two (2)
years and the vacancy occurs more than ten (10) days before the deadline for
qualifying for the next biennial election, then the position of mayor shall
be filled at such next biennial election and the person appointed to such
office shall only serve as mayor until a person is elected as mayor at such
election. The person so elected shall be elected to fill the unexpired term
of his predecessor as mayor.



      (b)   Procedure for filling vacancy in office of vice mayor.
When the vice mayor assumes the office of mayor, or when his term as vice
mayor expires, or if the alderman serving as vice mayor should vacate his
office for any other reason, so that the office of vice mayor is then vacant,
the board, within thirty (30) days after such vacancy occurs, shall elect
from its membership a vice mayor to serve for the unexpired term of the vice
mayor who has vacated the office.



      (c)   Procedure for filling vacancy in the office of alderman.
Within thirty (30) days after a vacancy occurs in the office of Alderman, the
board shall appoint to such office a citizen, who would be eligible for
election thereto, to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term thereof;
provided that if the balance of the existing term at the time of vacancy is
more than two (2) years and the vacancy occurs more than ten (10) days before
the deadline for qualifying for the next biennial election, then such
position of alderman shall be filled at such next biennial election and the
person appointed to such office shall only serve as alderman until a person
is elected as alderman at such election. Such person shall be elected to fill
the unexpired term of his predecessor as alderman.



   If there occurs on the board three (3) or more vacancies which remain
unfilled for a period of thirty (30) days, the board shall forthwith, by
resolution, call upon the Election Commission for Shelby County to call a
special election for the purpose of filling such vacancies. This special
election shall be held in the same manner as provided in this charter for
regular elections. The aldermen elected at such special election shall hold
office for the remainder of the unexpired term of the position for which they
stand for election.  (As amended by Priv. Acts 2001, ch. 43)



ARTICLE V
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR



   SECTION 5.01.  APPOINTMENT, SALARY, AND REMOVAL.  The board shall
appoint an operating administrative officer with the title of town
administrator. He shall serve an indefinite term and may be removed from
office by the board of mayor and aldermen.



   SECTION 5.02.  DUTIES.  The town administrator shall be directly
responsible to the mayor and the board to exercise general administrative
responsibilities assigned to him for the coordination and direction of the
activities of the operating departments, including, but not limited to,
preparation of official agenda for all meetings, preparation and
administration of annual operating and capital improvement budgets,
preparation of reports for the mayor and board, purchasing, investigation of
citizens’ complaints, application for grants and administration thereof,
administration of personnel policies, including the selection and discipline
of personnel, provided however, the qualifications of all applicants for
operating department heads shall be reviewed by the town administrator, and
operating department heads shall be nominated by the mayor and appointed or
terminated only by majority vote of the board; and such other duties as may
be described by ordinance. The town administrator shall also maintain all
necessary intergovernmental relationships and attend all meetings of the
board.



   SECTION 5.03.  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.  The town administrator need
not be a resident of Collierville at the time of appointment but promptly
thereafter shall become and thereafter remain an actual resident of the Town.
Salary and other benefits incidental to his position shall be fixed by the
board.



   SECTION 5.04.  ABSENCE OF THE TOWN ADMINISTRATOR.  In the temporary
absence or disability of the town administrator, an employee of the Town
designated by the mayor or the town administrator shall serve as town
administrator.



   At any time during such absence or disability, the mayor may revoke
such designation and appoint another employee of the Town to serve until the
town administrator shall return.



   SECTION 5.05.  ALDERMEN DEALING WITH PERSONNEL THROUGH TOWN
ADMINISTRATOR.  Individual aldermen are not to have or exercise direct
authority over any of the personnel of the Town but may contact such
personnel for information gathering purposes to assist the aldermen in
meeting their collective responsibilities, provided that such contact is made
in such a way as not to interfere with the operation of the department of the
Town involved. All other contact with personnel of the Town by aldermen shall
be through the town administrator.



ARTICLE VI
TOWN ATTORNEY



   SECTION 6.01.  QUALIFICATIONS.  The town attorney shall be an
attorney at law entitled to practice in the courts of the State of Tennessee.



   SECTION 6.02.  APPOINTMENT, DUTIES, AND SALARY.  The town attorney
shall be appointed by the board and shall generally direct management of all
litigation in which the Town is a party, including the function of
prosecuting attorneys in the Town Court; represent the Town in all legal
matters and proceedings in which the Town is a party or interested or in
which any of its officers is officially interested; attend meetings of the
board as requested and advise the board and committees and members thereof,
the town administrator and heads of all departments, offices, or agencies as
to all legal questions affecting the Town’s interests; and approve as to
form, in those instances where required by the board, all contracts, deeds,
bonds, ordinances, resolutions, and other documents to be signed in the name
of or made by or with the Town. His compensation and other benefits
incidental to his position shall be fixed by the board, and he shall serve at
the will of the board.



   SECTION 6.03.  ASSISTANT TOWN ATTORNEYS.  The board may appoint one
(1) or more assistant town attorneys with such qualifications as the board
may determine and same shall perform such duties as the town attorney shall
assign to them. The compensation and other benefits incidental to the
positions of the assistant town attorneys shall be fixed by the board, and
they shall serve at the will of the board.



ARTICLE VII
TOWN CLERK



   SECTION 7.01.  APPOINTMENT.  The town clerk shall be nominated by the
mayor and confirmed by the board. He shall serve at such salary and with such
other benefits incidental to his position as are provided by the board, and
shall serve at the will of the board. The town clerk shall be subject to day
to day supervision by the town administrator.



   SECTION 7.02.  SHALL KEEP MINUTES.  It shall be the duty of the town
clerk to be present at all meetings of the board and to prepare and maintain
a full and accurate record of all business transacted by the same. In his
absence from a meeting the officer presiding at the meeting shall appoint a
person to fulfill the duties of town clerk.



   SECTION 7.03.  SHALL BE CUSTODIAN OF PUBLIC RECORDS, BONDS, ETC.  the
town clerk shall have custody of and preserve in his office the town seal,
the public records, ordinance books, minutes of the board, contracts, bonds,
titles, deeds, certificates and papers, all official indemnity or security
bonds, and all other bonds, oaths, and affirmations, and all other records,
papers and documents not required by this charter or by ordinance to be
deposited elsewhere, and register them by numbers, dates, and contents, and
keep an accurate and current index thereof.



   SECTION 7.04.  SHALL PROVIDE AND CERTIFY COPIES OF RECORDS, PAPERS,
ETC. The town clerk shall provide and, when required, certify copies of
records, papers and documents in his office and charge therefor, for the use
of the Town, such fees as may be provided by ordinance or resolution; and
cause copies of ordinances to be published as may be directed by the board
and kept in his office for distribution.



   SECTION 7.05.  SHALL PERFORM ANY OTHER DUTIES IMPOSED.  The town
clerk shall also perform any other duties imposed upon him by this charter,
by ordinance, by the town administrator or by the board.



ARTICLE VIII
ADMINISTRATION



   SECTION 8.01.  DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES, AND AGENCIES. The board may
establish town departments, offices or agencies in addition to those created
by this charter and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices
and agencies not in conflict with this charter. Departments, offices and
agencies created by the board may be abolished or combined.



   SECTION 8.02.  EMPLOYEES WHO HANDLE MONEY SHALL BE BONDED.  The town
administrator and every officer, agent, and employee having duties embracing
the receipt, disbursement, custody, or handling of money shall, before
entering upon his duties, execute a surety bond with a surety company
authorized to do business in the state of Tennessee, as surety, in such
amount as shall be prescribed by ordinance. All such bonds and sureties shall
be subject to the approval of the board, and the board may provide for
blanket bonds. The cost of all bonds shall be an expense of the Town.



   SECTION 8.03.  SERVICES FURNISHED AND EQUIPMENT USED OUTSIDE CORPORATE
LIMITS.  The Town is empowered, in its governmental capacity, to use its
firefighting, emergency medical and other equipment and personnel outside its
corporate limits, when and under such circumstances, limitations and
conditions as the board may determine.



   The board may provide or agree to such terms, limitations, restrictions
and conditions as may seem proper or advisable to it with respect to such
outside use of the equipment and personnel; and it may refuse to permit any
such outside use. In default of action by the governing body, the mayor shall
have authority to act for the governing body in authorizing the use of such
equipment or personnel outside of the corporate limits of Collierville,
Tennessee, and he may likewise have authority to refuse to permit such
outside use.



   Whenever said firefighting, emergency medical and/or other equipment
and Town personnel are used or employed outside the corporate limits of the
Town, the Town of Collierville and its officials, agents, servants, employees
and volunteers authorizing or performing such service, shall be entitled to
all the immunities and protection from liability to which they are entitled
with respect to similar services within the corporate limits of the Town. It
is expressly provided that the performance of the service shall constitute
the discharge of a governmental function.



   SECTION 8.04.  APPOINTMENTS. No person may serve as an appointed
member of any board of the Town while that person is an appointed member of
another board of the Town except as provided by ordinance or state law.



   SECTION 8.05.  SPECIAL CONTRACTUAL APPOINTMENTS.  The board shall be
empowered to appoint special consultants, architects and auditors when deemed
advisable or necessary.



   SECTION 8.06.  AUTHORITY TO REGULATE OR PROHIBIT SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS,
ETC. The board is hereby authorized, by ordinance, to regulate or prevent the
practice of being in or upon private residences within the Town by
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of
merchandise, not having been requested or invited to do by the owners or
occupants of a private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for
the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or disposing of, peddling or hawking
the same.



   SECTION 8.07.  PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS. The rules and
regulations under which the personnel system of the Town shall be governed
shall be prepared by the town administrator and shall become effective when
adopted by the board. These rules and regulations may be amended from time to
time and shall set forth personnel policies and procedures



   SECTION 8.08.  PROHIBITIONS.  No person shall be appointed to, or
removed from, or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to
any Town position or appointive Town administrative office because of race,
sex, age, disability, national origin, political or religious opinions or
affiliations.



ARTICLE IX
FINANCE AND BUDGET



   SECTION 9.01.  FISCAL YEAR.  The fiscal year of the Town shall begin
on the first day of July and end on the last day of June, unless otherwise
provided by ordinance.



   SECTION 9.02.  ANNUAL BUDGETS REQUIRED.  The adoption of an annual
budget shall be a prerequisite to the appropriation of money for municipal
purposes and the levy of property taxes.



   SECTION 9.03.  TOWN ADMINISTRATOR REQUIRED TO PREPARE AND SUBMIT
ANNUAL BUDGET AND EXPLANATORY MESSAGE.  At least forty-five (45) days before
the beginning of the fiscal year, the town administrator shall prepare and
submit to the board a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying
message. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the Town for the
ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate
any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures,
and revenues together with the reasons for such changes, summarize the
Town’s debt position, include such other material as the town administrator
deems desirable or the board may require, and otherwise be in such form and
substance as may be required by general state law.



   SECTION 9.04.  REQUIRED CONTENT AND ORGANIZATION OF BUDGET. The budget
shall provide a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year and,
except as required by law or this charter, shall be in such form as the town
administrator deems desirable or the board may require.



   SECTION 9.05.  PUBLIC HEARING ON ANNUAL BUDGET.  After considering
the town administrator’s proposed annual budget and the making of any
modification thereto, the board shall schedule a time and place for a public
hearing thereon and shall give proper notice of the time and place of the
public hearing, a summary of the annual budget tentatively approved by the
board, and a notice of when and where the entire annual budget may be
inspected. Notice of the public hearing must be given at least seven (7) days
in advance of the date thereof.



   SECTION 9.06.  BUDGET ADOPTION.  After the public hearing, the board
shall adopt the budget, with such modification or amendments as the board
deems advisable, for the ensuing year on or before the last day of the fiscal
year currently ending. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the
appropriations for the current fiscal year shall become the appropriations
for the next fiscal year until the adoption of the new budget ordinance.



   Adoption of the budget shall be by resolution and shall be passed upon
one reading at a regular, adjourned, or called meeting of the board. Adoption
of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified
therein as expenditures from the funds indicated.



   SECTION 9.07.  AMENDMENTS TO THE ANNUAL BUDGET.  Except as otherwise
restricted by law, the board may amend the budget by resolution upon one
reading at a regular adjourned, or called meeting of the board. In order to
increase expenditures over the total of those authorized by the current
budget, the board must amend the budget resolution.



   SECTION 9.08.  TRANSFER OF UNENCUMBERED APPROPRIATIONS. At any time
during the fiscal year, the town administrator may transfer part or all of
any unencumbered line items within a department, office, or agency. The
board, by appropriate resolution may authorize the town administrator to
transfer moneys from one (1) department, office or agency to another within
the same fund subject to such limitations and procedures as it may prescribe.



   SECTION 9.09.  EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS.  Upon a declaration by the
board that there exists a public emergency affecting life, health, property,
or the public peace, the board may make emergency appropriations by
ordinance. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues
to meet such appropriations, the board is authorized to borrow funds
sufficient to meet an emergency by issuing evidence of obligations. Provision
shall be made in the budget for the succeeding fiscal year for the payment of
such obligations.



   SECTION 9.10.  DEFICITS.  If at any time during the fiscal year it
appears probable to the town administrator that the available revenues will
be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report, without
delay, to the board, the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action
taken by him, and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The
board shall then take such action as it deems necessary to prevent or
minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce
appropriations.



   SECTION 9.11.  LAPSING OF APPROPRIATIONS. Any portion of an annual
appropriation remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of a fiscal
year shall lapse and be credited to the respective fund’s fund balance.



   SECTION 9.12.  INCURRENCE AND DISCHARGE OF OBLIGATIONS.  No payment
shall be made or obligation incurred against any appropriation unless the
town administrator certifies that an appropriation has been made for that
purpose and that there is unexpended and unencumbered in the appropriation
for that purpose an amount sufficient to meet the obligation or to make the
expenditure. However, except where prohibited by law, nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making of
contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the
issuance of bonds or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing
for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year.



   SECTION 9.13.  BORROWING OF FUNDS.  The board may authorize the Town
to issue bonds or to borrow money in conformance with the laws of the state
of Tennessee.



   SECTION 9.14.  ACCOUNTING RECORDS, CONTROLS AND AUDITS.  Adequate
accounting records shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. Constant and comprehensive
budgetary control shall be maintained. An audit of the financial statements
of the Town shall be required by action of the board and same shall be made
after the end of each fiscal year by an independent certified public
accountant.



   SECTION 9.15.  PURCHASING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.  All purchases of
goods and services by authorized officials of the Town, using or encumbering
municipal funds, shall be made in accordance with policies of the board and
applicable laws of the state of Tennessee.



ARTICLE X
TAXATION



   SECTION 10.01.  GENERAL POWER TO LEVY TAXES. Subject to provisions of
general law, the board shall have and is hereby given the power to levy taxes
for all corporate purposes upon all taxable property, real, personal and
mixed, and privileges within the limits of the Town, and be it further
enacted, that the board shall have the power to license, tax and regulate
everything licensed, taxed and regulated by the state and/or county.



   SECTION 10.02.  ASSESSMENT AND LEVY.  The principles established for
state and county taxation shall be used to assess for taxation all property
within the Town not exempt by general law. Assessments made by the Shelby
County Tax Assessor may be adopted by the Town or assessments may be made by
the Town in accordance with applicable law.



   SECTION 10.03.  PENALTIES AND INTEREST ON DELINQUENT TAXES.  The Town
shall establish due and delinquent dates for payment of property taxes and
shall be allowed to assess the same penalties and collect the same rate of
interest on delinquent taxes which may be due the municipality as are now or
may hereafter be assessed and/or collected by the County of Shelby. Taxes
shall be due on December 1st of each year, and declared delinquent if not
paid in full on or before March 1 of the following year.



   SECTION 10.04.  PRIVILEGE TAXES GENERALLY.  The Town shall be
authorized to fix by ordinance, in accordance with the general laws of the
state of Tennessee, a business privilege tax on all businesses, pursuits,
occupations and professions carried on in the Town.



   SECTION 10.05.  INSTITUTION OF SUITS TO ENFORCE TAX LIENS.  Before
March 1 of the second year following the year for which assessed, the town
administrator shall certify to the town attorney the list of all real estate
upon which municipal taxes remain due and unpaid or which is liable for sale
for other taxes and assessments; and the attorney shall proceed at once to
file or cause to be filed suits in the appropriate court for the collection
of such taxes, assessments, penalties, and interest and enforcement of tax
liens. Upon the filing of suit, an additional penalty established by the
board shall accrue upon all delinquent taxes as attorney’s fees. Suits may
be filed, prosecuted and the land sold in the same manner as for the
enforcement of tax liens for delinquent county taxes, or as otherwise
provided by state law.



   SECTION 10.06.  STATUTORY LIEN.  All municipal taxes on real estate
in the Town and all penalties and costs accruing thereon are hereby declared
to be a lien on the real estate on and after January 1 of the year for which
the same are assessed.



   SECTION 10.07.  COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES. All
taxes delinquent for thirty (30) days may be collected by distress warrants,
by the sale of personal property, and by any other judicially accepted means.
The delinquent tax list in the hands of the collector shall have the force
and effect of a judgment and execution from a court of record.



   SECTION 10.08.  OCCUPANCY TAX.



   SECTION A. As used in this section unless the context otherwise
requires:



      (1)   “Consideration” means the consideration charged,
whether or not received, for the occupancy in a hotel valued in money whether
to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts,
cash, credits, property and services of any kind or nature without any
deduction therefrom whatsoever. Nothing in this definition shall be construed
to imply that consideration is charged when the space provided to the person
is complimentary from the operator and no consideration is charged to, or
received from, any person.



      (2)   “Finance director” means the finance director of the
Town of Collierville, Tennessee.



      (3)   “Hotel” means any structure or space, or any portion
thereof, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by
transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any
hotel, inn, tourist camp, tourist court, tourist cabin, motel or any place in
which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are furnished to transients for a
consideration.



      (4)   “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the
right to the use or possession, of any room, lodgings or accommodations in
any hotel.



      (5)   “Operator” means the person operating the hotel
whether as owner, lessee or otherwise.



      (6)   “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership,
joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock
company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee,
syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.



      (7)   “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy
or is entitled to occupancy for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations in a
hotel for a period of less than thirty (30) continuous days.



   SECTION B. The board of the Town is authorized to levy by ordinance and
collect a privilege tax upon the privilege of occupancy in any hotel of each
transient in any amount to be set by ordinance by the Town of up to five
percent (5%) of the consideration charged by the operator. Such tax is a
privilege tax upon the transient occupying such room and is to be collected
as provided in this charter.



   SECTION C.



      (1)   Such tax shall be added by each and every operator to
each invoice prepared by the operator for the occupancy of the hotel and
given directly or transmitted to the transient for the occupancy in the
operator’s hotel. Such tax shall be collected by such operator from the
transient and remitted to the Town.



      (2)   When a person has maintained occupancy for thirty (30)
continuous days, that person shall receive from the operator a refund or
credit for the tax previously collected from, or charged to, the transient,
and the operator shall receive credit for the amount of such tax if
previously paid or reported to the Town.



   SECTION D.



      (1)   The tax hereby levied shall be remitted to the finance
director or his designee by all operators who lease, rent or charge for any
rooms, lodgings, spaces or accommodations in hotels within the Town which
finance director shall be charged by ordinance of the Town with the duty of
collection thereof, such tax to be remitted to such officer not later than
the twentieth (20th) day of each month for the preceding month. The operator
is required to collect the tax from the transient at the time of the
presentation of the invoice for such occupancy whether prior to occupancy or
after occupancy as may be the custom of the operator, and if credit is
granted by the operator to the transient, then the obligation to the Town for
such tax shall be that of the operator.



      (2)   For the purpose of compensating the operator for
remitting the tax authorized and levied pursuant hereto and the related
ordinances of the Town, the operator shall be allowed two percent (2%) of the
amount of the tax due and accounted for and remitted to the Town in the form
of a deduction in submitting the report and paying the amount due by such
operator, provided the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment.



   SECTION E. The finance director shall be responsible for the collection
of such tax and shall place the proceeds of such tax in such accounts as
provided in the ordinance of the Town adopted under the authority hereof. A
monthly tax return shall be filed under oath with the finance director by the
operator with such number of copies thereof as the finance director may
reasonably require for the collection of such tax, The report of the operator
shall include such facts and information as may be deemed reasonable for the
verification of the tax due. The form of such report shall be developed and
furnished by the finance director and approved by the board prior to use. The
finance director shall audit each operator in the town at least once a year
and shall report on the audits to the board. The board is hereby authorized
to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of the
provisions of this act.



   SECTION F. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any
manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will
be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the
rent, or that if added, any part will be refunded.



   SECTION G. Taxes collected by an operator which are not remitted to the
finance director on or before the due dates are delinquent. An operator is
liable for interest on such delinquent taxes from the due date at the rate of
twelve percent (12%) per annum, and is liable for an additional penalty of
one percent (1%) for each month or fraction thereof such taxes are
delinquent. Such interest and penalty shall become a part of the tax herein
required to be remitted. Each occurrence of willful refusal of an operator to
collect or remit the tax or willful refusal of a transient to pay the tax
imposed is unlawful and shall be punishable by a civil penalty not in excess
of five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition, it is unlawful for any
operator to knowingly file a false tax return and a violation shall be
punishable by a civil penalty not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00).



   SECTION H. It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection
and payment to the Town of any tax imposed by this charter to keep and
preserve for a period of three (3) years all records necessary to determine
the amount of such tax due for which he or she may have been liable for the
collection of, and payment to, the Town, which records the finance director,
his designee or any accounting firm or accountant employed by the Town, shall
have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.



   SECTION I.



      (1)   The finance director in administering and enforcing the
provisions of this charter and any ordinance adopted pursuant hereto shall
have as additional powers, those powers and duties with respect to the
collecting taxes as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 67 or
otherwise provided by law for the county clerks and/or municipal officers.



      (2)   Upon any claim of illegal assessment and collection, the
taxpayer has the remedies provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 67,
Chapter 23, it being the intent of this charter that the provisions of law
which apply to the recovery of state taxes illegally assessed and collected
shall also apply to taxes illegally assessed and collected under the
authority of this charter. The finance director shall possess those powers
and duties as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 67-1-707, for
county clerks applicable to adjustments and refunds of such tax.



      (3)   With respect to the adjustment and settlement with
taxpayers, all errors of taxes collected by the finance director under
authority of this charter shall be refunded by the Town.



      (4)   Notice of any tax paid under protest shall be given to
the finance director and the ordinance authorizing levy of the tax shall
designate a municipal officer against whom suit may be brought for recovery.



   SECTION J. The proceeds of the tax authorized by this charter shall be
allocated to such funds as the board shall direct.



   SECTION 10.09.  THE COLLIERVILLE HISTORIC PRESERVATION TAX.



   SECTION A. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:



      (1)   “Building permit” means a permit for development
issued by the Town for construction of a building within the municipal limits;



      (2)   “Certificate of occupancy” means a license for
occupancy of a building or structure issued in the Town;



      (3)   “Commercial and office building” means any structure
built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattels or movable
property of any kind for commercial purposes or to provide office space; the
term includes a mobile home;



      (4)   “Development” means the construction, building,
reconstruction, erection, extension, betterment or improvement of land
providing a building or structure or the addition to any building or
structure, or any part thereof, which provides, adds to, or increases, the
floor area of a commercial or office building of a non-residential use;



      (5)   “Floor area” means the total of the gross horizontal
area of all floors, including usable basements and cellars, below the roof
and within the outer surface of the main walls of principal or accessory
buildings or the center lines of party walls separating such buildings or
portions thereof, or within lines drawn parallel to and two (2) feet within
the roof line of any building or portions thereof without walls, but
excluding arcades, porticos and similar open areas which are accessible to
the general public, and which are not designed or used as sales, display,
storage, service, production or office areas;



      (6)   “Governing body” means the board of the Town;



      (7)   “Historic preservation program” means proposed
schedule of future projects in the Town Square Business District, listed in
order of construction priority, together with cost estimates and the
anticipated means of financing each project approved by the board;



      (8)   “Non-residential” means the development of any
property for any use other than residential use, except as may be exempted by
this act;



      (9)   “Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership,
joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the
plural as well as the singular number;



      (10)   “Place of worship” means that portion of a building
owned by a religious institution which has tax-exempt status, which is used
for worship services and related functions; provided, however, that a place
of worship does not include buildings or portions of buildings which are used
for purposes other than for worship and related functions or which are or are
intended to be leased, rented or used by persons who do not have tax-exempt
status;



      (11)   “Public buildings” means a building owned by the
state of Tennessee or any agency thereof, a political subdivision of the
state of Tennessee, including, but not necessarily limited to, counties,
cities, school districts and special districts, or the federal government or
any agency thereof; and



      (12)   “Residential” means the development of any property
for a dwelling unit or units.



   SECTION B. It is the intent and purpose of this section to authorize
the town to impose a tax on new commercial and office development within the
corporate limits, but outside the Historic Town Square business district, to
be payable at the time of issuance of a building permit or certificate of
occupancy so as to ensure and require that the persons responsible for new
development share in the burdens of growth by paying their fair share of the
costs of maintaining, improving and developing the Historic Town Square made
necessary by such development.



   SECTION C. Engaging in the act of commercial and office development
within Collierville, except as provided in Section E herein, is declared to
be a privilege upon which Collierville may, by ordinance of the governing
body, levy a tax in an amount not to exceed the rate set forth in Section F.



   SECTION D. The board shall impose the tax authorized herein by
ordinance after adopting a Historic Town Square capital improvements program
indicating the need for, and the cost, for the projects anticipated to be
funded, in part, by this tax and after finding that the need for such
projects is reasonably related to new commercial and office development in
the Town. The ordinance of the board imposing this tax shall state the rate
to be applied on new commercial and office development. The governing body
shall, by ordinance, adopt administrative guidelines, procedures, policies,
regulations, forms and an appellate review process necessary to properly
implement, administer and enforce the provisions of this section.



   SECTION E. The provisions of Section 10.09 shall not apply to
development of:



      (1)   Residential structures;



      (2)   Industrial buildings;



      (3)   Buildings used for agricultural purposes;



      (4)   Public buildings; and



      (5)   Places of worship.



   SECTION F. For the exercise of the privilege described herein,
Collierville may impose a tax on new commercial and office development not to
exceed fifty cents ($0.50) per gross square foot of development. The Town may
develop a tax rate schedule by which commercial and office building uses are
classified by type for the purpose of imposition of the tax authorized herein.



   SECTION G. The tax established by this section shall be collected at
the time of application for a building permit for development as herein
defined or, if a building permit is not required, at the time of application
for a certificate of occupancy by the official duly authorized in such
jurisdiction to issue building permits or certificates of occupancy. The Town
shall, before issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy,
receive payment in cash or by negotiable instrument payable to the
municipality. No building permit for development as herein defined, or
certificate of occupancy, if no building permit is required, shall be issued
in Collierville unless the tax has been paid in full or a negotiable
instrument payable to the Town has been received.



   SECTION H. All funds collected by the imposition of the tax shall be
used for the purpose of preserving, maintaining, improving and developing
public facilities and promoting private redevelopment within the Historic
Town Square of Collierville, the need for which is reasonably related to new
commercial and office development within the corporate limits of Collierville.



   SECTION I. The authority to impose this tax on new commercial and
office development in the Town is in addition to all other authority to
impose taxes, fees, assessments or other revenue-raising or land development
regulatory measures granted either by the private or public acts of the state
of Tennessee and the imposition of such tax, in addition to any other
authorized tax, fee, assessment or charge, shall not be deemed to constitute
double taxation.



   SECTION J. The provisions of this section shall in no manner repeal,
modify or interfere with the authority granted by any other public or private
law applicable to the Town. This section shall be deemed to create an
additional and alternative method for Collierville to impose or collect taxes
for the purpose stated herein made necessary by new commercial and office
development within the municipality.



ARTICLE XI
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT



   SECTION 11.01.  JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. The judicial department of the
Town shall be established and administered in the following manner.



   SECTION 11.02.  NUMBER OF JUDGES.  The Town shall have one town judge
until the board may, by ordinance, increase the number of judges.



   SECTION 11.03.  QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM.  All persons serving as town
judge shall be licensed to practice law in the courts of the state of
Tennessee and shall meet the qualifications established by Article V, Section
4 of the Tennessee Constitution, to wit: They shall be thirty (30) years of
age, shall before their election have been a resident of the state of
Tennessee for five (5) years and of the Town for one (1) year and shall be
elected by the qualified voters of the Town for a term of service of eight
(8) years, (i) except for certain instances in which a person may be
appointed as town judge for a term which shall expire after the next
applicable regular August general election and (ii) except for any initial
term of elected service which may be shorter, all as provided hereinafter.



   SECTION 11.04.  JURISDICTION AND POWERS.  The jurisdiction of the
town judge shall extend to the trial of all offenses against the ordinances
of the Town and, concurrently with the Court of General Sessions of Shelby
County, Tennessee, for violation of the criminal laws of the state. Costs in
trials of offenses against the ordinances of the Town shall be provided by
ordinance. Costs in other matters shall be as established under general laws
of the state of Tennessee. The town judge shall have the power to: levy
fines, penalties, and costs, to issue all necessary process, to administer
oaths, and to maintain order, including the power to punish for contempt by
fine or confinement not exceeding the limits provided by general laws.



   SECTION 11.05.  BAIL. The bail of persons arrested and awaiting trials
and persons appealing the decision of a town judge shall be fixed by the town
judge and upon such security as in his discretion he deems necessary or as
otherwise may be provided by ordinance or general law.



   SECTION 11.06.  SEPARATION OF POWERS.  The town judge shall be the
exclusive judge of the law and facts in every case before the court and no
official or employee of the Town shall attempt to influence his decision
except through pertinent facts presented in court.



   SECTION 11.07.  POPULAR ELECTION OF JUDGE(S). The popular election of
the town judge is hereby chosen and all town judges shall be popularly
elected, subject to the provisions for initial appointments as provided for
herein and appointments to fill any vacancy.



   SECTION 11.08.  TERMS; ELECTION PROCEDURE.  The town judge elected at
present shall remain in office through the term for which he was elected.
Thereafter, the term of office of a town judge shall be eight (8) years. All
subsequent elections for town judge pursuant to this charter and general laws
shall be held in accordance with Article VII, Section 5 of the Tennessee
Constitution and the general law.



   SECTION 11.09.  VACANCIES.  A vacancy in the office of the town judge
shall be filled by appointment of the board. The person appointed, however,
may serve only until the next regular August general election. At such
election, a person shall be elected to serve any unexpired term if the full
term of his successor is not to be filled at such election. In the temporary
absence of a town judge, a qualified person shall be appointed by the board
or appointed pursuant to the statutes and general law of the state of
Tennessee to serve until the return of the presiding judge.



   SECTION 11.10.  COMPENSATION.  The salary and any other benefits
relating to the office of all town judges shall be established by the board
by ordinance thirty (30) days prior to the qualification date for the town
judge’s election for the next term of office and shall not be increased nor
diminished during any such term. The salary for the town judge elected at
present shall remain at twenty-five thousand three hundred dollars ($25,300)
annually until changed in accordance with the foregoing. The salary shall be
paid monthly from the general fund of the Town. In addition, as part of the
compensation relating to the office of town judge, a town judge, if otherwise
eligible for coverage under the health and medical benefits plan of the Town,
shall be afforded the same coverage under such plans, at the expense of the
Town, as is generally afforded to the other employees of the Town.



   SECTION 11.11.  RECORDS; DOCKETS; CITY COURT CLERK. The Town does not
elect, as permitted by the laws of the state of Tennessee, to require the
city court clerk to be elected. The town administrator shall have the duty of
maintaining all records of the city court in accordance with applicable laws.
The town administrator may employ on behalf of the Town a person to assist
him in this function and such person shall be designated as the city court
clerk. The board shall require the proper maintenance of the docket of the
city court and other records of the court. Subject to the general law and the
authority of the town judge, the board shall fix the regular time for holding
court.



ARTICLE XII
MISCELLANEOUS



   SECTION 12.01.  GENDER.  Any pronoun used herein or any reference to
the term alderman or aldermen shall be construed to mean the proper gender of
the person to whom it shall apply under the circumstances.



   SECTION 12.02.  CORPORATE EXISTENCE, EXISTING ORDINANCES AND
RESOLUTIONS.  The corporate existence of the Town is continued. All existing
ordinances, obligations, resolutions or other actions of the board not
inconsistent with this charter shall remain in full force and effect until
amended or repealed in the manner herein provided.



   SECTION 12.03.  EXPIRATION OF TERMS OF ELECTED OFFICERS.  Nothing in
this charter shall be construed as having the effect of removing any
incumbent from office or abridging the term of any official prior to the end
of the term for which he was elected.



   SECTION 12.04.  SEVERABILITY.  If any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence or part of this charter shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or
impair any other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such
other parts are necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be
invalid or unconstitutional. It is the legislative intent in enacting this
charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part
be enacted separately and independently of each other.



   SECTION 2. Chapter 230 of the Private Acts of 1988, Chapter 35 of the
Private Acts of 1991, Chapters 174 and 175 of the Private Acts of 1992,
Chapter 187 of the Private Acts of 1996, Chapter 41 of the Private Acts of
1999, and all other acts amendatory to Chapter 230 of the Private Acts of
1988, are repealed.



   SECTION 3. Approval By The board. This act shall have no effect unless
it is approved by a two- thirds (2/3) vote of the board of mayor and aldermen
of the Town within sixty (60) days of its signing by the governor. Its
approval or nonapproval shall be proclaimed by the mayor of Collierville and
certified by him to the Secretary of State.



   SECTION 4. Effective Date. For the purpose of approving or rejecting
the provisions of this act, it shall be effective upon becoming a law, the
public welfare requiring it. For all other purposes it shall become effective
upon being approved as provided in SECTION 3.



HOUSE BILL NO. 1989



PASSED: MAY 3, 2001



APPROVED: MAY 10, 2001



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Construction of code



   10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices; name designations



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Reasonable time



   10.11   Repeal or modification of code section



   10.12   Limitation periods



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Section histories; statutory references



   10.15   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature, as revised, codified,
rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “The Code of
Collierville, Tennessee,” for which designation “Code of Ordinances,”
“Codified Ordinances” or “Code” may be substituted.  Code title,
chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.



   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws,
amendments thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or
amendment thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and
effect, as if it had not been repealed by this code.  All rules and
regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full
force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of
this code.



   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is
continued only for the period designated in the original enactment of that
appropriation.



   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does
not resolve a conflict between two or more sections.



   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved
by reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted.  The
section most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.



   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.



   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings
assigned to the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this
code, as originally enacted, or as added by amendment, are not law, and may
be altered by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any
official publication, to more clearly indicate its content.  These
descriptive headings are for organizational purposes only and do not affect
the meaning, application or construction of the law they precede.



      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for
reference purposes only and is not a part of the section.



   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all
subsequent amendments to that section unless otherwise provided.



§ 10.05  RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Rules of interpretation.  This code shall be construed by the
following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the
legislative intent or context of the provision.



      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense.  Technical  words and phrases having a peculiar
and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to  their
technical import.



      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons
shall be construed as imputing authority to a majority of persons, unless
otherwise declared in the section giving the authority.



      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by
law, an agent or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the
performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.



      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include
the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a
verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      BOARD. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of
Collierville.



      COUNTY.  Shelby County, Tennessee.



      HIGHWAY.  Bridges, roads and streets unless otherwise expressly
provided.



      MONTH.  One calendar month.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, any form of legal entity, trustee, lessee or
receiver.  Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to legal entities, the
officers or agents thereof.



      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING.  When referring to sections or
divisions in this code, the sections or divisions next following or next
preceding that in which the words occur, unless some other section is
designated.



      STATE. The State of Tennessee.



      TOWN.  The Town of Collierville, Tennessee.



      WRITTEN and IN WRITING.



         (a)   Printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters.



         (b)   Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person or the
person’s mark.



      YEAR.  One calendar year unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently
amended or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the invalidity does not affect other sections that can be given effect
without the invalid section or application.



   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code
containing a nonseverability provision, each division or part of every
section is severable.  If any portion or application of a section is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:



      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably
connected with and so dependent upon the invalid provision or application
that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without
the invalid provision or application; or



      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being
executed in accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid
provision or application.



   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless
of whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof,
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   Reference to offices.  Reference to a public office or
officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the
Town exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the
provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the
official title of the functionary.



   (B)   Name designations.  Whenever any ordinance or resolution of
the Council refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality of any government, and that
name designation is incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date
of that ordinance or subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties or
liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different
entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality, whether correctly named in the
ordinance at its effective date or not, means that correctly named entity, or
the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers and rights were
transferred.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be
excluded.



§ 10.11  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.



   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section
or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law
is not revived unless it so expressly provides.  The repeal of any section
shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred
under the section unless the repealing section so expressly provides.  The
section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of
sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the
penalty, forfeiture or liability.



§ 10.12  LIMITATION PERIODS.



   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, to
the prosecution of offenses or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment.  All suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.  Example:  (Tenn. Code Ann. § 50-18-70)  (Ord. 10, passed
1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



§ 39.02  PUBLIC RECORDS.



   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.



Statutory reference:



   Inspection of public records, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-503



§ 10.15  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   (A)   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the
effective date of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as
provided by those laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities
accrued, penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date
of this code.



   (B)   The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued. 
Punishments, penalties or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if
this code had not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting
permission to utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or
franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway
and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as
if this code had not been enacted.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GOVERNING BODY



      31.   TOWN OFFICIALS



      32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



      33.   FIRE DEPARTMENT



      34.   TOWN COURT



      35.   TOWN POLICIES



      36.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      37.   TAXATION AND FINANCE



      38.   HERITAGE COMMISSION



      39.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



CHAPTER 30:  GOVERNING BODY



Section



   30.01   Time and place of meetings



   30.02   Agenda



   30.03   Town Clerk to keep minutes



   30.04   General rules of order



   30.05   Committees



   30.06   Vacancies



   30.07   Officers to take oath of office



   30.08   Mayor supervises Town’s affairs



§ 30.01  TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS.



   The Board shall meet at the Town’s Municipal Center, or such other
place as the Mayor may designate from time to time, on the second and fourth
Mondays of each month at 6:00 p.m. or at such other time as the Mayor may
designate from time to time.  Should the regular meeting day fall on a legal
holiday, the meeting will be held on the Tuesday immediately following the
holiday.



(`83 Code, § 1-101)  (Ord. 2003-01, passed 2-10-03)



§ 30.02  AGENDA.



   The office of Town Clerk shall be filled and governed by Article VII of
the Charter of the Town.



(`83 Code, § 1-103)



§ 30.03  TOWN CLERK TO KEEP MINUTES.



   The Town Clerk of the Board is authorized to keep the minutes of all
meetings of the Board.



(`83 Code, § 1-104)



§ 30.04  GENERAL RULES OF ORDER.



   The rules of order and parliamentary procedure contained in Robert’s
Rules of Order, latest Revision, shall govern the transaction of business by
and before the Board at its meetings in all cases to which they are
applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with provisions of state
law, the Charter of the Town or this code.



(`83 Code, § 1-105)



§ 30.05  COMMITTEES.



   The Board may appoint such committees as are necessary. 



(`83 Code, § 1-106)



§ 30.06  VACANCIES.



   When a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, Vice Mayor or Alderman,
the vacancy shall be filled as set forth in section 4.12 of the Charter of
the Town of Collierville.   



(`83 Code, § 1-109)  (Am. Ord. 79-005, passed 7-9-79)



§ 30.07  OFFICERS TO TAKE OATH OF OFFICE.



   Upon such filling of any vacancy in any of the offices enumerated in
this chapter, they shall take the following oath of office:



   “I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the
United States, the Constitution of the State of Tennessee, and the laws and
ordinances of the Town of Collierville, and that I will faithfully demean
myself in office.  So help me God.”



(`83 Code, § 1-110)



§ 30.08  MAYOR SUPERVISES TOWN’S AFFAIRS.



   The Mayor shall have general supervision of all municipal affairs and
may require such reports from the officers and the employees as he or she may
deem necessary to carry out his or her executive responsibilities. It shall
be the duty of the Mayor from time to time to make reports to the Board
concerning the condition of the public institutions and services of the Town
and to recommend measures for their improvement. The Mayor shall be
responsible for seeing that all laws and ordinances of the Town are enforced.



(`83 Code, § 1-201)  (Am. Ord. 79-005, passed 7-9-79)



CHAPTER 31:  TOWN OFFICIALS



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Duties of officials



Town Clerk



   31.15   Appointment, term of office, bond



   31.16   To perform general administrative duties



Town Administrator



   31.30   Appointment, term of office



   31.31   Duties



   31.32   Residency



Code Compliance Officer



   31.45   Purpose



   31.46   Code Compliance Officer



   31.47   General enforcement authority and responsibilities



   31.48   Notice of violation



   31.49   Authority to inspect



   31.50   Authority to vary from code



   31.51   Issuance of permits



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  DUTIES OF OFFICIALS.



   The officers and employees of the Town shall have such duties as may be
prescribed by the Town Charter, required by general law or assigned by the
Board upon the passage of appropriate ordinances and resolutions.



(`83 Code, § 1-301)



TOWN CLERK



§ 31.15  APPOINTMENT, TERM OF OFFICE, BOND.



   The Town Clerk shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Board.  He or she shall serve at such salary and with such other benefits
incidental to such position as are provided by the Board, and shall serve at
the will of the Board.  The Town Clerk shall be subject to day to day
supervision by the Town Administrator.  He or she shall be bonded in such
sum and with such surety as may be acceptable to the Board.



(`83 Code, § 1-401)



§ 31.16  TO PERFORM GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES.



   The Town Clerk shall perform such administrative duties as may be
prescribed by the Board, the Charter or this code.  He or she shall have
custody of, and be responsible for maintaining all corporate bonds, records,
papers, original copies of ordinances and minutes of all meetings of the
Board in such fireproof vault or safe as the municipality shall provide.



(`83 Code, § 1-402)



TOWN ADMINISTRATOR



§ 31.30  APPOINTMENT, TERM OF OFFICE.



   The board shall appoint an operating administrative officer with the
title of Town Administrator. He shall serve an indefinite term and may be
removed from office by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



(`83 Code, § 1-501)



§ 31.31  DUTIES.



   The Town Administrator shall be directly responsible to the Mayor and
the Board and  shall exercise general administrative responsibilities
assigned to him or her, including, but not limited to:



   (A)   Preparation and administration of annual operating and capital
budgets;



   (B)   Investigation of citizen complaints;



   (C)   General administrative coordination of activities of operating
departments;



   (D)   Purchasing of equipment and supplies;



   (E)   Preparation of reports for Board;



   (F)   Administration of personnel policies;



   (G)   Preparation of official agenda for Board;



   (H)   Solicitation of grants and other funding sources;



   (I)   Maintain intergovernmental relations with other government
agencies;



   (J)   Attend all Board meetings;



   (K)   Such other duties as may be assigned by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.



(`83 Code, § 1-502)



§ 31.32  RESIDENCY.



   The Town Administrator need not be a resident of Collierville at the
time of appointment, but promptly thereafter shall become and thereafter
remain an actual resident of the Town. The salary of the Town Administrator
shall be recommended by the Mayor and approved by the Board through the
budget process of the Town.



(`83 Code, § 1-503)



CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER



§ 31.45  PURPOSE.



   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen finds that enforcement of the Town Code
and applicable state codes throughout the municipality is an important public
service. Code enforcement is vital to protection of the public’s health,
safety, welfare and quality of life. The Board recognizes that enforcement
starts with the drafting of precise regulations that can be effectively and
consistently applied in administrative enforcement. The Board further finds
that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of
administrative and judicial remedies is critical to gain compliance with code
regulations. Failure to comply with an administrative code compliance action
may require the Town Attorney to file a judicial action to gain compliance.



(`83 Code, § 1-901)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 4-23-01)



§ 31.46  CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER.



   The provisions of the Town Code relative to property violations,
including, but not limited to weeds and noxious vegetation and the
accumulation of trash and rubbish upon property and other regulations as
assigned by the Town Administrator shall be administered by the Code
Compliance Officer or an appropriate designee selected by the Town
Administrator.



(`83 Code, § 1-902)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 4-23-01)



§ 31.47  GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Code Compliance Officer or an appropriate designee selected by the
Town Administrator shall have the authority and powers necessary to gain
compliance, including:



   (A)   Enforcement of the Town Code, zoning ordinance, subdivision
regulations, design standards manual and related codes adopted and enforced
by the Town;



   (B)   Conduct field inspections of buildings, structures and land,
including the taking of photographs, samples and other physical evidence to
determine compliance with the provisions of the Town Code;



   (C)   Issuance of notices of violation;



   (D)   Issuance of citations to appear in Town Court and to initiate
other legal action upon authorization of the Town Administrator as may be
necessary to gain compliance;



   (E)   Undertake whatever judicial and administrative remedies are
available under the Town Code to gain compliance;



   (F)   Maintain current record of the Town Code and subsequent
amendments;



   (G)   Maintain records of all code violations and investigations
performed;



   (H)   Maintain records of all permits issued under the authority of
the Code Compliance Officer;



   (I)   Provide information to the public on all matters relating to
the Town Code;



   (J)   Initiate, direct and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of the Town Code and make reports of recommendations to the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen.



(`83 Code, § 1-903)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 4-23-01)



§ 31.48  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Whenever a Code Compliance Officer determines that a violation
of the Town Code exists, the Code Compliance Officer may issue a notice of
violation to a property owner.



   (B)   The notice of violation shall include the following
information:



      (1)   Name of the property’s owner of record;



      (2)   Street address of the property in violation of Town Code;



      (3)   The code sections in violation;



      (4)   A description of the property’s condition which
violates the applicable codes;



      (5)   A deadline or specific date to correct the violations
listed in the notice of violation;



      (6)   Reference to the potential consequences should the
property remain in violation after the expiration of the compliance deadline,
including, but not limited to criminal prosecution, civil injunction,
administrative abatement, civil penalties, revocation of permits and
withholding of future municipal permits.



(`83 Code, §1-904)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 4-23-01; Am. Ord. 2005-05, passed
3-28-05)



§ 31.49  AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.



   The Code Compliance Officer is authorized to enter upon any property or
premises to ascertain whether the provisions of the Town Code, zoning
ordinance, subdivision regulations, design standards manual and other related
codes enforced by the Town are being obeyed and to make any examinations and
surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties.
These may include the taking of photographs, samples or other physical
evidence. All inspections, entries, examinations and surveys shall be done in
a reasonable manner. If an owner, occupant or agent refuses permission to
enter or inspect, the Code Compliance Officer may seek a warrant as provided
under Tennessee law to gain access to the property.



(`83 Code, § 1-905)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 4-23-01)



§ 31.50  AUTHORITY TO VARY FROM CODE.



   Under no circumstances is the Code Compliance Officer permitted to make
changes in the Town Code, zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, design
standards manual and other related codes enforced by the Town, nor to vary
its terms and provisions in carrying out the duties and responsibilities
assigned to the Code Compliance Officer.



(`83 Code, § 1-906)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 4-23-01)



§ 31.51  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   The Code Compliance Officer shall not refuse to issue a permit when the
applicant complies with conditions imposed by the Town Code, zoning
ordinance, subdivision regulations, design standards manual and other related
codes enforced by the Town even though compliance with the permit might
result in the violation of private agreements such as restrictive covenants.



(`83 Code, § 1-907)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 4-23-01)



CHAPTER 32:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



Police Department



   32.01   Chief of Police



   32.02   Attendance at Board meetings



   32.03   Composition and organization



   32.04   Police officers to preserve law and order



   32.05   Enforcement of ordinances



   32.06   Police officers subject to Chief’s orders



   32.07   Police to wear uniforms and be armed



   32.08   Arrest and authority



   32.09   Police offices may require assistance in making arrests



   32.10   Disposition of persons arrested



   32.11   Police Department records



Police Reserves



   32.25   Established



   32.26   Maximum complement



   32.27   Member’s compensation; no fringe benefits



   32.28   Appointment of members



   32.29   Qualification of membership



   32.30   Conditions precedent to entering upon duties



   32.31   Chief of Police to command



   32.32   Either the Town or member may terminate service



   32.33   Town will not furnish uniforms



   32.34   Members to carry identification cards



   32.35   Rules and regulations to be prescribed by Chief of Police



   32.36   Chief of Police to fix specific duties



   32.37   To be armed only on order of Chief of Police



   32.38   Forcible entry by members listed



   32.39   Powers of arrest



   32.40   Impersonation of reserve officer; violation of ordinance



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.01  CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Board, to serve at will
of the Board, and shall have general supervision over the Police Department
and shall be responsible for the efficiency thereof, with such duties as may
be assigned by the Board. 



(`83 Code, § 1-601)



§ 32.02  ATTENDANCE AT BOARD MEETINGS.



   The Chief of Police or, in his or her absence, one of the police
officers, shall be present at the meetings of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
whenever requested by the Board or by the Town Administrator.



(`83 Code, § 1-602)



§ 32.03  COMPOSITION AND ORGANIZATION.



   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such
number of subordinate officers and personnel as the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may provide for.



(`83 Code, § 1-603)



§ 32.04  POLICE OFFICERS TO PRESERVE LAW AND ORDER.



   Police officers shall preserve law and order within the Town.  They
shall patrol the Town and shall assist the Town Court during the trial of
cases. Police officers shall also promptly serve any legal process issued by
the Town Court.



(`83 Code, § 1-604)



§ 32.05  ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES.



   The Chief of Police shall see that all ordinances are enforced and when
any violation shall come to his or her attention, whether by personal
observation or by information from others, he or she shall make  complaint
and cause the person to be prosecuted.



(`83 Code, § 1-605)



§ 32.06  POLICE OFFICERS SUBJECT TO CHIEF’S ORDERS.



   All police officers shall obey and comply with such orders and
administrative rules and regulations as the Police Chief may officially issue
or that may be issued by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



(`83 Code, § 1-606)



§ 32.07  POLICE TO WEAR UNIFORMS AND BE ARMED.



   All police officers shall wear such uniforms and badge as the Board may
authorize and shall carry a service pistol and impact weapon at all times
while on duty unless otherwise expressly directed by the Chief for special
assignment.



(`83 Code, § 1-607)



§ 32.08  ARREST AND AUTHORITY.



   Unless otherwise authorized or directed in this code or other
applicable law, an arrest of a person shall be made by a police officer in
the following cases:



   (A)   Whenever he or she is in possession of a warrant for the
arrest of a person;



   (B)   Whenever an offense is committed or a breach of the peace is
threatened in the officer’s presence by the person;



   (C)   Whenever a felony has in fact been committed and the officer
has probable cause to believe the person has committed it.



(`83 Code, § 1-608)



§ 32.09  POLICE OFFICERS MAY REQUIRE ASSISTANCE IN MAKING ARRESTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully refuse to aid a police
officer in making a lawful arrest when such person’s assistance is
requested by the police officer and is reasonably necessary to effect the
arrest.



(`83 Code, § 1-609)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.10  DISPOSITION OF PERSONS ARRESTED.



   Unless otherwise authorized by law, when any person is arrested, he or
she shall be brought before the Town Court for immediate trial or be allowed
to post bond. When the Town Judge is not immediately available, or the
alleged offender does not post the required bond, he or she shall be confined.



(`83 Code, § 1-610)



§ 32.11  POLICE DEPARTMENT RECORDS.



   The Police Department shall keep a comprehensive and detailed daily
record in permanent form, showing:



   (A)   All known or reported offenses and/or crimes committed within
the corporate limits;



   (B)   All police arrests made;



   (C)   All police investigations made, funerals convoyed, fire calls
answered and other activities of the Police Department.



(`83 Code, § 1-611)



POLICE RESERVES



§ 32.25  ESTABLISHED.



   To assist the regular Police Department in the preservation of the
peace, the prevention and detection of crime, the arrest of offenders, the
suppression of riots and to protect the rights of persons and property,
maintain and guard the public health and preserve order at elections; to
assist in the execution and return of legal processes, notices and orders of
the Town Court, the Town Judge, the Mayor and Town Clerk; and to execute all
other processes, notices and orders, there is established a Reserve Division
of the Collierville Police Department to be known as the Collierville Police
Reserve.



(`83 Code, § 1-1301)



§ 32.26  MAXIMUM COMPLEMENT.



   The Collierville Police Reserve shall be composed of voluntary
membership not to exceed a maximum of 20 persons and shall not be classified
other than reserve patrol officer.



(`83 Code, § 1-1302)



§ 32.27  MEMBER’S COMPENSATION; NO FRINGE BENEFITS.



   All members of the Collierville Police Reserve shall be compensated at
a rate of $1 per year but shall not be included in any civil service,
retirement, life or health program or any other fringe benefits normally
provided for employees of the Town of Collierville.



(`83 Code, § 1-1303)



§ 32.28  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   All members of the Collierville Police Reserve shall be appointed by
the Chief of Police.



(`83 Code, § 1-1304)



§ 32.29  QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERSHIP.



   No person shall be eligible for membership in the Collierville Police
Reserve unless he or she is the age of 21 years or older, physically fit,
psychologically fit, a U.S. citizen, a resident of the State of Tennessee and
the County of Shelby or Fayette, never has been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, possesses a high school diploma or
equivalent and of excellent character and reputation, as determined by the
Chief of Police.



(`83 Code, § 1-1305)



§ 32.30  CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO ENTERING UPON DUTIES.



   No person shall enter upon his or her duties as a member of the
Collierville Police Reserve until he or she shall:



   (A)   At his or her own expense, furnish evidence that he or she is
in excellent physical condition, mentally stable and suffers from no ailment
or disability which would limit or prevent engaging in strenuous exercise or
the use of firearms;



   (B)   Successfully complete a course of instruction as prescribed by
the regular Chief of Police of the Collierville Police Department;



   (C)   Furnish satisfactory evidence that he or she has obtained
necessary personal equipment which the Collierville Police Department
requires of its regular officers.



(`83 Code, § 1-1306)



§ 32.31  CHIEF OF POLICE TO COMMAND.



   The Chief of the regular Collierville Police Department or his or her
designee shall have complete control, authority and command over reserves
while on duty.



(`83 Code, § 1-1307)



§ 32.32  EITHER THE TOWN OR MEMBER MAY TERMINATE SERVICE.



   Each reserve officer may resign from the Collierville Police Reserve
unit at any time, but it shall be his or her duty to notify the Chief of
Police of the desire to do so. Membership of any person may be terminated by
the Chief of Police at any time he or she deems such to be necessary or for
the good of the Police Department and reserve unit, and no member is
considered permanent at any time with a right to appeal.



(`83 Code, § 1-1308)



§ 32.33  TOWN WILL NOT FURNISH UNIFORMS.



   All members of the Collierville Reserve shall wear prescribed uniforms
when performing duty with the Collierville Police Department.  The uniform
and all other personal equipment will be furnished by the reserve officer.



(`83 Code, § 1-1309)



§ 32.34  MEMBERS TO CARRY IDENTIFICATION CARDS.



   An identification card shall be issued to each member of the
Collierville Police Reserve, who must carry such identification at all times
while on duty, and must surrender same upon termination of membership.



(`83 Code, § 1-1310)



§ 32.35  RULES AND REGULATIONS TO BE PRESCRIBED BY CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief of Police shall prescribe rules and regulations for the
Collierville Police Reserve, and each member of the reserve unit, before
entering upon his or her duties, shall sign a copy of the rules and
regulations noting his or her acceptance of same and willingness to abide
thereby.



(`83 Code, § 1-1311)



§ 32.36  CHIEF OF POLICE TO FIX SPECIFIC DUTIES.



   The Chief of Police shall fix the specific duties of the Collierville
Police Reserve, and no member shall in any manner perform any act as a member
of the Collierville Police Reserve unless he or she is specifically
designated for duty as such member at the time.



(`83 Code, § 1-1312)



§ 32.37  TO BE ARMED ONLY ON ORDER OF CHIEF OF POLICE.



   No member of the Collierville Police Reserve shall, while on duty or
otherwise, carry or use any firearm or other weapon except on the order of
the Chief of Police.



(`83 Code, § 1-1313)



§ 32.38  FORCIBLE ENTRY BY MEMBERS LISTED.



   No member of the Collierville Police Reserve shall break into or
otherwise forcefully enter upon any private property or enter any dwelling or
habitation of another person without consent of the owner or occupant, except
when immediately accompanied by a regular member of the Collierville Police
Department, who then and there requests his or her aid in the enforcement of
the law and such forceful entry is authorized by the laws of the State of
Tennessee.



(`83 Code, § 1-1314)



§ 32.39  POWERS OF ARREST.



   Reserve officers shall have the following powers of arrest and none
other:



   (A)   He or she may arrest for a public offense committed in his or
her presence;



   (B)   He or she may arrest a person who has in fact committed a
felony, although not in his or her presence;



   (C)   When a felony has in fact been committed, he or she may make
an arrest when he or she has reasonable cause for believing the person
arrested committed it;



   (D)   He or she may lend physical aid to any regular member of the
Police Department in making any lawful arrest, when authorized by the Chief
of Police or requested by any member of the Police Department.



(`83 Code, § 1-1315)



§ 32.40  IMPERSONATION OF RESERVE OFFICER; VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE.



   It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to hold
himself or herself out as a member of the Collierville Police Reserve, to
display an identification card indicating such or to wear a uniform
indicating such membership, unless he or she is in fact a member in good
standing of the Collierville Police Reserve.



(`83 Code, § 1-1316)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 33:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section



   33.01   Establishment and equipment



   33.02   Objectives



   33.03   Organization, rules and regulations



   33.04   Reports and records



   33.05   Chief responsible for training



   33.06   Destruction of property



   33.07   Chief to be assistant to state officer



   33.08   Police powers



Cross reference:



   Fire prevention and protection, see Chapter 94



§ 33.01  ESTABLISHMENT AND EQUIPMENT.



   There is established a Fire Department to be supported and equipped by
appropriations from the Board.  All apparatus, equipment and supplies shall
be purchased by or through the Town and shall remain the property of the Town.



(`83 Code, § 6-301)



§ 33.02  OBJECTIVES.



   The Fire Department shall have as its objectives:



   (A)   To prevent uncontrolled fires from starting;



   (B)   To prevent the loss of life and property in case a fire does
start;



   (C)   To confine a fire to the place of origin;



   (D)   To extinguish uncontrolled fire;



   (E)   To prevent loss of life from asphyxiation or drowning;



   (F)   To perform such rescue work as its equipment and/or the
training of its personnel makes practical.



(`83 Code, § 7-302)



§ 33.03  ORGANIZATION, RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Fire protection shall be under the supervision of the Fire Chief,
appointed by the Board to serve at the will of the Board and shall be
responsible for the protection of life and property against fire, the
prevention and extinguishment of fires and the removal of fire hazards. He or
she shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of all property and
equipment of his or her division. The Chief shall set up the organization of
the Department, make definite assignment to individuals and shall formulate
and enforce such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the orderly
and efficient operation of the Fire Department. 



(`83 Code, § 7-303)



§ 33.04  REPORTS AND RECORDS.



   The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep adequate records of all
fires, inspections, apparatus, equipment, personnel and work of the
Department. He or she shall submit a written report on such matters to the
Town Administrator once each month and, at the end of the year, a detailed
annual report shall be made to the Mayor and Board.



(`83 Code, § 7-304)



§ 33.05  CHIEF RESPONSIBLE FOR TRAINING.



   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be fully responsible for the
training of the firefighters, and the minimum training shall consist of
having the personnel take the fire apparatus out for practice operations not
less than once a month.



(`83 Code, § 7-305)



§ 33.06  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   Firefighters shall have the power to remove or destroy any property
when reasonably necessary to prevent the further spread of a fire.



(`83 Code, § 7-306)



§ 33.07  CHIEF TO BE ASSISTANT TO STATE OFFICER.



   Pursuant to requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-102-108, the Chief of
the Fire Department is designated as an assistant to the State Commissioner
of Insurance and Banking, is subject to all the duties and obligations
imposed by Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-102-108, and shall be subject to the Fire
Prevention Commissioner in the execution of the provisions thereof.



(`83 Code, § 7-307)



§ 33.08  POLICE POWERS.



   Firefighters shall have and exercise the same powers as police officers
in so far as reasonably necessary to accomplish the objectives of the Fire
Department in an efficient manner.



(`83 Code, § 7-308)



CHAPTER 34:  TOWN COURT



Section



   34.01   Town Court



   34.02   Town Judge



   34.03   Maintenance of docket



   34.04   Jurisdiction



   34.05   Costs



   34.06   [Reserved]



   34.07   Bonds



   34.08   Issuance of arrest warrants



   34.09   Issuance of summonses



   34.10   Issuance of subpoenas



   34.11   Trial and disposition of cases



   34.12   Appeals



Cross-reference:



   Charter, Article XI



§ 34.01  TOWN COURT.



   (A)   Establishment of court.  There is established a Town Court to
be presided over by two Town Judges.



   (B)   Divisions.  The Town Court shall henceforth be divided into
two divisions designated as Division I and Division II.  If the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen should increase by future ordinance the number of persons
who shall serve as Town Judge, additional divisions shall be created upon
such persons taking office.



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 1-23-06)



§ 34.02  TOWN JUDGE.



   (A)   Judicial elections.



      (1)   Judges of the Collierville Municipal Court shall, upon
the effective date of this chapter, be elected by a popular vote of the
registered voters of the Town to office to serve a term of eight years.



      (2)   Elections shall be at large and the candidate receiving
the largest number of votes shall be declared elected.  The first election
for Division I Judge shall be held at the time of the next regular August
general election following the effective date of this chapter.  The Division
II Judge's office shall remain vacant until the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
appoints a person to fill such vacancy.  Such appointed Division II Judge
shall remain in office until the time of the next regular August general
election following his or her appointment. All subsequent elections for Town
Judge pursuant to this chapter and general law shall be held in accordance
with Article 7, § 5 of the Tennessee Constitution.



   (B)   Qualifications.  All candidates for the position of Judge of
the Collierville Municipal Court shall be 30 years of age or older, a
resident of the State of Tennessee for not less than five years immediately
prior to the election, a resident of the Town for at least one year
immediately prior to the election, and shall be licensed to practice law in
the State of Tennessee.



   (C)   Filling vacancies.  In the absence of a Judge of the
Collierville Municipal Court, whether caused by resignation, death or
disability, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appoint a qualified person to
serve until the next general election.  Disability of a Town Judge shall be
determined by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (D)   Special judges.



      (1)    General sessions docket.  In the event a Town Judge
shall be unable to sit for good cause, including, but not limited to by
reason of health, schedule, vacation or other reasons, a special judge shall
be chosen to temporarily serve in his or her absence or temporary
unavailability as provided by Tenn. Code Ann.§ 16-15-209.



       (2)   Municipal docket.  In the event a Town Judge shall be
unable to sit for good cause, including, but not limited to by reason of
health, schedule, vacation or other reasons, a special judge, who is
qualified under subsection (D)(1) of this section, or a special judge, who is
appointed pursuant to subsections (D)(2)(a) through (c) of this section,
shall temporarily serve in such Judge's absence or temporary unavailability:



         (a)   A Town Judge or, if no Town Judge is able, the
Clerk of Court shall appoint a special judge to hold court, preside and
adjudicate in the absence of a Town Judge;



         (b)   A special judge must possess all of the
qualifications of a Town Judge of the Collierville Municipal Court; and



         (c)   A list of five eligible special judges shall be
created by each Town Judge for his or her division.  Such list shall
designate potential special judges in order of priority and shall be
maintained by the Clerk of the Court.  When necessary, a special judge for a
division shall be chosen from such list based upon the order of priority in
which they are listed.



   (E)   Divisions.  In any election for the position of Town Judge,
all persons shall be required to designate the division of the Town Court to
which they seek election and no person shall be permitted to seek election to
more than one division in any election.



   (F)   Compensation.  Compensation for the Judges of the
Collierville Municipal Court shall be fixed by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen and shall not be altered during the term of office. Any adjustment
to compensation for the office of Judge must be made not less than 30 days
prior to the deadline for qualification of candidates for the next election:



      (1)   Pursuant to the Charter of the Town of Collierville, it
is ordained that the Judge of Division I shall receive a salary of $58,000
annually, effective immediately upon his or her taking office after his or
her election in August 2014, and that such salary shall be automatically
increased to $64,000 annually on August 1, 2018, and shall thereafter remain
at such increased amount until changed by ordinance of the Town; such salary
to be paid monthly from the General Fund of the Town; and



      (2)   The salary of the first Division II Judge shall be set
by ordinance prior to the Judge's appointment and shall remain at such amount
until changed by ordinance of the Town; such salary to be paid monthly from
the General Fund of the Town; and



      (3)   If otherwise eligible for coverage under the health,
medical and life insurance, retirement and benefit plans of the Town, Town
Judges shall be afforded the same benefits under such plans, at the expense
of the Town, as is generally afforded to other employees of the Town;



      (4)   This chapter shall take effect upon the taking of office
as Town Judge of the person elected to serve as Division I Judge in August
2014.



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 1-23-06; Am. Ord. 2013-15, passed 11-11-13)



§ 34.03  MAINTENANCE OF DOCKET.



   Town Judges shall keep a complete docket of all matters coming before
them in their judicial capacity. The docket shall include for each defendant
such information as his or her name, warrant and/or summons, numbers, alleged
offense, disposition, fines, penalties and costs imposed and whether
collected, whether committed to workhouse and all other information which may
be relevant. 



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 1-23-06)



§ 34.04  JURISDICTION.



   Town Judges, as presiding officers of the court, shall impose penalties
within their discretion for any violations of the Town Charter or ordinances
or for violations of state law committed within the police jurisdiction of
the Town. Any such penalty shall not be greater than the maximum monetary
amount permitted by state law, or a sentence to the Town jail or county
workhouse for a maximum of 11 months 29 days, or both.



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 1-23-06)



§ 34.05  COSTS.



   (A)   Town Judges shall collect, in addition to the fine, a Town
Court fee of $61 on violations of Town ordinances, and the maximum
permissible fee under state law for state statutory violations, together with
the appropriate state litigation tax and the appropriate town litigation tax
(Ordinance 2006-19, passed 9-25-06). A fee of $12.50 in addition to the above
shall be collected on all violations for public defender costs and the funds
forwarded to Shelby County Government.



   (B)   For each continuance requested by the defender, the maximum
permissible fee under state law will be charged.



   (C)   At the time of a conviction for DUI, driving without a
license, suspended license, canceled license and/or revoked license, or any
offense which requires a certification of payment and fines to the State of
Tennessee for reissuance of licenses, the maximum permissible fee under state
law will be charged for such certification.



   (D)   In cases where a defendant's record is to be expunged due to
completion of diversion, the maximum permissible fee under state law will be
charged.



   (E)   If the defendant chooses to enter a plea of guilty to the
offense(s) charged, pay the forfeit on his or her traffic citation, and waive
his or her right to a trial, the forfeit will have the same force and effect
as a guilty judgment taken by the court, but without court cost and
applicable fees. Any fine, court cost and fees shall be deposited in the
General Fund of the Town.



   (F)   In addition to posted fines, all forfeitures will be assessed
court costs.



   (G)   In cases where a Judge deems appropriate, a clerk's fee of up
to $100 may be assessed. In addition to posted fines, all forfeitures will be
assessed a forfeiture fee of the maximum permissible fee under state law.



   (H)   Traffic citations remaining unpaid for 20 days shall be
assessed a forfeiture fee and applicable court costs.



   (I)   The Town may engage the services of a collection agency to
collect fines and costs assessed by the municipal court where such fines and
costs have not been collected within 60 days after they were due; provided,
however, that such engagement may only be made by written contract between
the Town and such collection agency.



   (J)   A fee of $5 shall be collected on each citation for violation
of any traffic ordinance that results in a plea of guilty or nolo contendre
or a judgment of guilty, for the purpose of funding the development and
operation of an electronic citation system for the Collierville Police
Department. One dollar ($1) of such fee shall be retained by the Town Court
Clerk and used for computer hardware purchases, usual and necessary computer
related expenses, or replacement.



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 1-23-06; Am. Ord. 2014-08, passed 12-8-14; Am. Ord.
2015-24, passed 1-25-16)



§ 34.06  [RESERVED].



§ 34.07  BONDS.



   (A)   When a Town Judge is not available or when an accused offender
requests and has reasonable grounds for a delay in the proceedings of his or
her case, he or she shall be allowed to post an appearance bond with a Town
Judge or with the clerk of the court, provided the alleged offender is not
drunk, in need of protective custody, nor otherwise poses a threat to himself
or the community.



   (B)   An appearance bond in any case before the Town Court shall be
in such amount as a Town Judge shall prescribe and shall be conditioned that
the defendant shall appear for proceedings before the Town Court at the
stated time and place.  An appeal bond in any traffic case shall be in the
sum of $250 cash and shall be conditioned such that if the Circuit Court or
Criminal Court shall find against the appellant, the fine or penalty and all
costs of the trial and appeal shall be promptly paid by the defendant. An
appearance or appeal bond in any case may be made in the form of a cash
deposit or by any corporate surety companies authorized to do business in
Tennessee.  No other type bond shall be acceptable.



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 1-23-06; Am. Ord. 2006-14, passed 9-11-06)



§ 34.08  ISSUANCE OF ARREST WARRANTS.



   Town Judges shall have the power to issue warrants for the arrest of
persons charged with violating municipal ordinances.



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 1-23-06)



§ 34.09  ISSUANCE OF SUMMONSES.



   When a complaint of an alleged ordinance violation is made, a Town
Judge may in his or her discretion, in lieu of issuing an arrest warrant,
issue a summons ordering the alleged offender to personally appear before the
Town Court at a time specified therein to answer the charges against him or
her. The summons shall contain a brief description of the offense charged but
need not set out verbatim the provisions of the ordinances alleged to have
been violated. Upon failure of any person to appear before Town Court as
commanded in a summons lawfully served on him or her, the cause may be
proceeded with ex-parte, and the judgment of the courts shall be valid and
binding subject to the defendant's right to appeal.



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 1-23-06)



§ 34.10  ISSUANCE OF SUBPOENAS.



   A Town Judge may subpoena as witnesses all persons whose testimony he
or she believes will be relevant and material to matters coming before his or
her court, and it shall be unlawful for any person lawfully served with such
subpoena to fail or neglect to comply therewith.



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 1-23-06)



§ 34.11  TRIAL AND DISPOSITION OF CASES.



   Every person charged with violating a municipal ordinance shall be
entitled to an immediate trial and disposition of his or her case, provided
the Town Court is in session or a Town Judge is reasonably available.
However, the provisions of this section shall not apply when the alleged
offender by reason of drunkenness or other incapacity is not in proper
condition or is not able to appear before the court.



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 1-23-06)



§ 34.12  APPEALS.



   Any defendant who is dissatisfied with any judgement of the Town Court
against him or her may, within ten days after such judgement is rendered,
appeal to the Circuit Court or the Criminal Court, upon posting a proper
appeal bond.



(`83 Code, § 1-713)



CHAPTER 35:  TOWN POLICIES



Section



General Provisions



   35.01   County workhouse to be used



   35.02   Occupational Safety and Health Program



Code of Ethics



   35.10   Code of Ethical Conduct for Officials of the Town of
Collierville



   35.11   Code of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Town of
Collierville



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  COUNTY WORKHOUSE TO BE USED.



   The Shelby County Penal Farm is designated as the municipal workhouse.



(`83 Code, § 1-801)



§ 35.02  OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM.



   (A)   Purpose. The Town, in electing to update its established
program plan will maintain an effective Occupational Safety and Health
Program for its employees and shall:



      (1)   Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of
employment that includes:



         (a)   Management commitment and employee involvement;



         (b)   On-going analysis of the worksite to identify all
hazards and potential hazards;



         (c)   Methods for preventing or controlling existing or
potential hazards; and



         (d)   Training of managers, supervisors, and employees
to understand and deal with worksite hazards.



      (2)   Acquire, maintain and require the use of safety
equipment, personal protective equipment and devices reasonably necessary to
protect employees.



      (3)   Make, keep, preserve, and make available to the
Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development of the State of Tennessee,
his designated representative, or persons within the Tennessee Department of
Labor and Workforce Development to whom such responsibilities have been
delegated, adequate records of all occupational accidents and illnesses and
personal injuries for proper evaluation and necessary corrective action as
required.



      (4)   Consult with the State Commissioner of Labor and
Workforce Development, as appropriate, with regard to the adequacy of the
form and content of records.



      (5)   Consult with the State Commissioner of Labor and
Workforce Development, as appropriate, regarding safety and health problems
which are considered unusual or peculiar and are such that they cannot be
achieved under a standard promulgated by the state.



      (6)   Provide reasonable opportunity for the participation of
employees in the effectuation of the objectives of this program, including
the opportunity to make anonymous complaints concerning conditions or
practices injurious to employee safety and health.



      (7)   Provide for education and training personnel for the
fair and efficient administration of occupational safety and health
standards, and provide for education and notification of all employees of the
existence of this program.



   (B)   Coverage. The provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health
Program plan for the employees of the Town shall apply to all employees of
each administrative department, commission, board, division or other agency
of the Town whether part-time or full-time, seasonal or permanent.



   (C)   Standards authorized. The occupational safety and health
standards adopted by the Town of Collierville are the same as, but not
limited to, the State of Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Standards
promulgated, or which may be promulgated, in accordance with Section 6 of the
Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 (T.C.A. Title 50,
Chapter 3).



   (D)   Variances from standards authorized. The Town may request,
upon written application to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development of the State of Tennessee, an order granting a temporary variance
from any approved standards. Applications for variances shall be in
accordance with the rules of the Tennessee Department of Labor and Workforce
Development, Occupational Safety, Chapter 0800-1-2, as authorized by T.C.A.,
Title 50. Prior to requesting such temporary variance, the Town shall notify
or serve notice to employees, their designated representatives, or interested
parties and present them with an opportunity for a hearing. The posting of
notice on the main bulletin board as designated by the Town shall be deemed
sufficient notice to employees.



   (E)   Administration. For the purposes of this division, the Town
Administrator is hereby designated as the chief executive officer to perform
duties and to exercise powers assigned so as to plan, develop, and administer
the Town's Occupational Safety and Health Program. The Town Administrator
shall develop a plan of operation for the Town's Occupational Safety and
Health Program and said plan shall become a part of the Town Code when it
satisfies all applicable sections of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and
health Act of 1972 and Part IV of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and
Health Plan.



   (F)   Amendments. Amendments or revisions to the Town of
Collierville Occupational Safety and Health Program may be recommended for
adoption by the Town Administrator by resolution of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen. Such amendments or revisions shall become effective upon the
approval of the resolution by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (G)   Funding the program. Sufficient funds for administering and
staffing the program shall be made available as authorized by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.



(Ord. 2004-01, passed 3-8-04)



CODE OF ETHICS



§ 35.10 CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT FOR OFFICIALS OF THE TOWN OF COLLIERVILLE.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      OFFICER. The Mayor and any member of the Board of Aldermen and
any appointive member of a board, commission or committee established by
ordinance, charter or state law.



   (B)   Standards of conduct.  No Town officer shall knowingly:



      (1)   Use such officer's public position or office to obtain
personal financial gain or anything of substantial value that might
reasonably tend to influence such officer to act improperly while discharging
his or her official duties;



      (2)   Take any official action substantially affecting a
matter in which the officer, a family member, or an organization with which
the officer is associated has a substantial financial interest, or use his or
her office or position in a way that produces or assists in the production of
a substantial benefit, direct or indirect, for the officer, a family member,
or an organization with which the officer is affiliated;



      (3)   Participate in making or influencing any Town
governmental decision or action in which the officer knows that he or she or
any member of his or her family have any material financial interest
distinguishable from that of the public generally or from that of other Town
officers generally;



      (4)   Accept or solicit any promise of any benefit, direct or
indirect, to the officer, family members, or his or her employer (in the case
of an elected or appointed person) which the officer believes or should
reasonably believe was intended to influence the officer's vote or other
action taken in the officer's official capacity;



      (5)   Receive or use for personal purposes any property,
services or funds of the Town of Collierville;



      (6)   Use for personal gain, or for the gain of any family
member, information pertaining to the Town of Collierville, which is not a
matter of common public knowledge;



      (7)   Accept other employment or engage in outside activities,
which might impair the officer's independent judgment in the performance of
his or her public duty;



      (8)   Fail or refuse to file in a timely manner all disclosure
statements required to be filed under the provisions of this section;



      (9)   Accept any gift having a value of more than $25, or
multiple gifts in any 12-month period having an aggregate value of more than
$100, from a person or entity presently doing business with the Town or
seeking approvals from the Town or a person or entity as to whom or which it
might reasonably be anticipated would do business with the Town or seek
approvals from the Town in the future, unless the recipient files, within ten
days of receipt of the gift, a written statement with the Town Clerk
identifying the gift and the donor; provided, however, on occasion, citizens
make gifts to groups of officials in gratitude for service. Such gifts are
not deemed to be of the nature that would impact or appear to impact
discretion, as governed by Tenn. Code Ann. § 8-17-102, and may be accepted
by such groups of officials so long as they are collectively shared. The
receipt of any such gift shall be reported to the Town Administrator, who
shall file, within ten days of receipt of any such gift, a written statement
with the Town Clerk identifying the gift and the donor;



      (10)   Vote on a measure, during a meeting at which a vote
takes place, without disclosing, before the vote, any personal interest,
defined as any financial, ownership or employment interest in the subject of
a vote, that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it
affects the officer's vote on the measure. In addition, the officer may
recuse himself or herself from voting on the measure;



      (11)   Exercise discretion relative to any matter that affects
or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects a personal
interest, defined as any financial, ownership or employment interest in a
matter to be regulated or supervised, without disclosing the personal
interest before the exercise of the discretion, when possible, on a form
provided by and filed with the Town Clerk. In addition, the official may, to
the extent allowed by law, charter, ordinance, or policy, recuse himself or
herself from the exercise of discretion in the matter.



   (C)   Enforcement.



      (1)   When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this
section comes to the attention of the Mayor or any Alderman, such shall be
reported to all of the members of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen; and the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall either determine that the complaint has
sufficient merit to warrant further investigation or determine that the
complaint does not have merit. If the Board of Mayor and Aldermen determines
that the complaint has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation, the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall cause an appropriate investigation to be
conducted or refer such matter to other appropriate authority.



      (2)   If an investigation reveals that further action should
be taken, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, after affording full due process
rights, may, by a vote of no fewer than a majority of the entire Board of
Mayor and Alderman (i.e. not fewer than four votes), issue a public censure
of the offender, refer the matter to the Town Attorney for prosecution in the
Town Court or refer the matter to other appropriate authority.



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 2-26-07)



§ 35.11 CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT FOR EMPLOYEES OF THE TOWN OF COLLIERVILLE.



   (A)   Preamble.



      (1)   Statement of purpose.



         (a)   The successful operation of a democratic
government requires that employees observe the highest standards of morality
and discharge faithfully their duties of office, recognizing that the public
interest must be their primary concern. Their conduct in both their official
and private affairs must be above reproach.



         (b)   The proper function of a municipal government
requires employees to be  impartial, accountable to its citizens and avoid
conflicts of interest or use of position for personal gain. To ensure that
the citizens of the Town of Collierville can have complete confidence in the
integrity of Town government, each Town employee shall adhere to the Code of
Ethical Conduct.



      (2)   Definitions. As used in this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         EMPLOYEE.  Any paid employee of the Town who is not a
member of the Board of Mayor and Alderman.



         SUPERVISOR.  Any employee who has been granted, by the
Town, authority to oversee the activities of other employees.



         TOWN. The Town of Collierville.



   (B)   Types of conduct.



      (1)   Secondary employment.



         (a)   If an employee of the Town accepts secondary
employment, while continuing to be an employee of the Town, such employee
shall promptly notify his or her supervisor of the secondary employment.



         (b)   Employees will not be granted sick leave as a
result of an injury or illness sustained during secondary employment.



         (c)   Town employees may not engage in secondary
employment which interferes with proper and effective job performance as a
Town employee, employment which could be considered a conflict of interest,
or employment which may subject the Town to any form of public criticism or
embarrassment.



         (d)   Town employees may not work for an outside
employer whose interests may conflict with those of the Town.



         (e)   Town employees may not use their jobs with the
Town to further their interests on the secondary job.



         (f)   Town employees may not work for, or invest in,
business concerns with whom they must deal in the course of their employment
with the Town.



         (g)   No employee shall engage in any business other
than Town business during his or her working hours.



         (h)   Secondary employment also refers to OUTSIDE
EMPLOYMENT as described in Section 14.03 of the Personnel Rules and
Regulations. Secondary employment also includes self-employment.



      (2)   Gifts.



         (a)   Town employees are prohibited from soliciting or
accepting gifts in any form from any person who has or is seeking to obtain
business from the Town or from any person whose interest may be affected by
the employee's performance or non-performance of official duties. Nothing in
this section shall prevent a Town employee from accepting a gift valued at
less than $25 or multiple gifts in any 12- month period having an aggregate
value of less than $100. If returning is impossible, the gift should be given
to the Town Administrator's office for appropriate disposal thereof;
provided, however, on occasion, citizens make gifts to groups of employees in
gratitude for service. Such gifts are not deemed to be of the nature that
would impact or appear to impact discretion, as governed by Tenn. Code Ann.
§ 8-17-102, and may be accepted by such groups of employees so long as they
are collectively shared. The head of the appropriate department shall file,
within ten days of receipt of any such group gift, a written statement with
the Town Clerk identifying the gift and the donor.



         (b)   Town employees shall not accept any fee or other
consideration from any third party for work performed on behalf of the Town.



      (3)   Impartiality.



         (a)   Town employees may not exercise discretion
relative to any matter that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to
infer that it affects a personal interest, defined as any financial,
ownership or employment interest in a matter to be regulated or supervised,
without disclosing the personal interest before the exercise, when possible,
to his or her immediate supervisor. The immediate supervisor shall forward
the disclosure to the designated ethics compliance officer with the Town
Personnel Department who shall make such record as deemed appropriate.



         (b)   No Town employee may grant or make available to
any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which
is the general practice to grant or make available to all citizens.



         (c)   Town employees must refrain from securing special
privileges or exemptions for themselves or their relatives beyond those which
would be available to all citizens.



         (d)   Town employees must not use privileged information
for their own financial advantage or to provide friends and acquaintances
with advantages or with information that could be used for financial
advantage. Each employee is charged with the responsibility of ensuring that
he or she releases only information that is available to the general public.



      (4)   Use of public property.



         (a)   No Town employee shall use or permit the use of
any publicly-owned property, vehicle, equipment, service, tool, or supplies
(new, surplus, scrap, or obsolete) or the labor of services of any Town
employee for the personal convenience or advantage of the employee or any
other person except in connection with the performance of Town services which
are generally available to the public.



         (b)   If any employee determines that he or she has an
outside interest that may be affected by Town plans or activities, or result
in a conflict of interest, the employee shall immediately report the
situation to his or her department head.



      (5)   Contracts with the Town.  Except for publicly-recorded
salary and benefits, no employee may receive any additional personal
financial benefit (income, goods or service, or increase in equity or other
value) from any transaction of the Town, including contracts for construction
and transactions for the sale or purchase of goods, services or real estate,
except those indirect and incidental public benefits and conveniences
accruing to all citizens under similar circumstances.



      (6)   Policy or legislative matters before the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen. Any employee who has a financial or other private interest in
any matter before the Board of Mayor and Aldermen (BMA) requiring a decision
and vote by the Board or who contributes to the preparation, presentation or
discussion of an official report or recommendation to the Board affecting
such financial or other private interest shall disclose at the appropriate
public meeting, verbally or in writing, duly recorded in the minutes thereof,
the nature and extent of such interest. This disclosure shall be made prior
to any vote by the Board.



   (C)   Administration of the Code of Ethics. Where a question arises
concerning the interpretation of any of the provisions of this Code of
Ethical Conduct, the Town Administrator shall decide the question. The Town
Administrator may, upon his or her discretion, refer questions to the Board
of Mayor and Alderman for comment and advice.



   (D)   Penalties. Town employees who violate the Code of Ethics may
be disciplined in a fashion that ranges from formal disciplinary reprimand to
discharge from employment.



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 2-26-07)



CHAPTER 36:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   36.01   Declaration of emergency



   36.02   Definition of emergency



   36.03   Proclamation



   36.04   Powers provided



   36.05   Authority of Board of Mayor and Aldermen



   36.99   Penalty



§ 36.01  DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.



   In the event that it is deemed necessary to declare the existence of an
emergency/disaster without delay, the Mayor, or if the Mayor is unavailable,
the Vice Mayor, may declare an emergency/disaster.  The declaration shall be
made when it is determined that a natural or manmade emergency/disaster has
occurred or that the occurrence or threat of one is imminent and requires
immediate expeditious action.



(`83 Code, § 1-201)  (Ord. 2001-21, passed 10-8-01)



§ 36.02  DEFINITION OF EMERGENCY.



   (A)   EMERGENCY shall mean the occurrence, or threat thereof,
whether accidental, natural or caused by man, in war or peace, which results
or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population or substantial
damage to or loss of property.



   (B)   Following declaration of a local emergency/disaster, the
declaration shall continue until the Mayor, or if the Mayor is unavailable,
the Vice Mayor, finds that the threat or danger of emergency/disaster no
longer exists or until an emergency meeting of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen takes place at which the declaration of the local emergency/disaster
is terminated by proclamation.



(`83 Code, § 1-204)  (Ord. 2001-21, passed 10-8-01)



§ 36.03  PROCLAMATION.



   A proclamation declaring a local emergency/disaster will activate the
emergency/disaster plan applicable to the specific incident and will be the
authority for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials or
facilities assembled or arranged to be made available pursuant to such plans.
Upon the declaration of a local emergency/disaster pursuant to this chapter,
emergency ordinances issued by the officials of this jurisdiction will be in
effect during the period of such emergency/disaster to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



(`83 Code, § 1-205)  (Ord. 2001-21, passed 10-8-01)



§ 36.04  POWERS PROVIDED.



   Pursuant to this chapter the Mayor, or if the Mayor is unavailable, the
Vice Mayor, is given the authority and enforcement powers, including, but not
limited to those powers delineated below:



   (A)   Suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of
alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and combustibles;



   (B)   Establish curfews, including, but not limited to the
prohibition of or restriction on pedestrian and vehicle movement, standing
and parking, except for the provision of designated essential services, such
as fire, police, emergency medical services and hospital services, including
the transportation of patients, utility emergency repairs and emergency calls
by physicians;



   (C)   Utilize all available resources of the Town of Collierville as
may be reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency/disaster, including
emergency expenditures not to exceed $100,000; and if it is anticipated that
the cost of emergency expenditures shall exceed $100,000, the Mayor, or if
the Mayor is unavailable, the Vice Mayor, shall have the power to call a
special meeting of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to consider authorization
for additional emergency expenditures;



   (D)   Declare certain areas off limits;



   (E)   Make provisions for the availability and use of temporary
emergency housing and emergency warehousing of materials;



   (F)   Establish emergency operating centers and shelters;



   (G)   Declare that during an emergency/disaster, it will be unlawful
and an offense against the Town of Collierville for any person, firm or
corporation to use the fresh water supplied by the Town of Collierville,
except as may be necessary to be used by emergency workers or for any purpose
other than cooking, drinking or bathing;



   (H)   Declare that during an emergency/disaster, it will be unlawful
and an offense against the Town of Collierville for any person, firm or
corporation operating within the Town to charge more than the average retail
price for any merchandise, goods or services sold during the
emergency/disaster. The average retail price as used herein is defined to be
that price at which similar merchandise, goods or  services were being sold
during the 90 days immediately preceding the emergency/disaster or a mark-up
which is not a larger percentage over wholesale cost than was being charged
prior to the emergency/disaster;



   (I)   Confiscate merchandise, equipment, vehicles or property needed
to alleviate the emergency/disaster.  Reimbursement shall be made within 60
days and customary value paid as was charged for the item during the 90 days
prior to the emergency/disaster;



   (J)   Allow the Mayor of the Town of Collierville, or in his or her
absence, the Vice Mayor, to request the National Guard of the Army, Coast
Guard or other law enforcement divisions, if necessary, to assist in the
mitigation of the emergency/disaster or to help maintain law and order,
rescue efforts and traffic control.



(`83 Code, § 1-206)  (Ord. 2001-21, passed 10-8-01)  Penalty, see § 36.99



§ 36.05  AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the authority of
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to declare or terminate a local
emergency/disaster and to take any action authorized by law when in regular
or special session.



(`83 Code, § 1-207)  (Ord. 2001-21, passed 10-8-01)



§ 36.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, § 1-208)  (Ord. 2001-21, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 2003-05,
passed 4-14-03)



CHAPTER 37:  TAXATION AND FINANCE



Section



General Provisions



   37.001   Official depositories for corporate funds



Expenditures



   37.015   Town Clerk and Town Administrator authority



   37.016   Checks to be signed by Mayor or Vice Mayor and to be
countersigned



   37.017   Expenditures subject to approval



   37.018   Purchasing



   37.019   Audit each fiscal year



Annual Budget



   37.030   Fiscal year



   37.031   Presentation of annual budget



   37.032   Preparation of annual budget



   37.033   Consideration by Board



   37.034   Adoption



   37.035   Administration of budget



   37.036   Other amendments



Real Property Taxes



   37.050   When due and payable



   37.051   When delinquent; penalty and interest



   37.052   Tax rate



   37.053   Senior Citizens Real Property Tax Freeze Act



   37.054   Municipal school system funding



Business Taxes



   37.065   Tax levies



   37.066   Tax rates



   37.067   License required



Wholesale Beer Tax



   37.080   To be collected



Capital Investment Plan



   37.090   Preparation of Plan



   37.091   Purpose and presentation of Capital Investment Plan



   37.092   [Reserved]



   37.093   Consideration and adoption by Board



Historic Preservation Tax



   37.105   Title



   37.106   Purpose and findings



   37.107   Authority



   37.108   Definitions



   37.109   Tax rate



   37.110   Issuance of building permit and certificate of occupancy;
prohibition



   37.111   Collection of tax



   37.112   Use and segregation of tax funds



   37.113   Amendments



   37.114   Exemptions



   37.115   Appeals and protests



   37.116   Additional authority



   37.117   Effect on other authority



Fire Protection Fee



   37.130   Title



   37.131   Purpose and findings



   37.132   Authority



   37.133   Definitions



   37.134   Issuance of building permit and certificate of occupancy



   37.135   Collection of fire fee



   37.136   Computation of fire facilities fee



   37.137   Use of funds



   37.138   Amendments



   37.139   Exemptions



   37.140   Appeals and protests



Hotel/Motel Occupancy Tax



   37.155   Definitions



   37.156   Levy of occupancy tax



   37.157   Collection by operator; inclusion in rate



   37.158   Remittance of tax by operator



   37.159   Collection of tax



   37.160   Disclosure of tax



   37.161   Failure of operator to collect tax



   37.162   Rules and regulations; reports; records



   37.163   Allocation of funds



   37.164   Applicability



Cross-reference:



   Charter, Articles IX and X



   Building Development Privilege Tax, see § 150.031



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 37.001  OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES FOR CORPORATE FUNDS.



   Corporate funds may be deposited at any financial institution at which
deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the
Federal Saving and Loan Insurance Corporation.  Preference for municipal
deposits shall be given to financial institutions meeting the above
requirements located within the corporate limits of Collierville with all
other relevant considerations being equal.



(`83 Code, § 6-701)



EXPENDITURES



§ 37.015  TOWN CLERK AND TOWN ADMINISTRATOR AUTHORITY.



   The Town Administrator and Town Clerk shall have the authority to
expend up to $50 from the petty cash fund at their disposal. 



(`83 Code, § 6-401)



§ 37.016  CHECKS TO BE SIGNED BY MAYOR OR VICE MAYOR AND TO BE
COUNTERSIGNED.



   All checks issued in payment for expenditures shall be signed by the
Mayor or Vice Mayor and countersigned by another member of the Board. 



(`83 Code, § 6-402)



§ 37.017  EXPENDITURES SUBJECT TO APPROVAL.



   All expenditures shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen through the adoption of the annual budget and regular reports
regarding the financial status of the corporation. 



(`83 Code, § 6-403)



§ 37.018  PURCHASING.



   (A)   Purchasing expenditures. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen
(“Board”) shall adopt by resolution regulations governing purchases by
the officers and employees of the Town; provided, however, that such
regulations shall provide that any nonemergency, nonproprietary purchase of
$25,000 or more shall be made only after competitive bidding, including
public advertisement and obtaining written, sealed bids or proposals, with
award by written contract or purchase order. At least three written
quotations shall be required whenever possible for purchases costing less
than $25,000 but $10,000 or more. Purchases of like items shall be aggregated
for purposes of the bid threshold of $25,000. Purchases of less than $10,000
may be made without public advertisement or competitive bidding.



   (B)   Sale of personal property. The Town Administrator may sell or
dispose of any personal property owned by the Town that is obsolete, no
longer required for public use, or unusable in accordance with a procedure,
which may be by negotiation, which the Town Administrator deems reasonable;
provided, however, that if the proceeds of sale are reasonably anticipated to
exceed $4,000 as to any one item, then sealed bids shall be taken or a public
auction held after reasonable public notice. No Town employee or officer
shall be permitted to purchase or acquire Town property except by sealed bid
or at public auction.



   (C)   Sale of real property.



      (1)   With the prior approval of the Board by resolution, the
Town may sell any real property owned by the Town, or any interests or rights
therein, when the sale of such property is determined to be in the best
interests of the Town because the property is no longer required for public
use by the Town. In considering the approval of a sale of such property, the
Board shall take into account all factors deemed to be important, including,
without limitation, those set forth in subsections (a) through (d) below; and
any resolution approving a sale shall contain the requirements and conditions
imposed with respect thereto by the Board. The factors set forth in
subsections (a) through (d) below must be considered by the Board but all of
same need not be imposed as conditions of sale:



         (a)   The conditions or restrictions relative to the
future use of the surplus real property;



         (b)   The preservation of all or parts of any
improvements to the property;



         (c)   The compatibility of the proposed future use with
zoning; and



         (d)   The compatibility of the proposed future use with
parking requirements.



      (2)   When the Board has determined that the value of the
property to be sold is reasonably likely to be greater than $25,000, then the
property shall be sold by sealed bid, after 30 days public notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town, provided that the Town shall
have the right to reject and refuse any and all bids on the basis that the
bids do not reflect the value of the property or for any other reason. Such
notice shall be advertised at least twice during the 30-day notice period.
The Board shall employ an independent certified appraiser in connection with
any sale of real property if the value is likely to be $25,000 or more.



      (3)   Upon reasonable determination by the Board that the
property does not exceed $25,000 in value, or that there are other unique
circumstances making a public advertisement and bid procedure impossible or
impracticable, then the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, by resolution, may waive
the requirements of public notice and sealed bidding and may sell or dispose
of the property in question by negotiated contract or by other means that
will adequately protect the public interest.



   (D)   Competitive sealed proposals.



      (1)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Town
ordinances and/or resolutions governing purchases, the Town may use
competitive sealed proposals to purchase goods and services rather than
competitive sealed bids when the Board, acting under the restrictions and
requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 12-3-1207, as same may hereinafter be
amended, and the procurement code adopted by this chapter, determines that
the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not
advantageous to the Town.  The Board must make the aforesaid determination
with regard to each use of competitive sealed proposals rather than
competitive sealed bids, except that in actual emergencies caused by
unforeseen circumstances such as natural or human- made disasters, delays by
contractors, delays in transportation, or unanticipated volume of work,
purchases through competitive sealed proposals may be made without specific
authorizing action of the Board.  A record of any emergency purchase shall
be made by the person authorizing the emergency purchase, specifying the
amount paid, the items and services purchased, from whom the purchase was
made, and the nature of the emergency.  A report of the emergency purchase
purchased through competitive sealed proposals containing all relevant
information shall be made as soon as possible by the person authorizing the
purchase to the Board. 



      (2)   Procurement code.  The following shall constitute the
Procurement Code of the Town:



         (a)   Conditions for use.



            1.   Competitive sealed proposals may be used only
when qualifications, experience, or competence are more important than price
in making the purchase;



            2.   When there is more than one solution to a
purchasing issue and the competitive sealed proposals will assist in choosing
the best solution; or



            3.   When there is no readily identifiable
solution to a purchasing issue and the competitive sealed proposals will
assist in identifying one or more solutions.



         (b)   Public notice.  Adequate public notice of the
request for competitive sealed proposals shall be given in the same manner
provided by applicable law for competitive sealed bids.



         (c)   Request/evaluation factors.  The request for
competitive sealed proposals shall state the relative importance of price and
other evaluation factors.  Among other things, the request shall include the
desired specifications (which may be expressed in the context of the result
sought to be obtained); the qualifications of each proposer; warranties, time
frame for performance, the contract; and, if applicable, the bond or other
security that the successful proposer will be required to furnish.



         (d)   Opening of proposals.  Competitive sealed
proposals shall be opened in a manner that avoids disclosure of contents to
competing proposers during the negotiation.  The proposals shall be open for
public inspection after, but not before, the intent to award the contract to
a particular proposer is announced.



         (e)   Discussions with responsive proposers and
revisions to proposals.  The request for competitive sealed proposals shall
provide that after receipt by the Town of a proposal, discussions may be
conducted for clarification to assure full understanding of, and
responsiveness to, the solicitation requirements with responsible proposers
who submit proposals determined by the purchasing agent to be reasonably
susceptible of being selected.  These proposers shall be accorded fair and
equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and for
revision of proposals, both as to the particular goods or services to be
furnished and the price thereof.  In order to permit the Town to obtain the
best offers of proposers, revisions may be permitted after submission and
before the intent to award to a particular proposer is announced.  In
conducting discussions, the purchasing agent and other municipal personnel
may make no disclosure to any proposer of any information derived from
proposals submitted by competing proposers.  Nothing contained herein shall
preclude the Town from conducting conferences or otherwise communicating with
all parties who may be interested in responding to a proposal prior to the
time that proposals are to be received.



         (f)   Best and final offers. If discussions are
conducted, the purchasing agent shall issue a written request for best and
final offers.  The request shall set forth the date, time, and place for
submission of best and final offers.  Best and final offers shall be
requested only once, unless the purchasing agent makes a written
determination that it is advantageous to the Town to conduct further
discussion or change the Town’s requirements.  The request for best and
final offers shall inform proposers that, if they do not submit a notice of
withdrawal or a best and final offer, their immediate previous offer will be
construed as their best and final offer.  Nothing contained herein shall
preclude the Board from rejecting all proposals and thereafter requesting new
proposals. 



         (g)   Award.  The award shall be made to the
responsible proposer whose proposal the Board determines is the most
advantageous to the Town, taking into consideration price and the evaluation
factors set out in the request for competitive sealed proposals.  No other
factor may be used in the evaluation.  The purchasing agent shall place in
the contract file a statement containing the basis on which the award was
made.



         (h)   Protest.  In the event that any proposer to a
request for competitive sealed proposers is aggrieved by the decision of the
Town, such aggrieved proposer may protest the intended award to another
proposer if the protest is filed within seven days after the intended award
is announced.  The protest must be filed with the Board in care of the Town
Administrator and shall be promptly decided by the Board. 



         (i)   No conflict with other laws. Nothing contained
herein is intended to change the authority of the Town with respect to
contracting for professional services in accordance with the applicable laws
of the State of Tennessee.



(`83 Code, § 6-404)  (Ord. 2001-13, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. 2004-14,
passed 8-23-04; Am. Ord. 2006-26, passed 1-22-07; Am. Ord. 2008-03, passed
2-11-08; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 10-9-17; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 10-22-18)



§ 37.019  AUDIT EACH FISCAL YEAR.



   There shall be an audit of the financial condition of the Town of
Collierville conducted after the end of each fiscal year in compliance with
the requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-56-105. The audit shall be made
available for public inspection when completed and such notice given in a
newspaper of general circulation within the community.



(`83 Code, § 6-405; Am. Ord. 2006-26, passed 1-22-07)



ANNUAL BUDGET



§ 37.030  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year for the Town of Collierville shall begin on the first
day of July and end on the last day of June, unless otherwise provided by
ordinance.



(`83 Code, § 6-501) (Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-13-04)



§ 37.031  PRESENTATION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.



   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Town
Administrator to prepare and submit to the Board of Mayor and Alderman, a
budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message.



   (B)   The Town Administrator shall prepare and submit the budget at
least 45 days before the beginning of the fiscal year.



(`83 Code, § 6-502) (Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-13-04)



§ 37.032  PREPARATION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.



   (A)   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for all
Town funds and activities, and shall be in such form as may be required by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (B)   The budget shall detail expected revenues and expenditures and
shall include such detail on a line-item basis.



   (C)   The Town Administrator shall explain the budget in both
narrative and fiscal terms, outline the proposed financial policies for the
Town, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major
changes from the current fiscal year with regard to financial policies,
expenditures and revenues, together with the reasons for such changes,
summarize the Town's debt position, include such other material as the Town
Administrator deems desirable or as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may
require, and otherwise be in such form and substance as may be required by
general state law.



   (D)   The Town Administrator shall detail proposed revenues and
expenditures by fund, organization unit, program, activity or object.



(`83 Code, § 6-503) (Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-13-04)



§ 37.033  CONSIDERATION BY BOARD.



   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall cause to be published a
general summary of the budget and a notice stating availability of the budget
for public inspection during regular business hours.



   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall conduct at least one
public hearing prior to budget adoption, with notice of such public hearing
being published at least seven days prior to the date of such public hearing
in a newspaper of general circulation in the community.



(`83 Code, § 6-504) (Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-13-04)



§ 37.034  ADOPTION.



   After the public hearing, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall adopt
the budget by resolution, with such modification or amendments as the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen deems advisable, for the ensuing year on or before the
last day of the fiscal year currently ending. If the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen fails to adopt the budget by this date, the appropriations for the
current fiscal year shall become the appropriations for the next fiscal year
until the adoption of the new budget resolution.



(`83 Code, § 6-506) (Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-13-04)



§ 37.035  ADMINISTRATION OF BUDGET.



   (A)   No more funds shall be expended within each line-item category
than is appropriated, except as provided herein.



   (B)   At any time during the fiscal year, the Town Administrator may
transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs
or line-items within a department, office or unit. Following the Board's
receipt of a written request and justification, the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may, by resolution, authorize the Town Administrator to transfer
part or all of any unencumbered appropriated balance within a department,
office or unit, or from one department, office or unit to another within the
same fund, subject to such limitations and procedures as the Board may
prescribe.



(`83 Code, § 6-506) (Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-13-04)



§ 37.036  OTHER AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Amendments to the annual budget.  Except as otherwise
restricted by law, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may amend the budget by
resolution upon one reading at a regular, adjourned or called meeting of the
Board. To increase expenditures over the total of those authorized by the
current budget, the Board must amend the budget resolution.



   (B)   Emergency appropriations.  To meet a public emergency
affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may make emergency appropriations by resolution.



   (C)   Reduction of appropriations.  If at any time during the
fiscal year it appears probable to the Town Administrator that the revenues
available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the Town
Administrator shall report such information to the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen without delay, and within a reasonable time after such information
becomes known to the Town Administrator. In making such report, the Town
Administrator shall indicate the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial
action taken by the Town Administrator, and recommendations as to any other
steps to be taken. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall then take such
further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit, and
for that purpose it may, by resolution, reduce one or more appropriations.



(`83 Code, § 6-507) (Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-13-04)



REAL PROPERTY TAXES



§ 37.050  WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE.



   Taxes levied by the municipality against real property shall become due
and payable annually on the first day of January next following the year in
which such taxes were levied.



(`83 Code, § 6-101)



§ 37.051  WHEN DELINQUENT; PENALTY AND INTEREST.



   (A)   All real property taxes shall become delinquent on and after
the first day of March next following the date on which the taxes are due and
payable and shall thereupon be subject to such penalty and interest as is
authorized and prescribed by the state law for delinquent county real
property taxes.



   (B)   All taxes shall bear interest at a rate of 12% annum from and
after the date of delinquency.



   (C)   In addition, there is levied and shall be collected on all
delinquency taxes a penalty of ½% per month for each month of delinquency or
part thereof and which shall accrue on the first day of each month such taxes
are delinquent.



(`83 Code, § 6-102)



§ 37.052  TAX RATE.



   The Board shall set the municipal tax rate adequate to meet the
financial obligations of the corporation each year before the beginning of
the new year.



(`83 Code, § 6-103)



§ 37.053  SENIOR CITIZENS REAL PROPERTY TAX FREEZE ACT.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide for uniform and
orderly administration of the property tax freeze program for eligible
taxpayers. This section is not intended to displace other forms of property
tax relief available at the time of its passage except as expressly provided
herein.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BASE TAX.  The property tax due on the principal residence of a
qualifying taxpayer at the time of the effective date of this section
approving the property tax freeze under this section. If the taxpayer did not
qualify or did not own an eligible residence when the freeze was adopted,
BASE TAX means the maximum property tax due on the taxpayer's eligible
residence for the year in which the taxpayer became eligible on the basis of
an approved application. If a taxpayer reapplies after acquiring a new
residence or after a period of ineligibility, the base tax shall be
recalculated for the year of reapplication and reestablishment of eligibility.



      COLLECTING OFFICIAL. The Town Finance Director.



      IMPROVEMENT.   Any change to a dwelling or dwelling lot that
would properly warrant a change by the assessor in the assessed value of the
property for the year or portion of the year in which the improvement is made.



      PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE. The dwelling owned by the taxpayer and
eligible as the taxpayer's legal residence for voting purposes; provided,
however, such size limit shall not exceed five  acres. The tax freeze
granted by this section shall only apply to the residence and no more than
the maximum limit for land established by such rules.



   (C)   (1)   Taxpayers seeking the property tax freeze must apply
annually to the Town Finance Director (or designee) and by the deadline
established by the Town Finance Director (or designee), and applicants must
qualify on the basis of age, income and ownership of eligible property. The
Town Finance Director (or designee) shall determine whether requirements for
eligibility have been met, and that determination shall be final, subject to
audit and recovery of taxes, including penalty and interest at the rates
otherwise provided for delinquent taxes under local and state law, if the
applicant is later determined to have not been eligible. Any taxpayer who
knowingly provides false information concerning the taxpayer's income or
other information relative to eligibility for such program, commits a Class A
misdemeanor and shall be referred to the District Attorney General.



      (2)   If the Town Finance Director (or designee) approves the
application, property taxes due upon the applicant's principal residence
shall be the lesser of:



         (a)   The actual tax due; or



         (b)   The base tax, provided the base tax shall be
adjusted to reflect any percentage increase in the value of the property
determined by the assessor to be attributed to improvements made or
discovered after the time the base tax was established.



   (D)   (1)   To qualify for the property tax freeze, the applicant
must be 65 years of age by the end of the year in which the application is
filed. The applicant must further own and use the property as the applicant's
principal residence for which the freeze is sought in the year of application
or reapplication and through the deadline date for application or
reapplication.



      (2)   In addition to the qualifications stated in division
(E)(1) of this section, the applicant's income, combined with the income of
any other owners of the property, and the income of any owners of a remainder
interest in the property who used the property as their principal place of
residence at any time during the year may not exceed the limit stated in
division (E)(3) of this section. INCOME FOR PURPOSES OF QUALIFICATION means
income from all sources as defined by the regulations of the Tennessee State
Board of Equalization.



      (3)   The income limit for the property tax freeze program
shall be that which is established by the State of Tennessee for senior
citizens property tax programs.



   (E)   (1)   The Town is authorized to perform income verification
or other related services.  In doing so, the Town may seek assistance from
another county, county trustee, municipality, and the Tennessee Comptroller
of the Treasury, as determined by the Town Finance Director.



      (2)   Financial records filed for purposes of income
verification shall be confidential and shall not be subject to inspection
under the Tennessee Public Records Act, but shall be available to local or
state officials who administer or enforce the provisions of this section or
requirements imposed pursuant thereto.



   (F)   The property tax freeze program shall conform to any uniform
definitions, application forms and requirements, income verification
procedures and other necessary or desirable rules, regulations, policies and
procedures, not in conflict with this section, as may be adopted by the
Tennessee State Board of Equalization.



(Ord. 2008-19, passed 11-10-08)



§ 37.054  MUNICIPAL SCHOOL SYSTEM FUNDING.



   The Town of Collierville shall be authorized to create a municipal
school system that shall meet the standards of adequacy established by
applicable state law and regulation, which standards include raising and
spending each year the required amount of local funds for the operation of
the municipal school system that, for calculation purposes only, would at
least be equal to the amount that would be raised through a $0.15 tax levy on
each $100 of taxable property for each year if all such taxes were collected.



(Adopted 7-16-13)



BUSINESS TAXES



§ 37.065  TAX LEVIES.



   The taxes provided in Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-4-701 et seq. and any
amendments thereto, known as the “Business Tax Act,” are levied on the
businesses, business activities, vocations or occupations carried on in the
Town of Collierville, Tennessee, at the rates and in the manner prescribed by
the Act.



(`83 Code, § 6-201)



§ 37.066  TAX RATES.



   The amounts and rates of the taxes provided for in the “Business Tax
Act,” Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-4-701 et seq., may be changed at any time and
from time to time by an appropriate resolution of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen of the Town of Collierville, provided only that any such change in
taxes or rates does not exceed the maximum provided for in the “Business
Tax Act.”



(`83 Code, § 6-202)



§ 37.067  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall exercise any such privilege within the municipality
without a current privilege license, which shall be issued by the Finance
Department to each applicant therefore upon such applicant’s compliance
with all regulatory provisions in this code and payment of the appropriate
privilege tax.



(`83 Code, § 6-203)



WHOLESALE BEER TAX



§ 37.080  TO BE COLLECTED.



   The Town Clerk is directed to take appropriate action to assure payment
to the municipality of the wholesale beer tax levied by the “Wholesale Beer
Tax Act,” as set out in Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 57-6-101 et seq.



(`83 Code, § 6-301)



CAPITAL INVESTMENT PLAN



§ 37.090  PREPARATION OF PLAN.



   (A)   The Town Administrator shall prepare or cause to be prepared a
five-year capital investment plan for the Town each year. The Town
Administrator shall present such capital investment plan to the Board of
Mayor and Alderman at least 45 days before the beginning of the fiscal year.



   (B)   Projects and budget estimates contained in such capital
investment plan shall not be considered project authorizations or
appropriations.



(`83 Code, § 6-601) (Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-13-04)



§ 37.091  PURPOSE AND PRESENTATION OF CAPITAL BUDGET PLAN.



   The five-year capital investment plan shall include a summary of each
project contained therein, a report on the status of all capital projects
undertaken or completed during the current year, and a list of all capital
improvements proposed to be undertaken during the upcoming five-year period.
The capital investment plan shall detail the necessity for each such project,
the cost estimate associated with each such project, and the proposed method
of financing for each such project. Additionally, the capital investment plan
shall include the estimated annual operating costs for each such project.



(`83 Code, § 6-602) (Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-13-04)



§ 37.092  [RESERVED.]



§ 37.093  CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION BY BOARD.



   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall review the capital
investment plan presented, and may make such recommendations or amendments to
the capital investment plan as the Board deems necessary.



   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall conduct at least one
public hearing prior to plan adoption, with notice of at least seven days
given in a newspaper of general circulation within the community.



   (C)   After public hearing, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall
adopt the five-year capital investment plan with or without amendments.



(`83 Code, § 6-604) (Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-13-04)



HISTORIC PRESERVATION TAX



§ 37.105  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Town of Collierville
Historic Preservation Tax.”



(`83 Code, § 6-801) 



§ 37.106  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen (the “Board”) recognize,
find and declare the Town Historic District and Historic Properties, as
designated by the Federal Register of Historic Places or by the Town, is an
important part of the history and character of the Town of Collierville and
has traditionally served as the Central Business District of the Town and the
center of commerce for southeast Shelby County and portions of Fayette
County, Tennessee, and Marshall County, Mississippi.



   (B)   The Board finds that: 



      (1)   The Town of Collierville has experienced rapid and
unprecedented growth in the past two decades, being one of the fastest
growing municipal corporations in the state, creating an overwhelming demand
for development of commercial and office facilities;



      (2)   New commercial and office developments within the
corporate limits of the Town but outside the Historic Town Square will
contribute to the deterioration and demise of the Historic Town Square and
Historic District as the traditional commercial center;



      (3)   Projections indicate the population of Collierville will
double by the year 2000;



      (4)   The Town has prepared a capital improvements program
identifying the need and the cost for maintaining and improving the Historic
Town Square to prevent further deterioration of this commercial center due to
new office and commercial development within the Town;



      (5)   The Tennessee General Assembly has authorized the Town
of Collierville to impose a historic preservation tax on the privilege of
engaging in development of new office, industrial and commercial facilities;
and



      (6)   The tax herein posed is within the statutory limits
established by the legislature and is otherwise reasonable and equitable. In
order to preserve the Town’s square and historic properties and protect
them from deterioration and demise caused by commercial, industrial and
office developments within the Town but outside the Town Historic District,
this chapter is enacted to require and ensure persons responsible for new
commercial, industrial and office development share in the burdens of growth
by paying their fair share of the cost of maintaining, improving and
developing the historic properties.



(`83 Code, § 6-802)



§ 37.107  AUTHORITY.



   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the Charter powers of the Town
of Collierville, Tennessee, and under the authority conferred to the Town to
levy a historic preservation tax on the privilege of engaging in the business
of new commercial and office development by Chapter 175 of the Tennessee
Private Acts of 1992 and new industrial development Chapter 41, House Bill
#1972 of the Tennessee Private Acts of 1999.



§ 37.108  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD. The municipal legislative body of the Town of Collierville,
Tennessee.



   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit for development issued by the Town of
Collierville for construction of a building within the municipal limits.



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A license for occupancy of a building or
structure issued in the Town of Collierville.



   DEVELOPMENT. The construction, building, reconstruction, erection,
extension, betterment or improvement of land providing a new building or
structure or an addition to any building or structure, or any part thereof,
which provides, adds to or increases the floor area of a commercial, office
or industrial building of a nonresidential use; the term does not include
improvements to property which do not create new or additional floor area as
herein defined.



   FLOOR AREA. The total of the gross horizontal area of all floors,
including usable basements and cellars, below the roof and within the outer
surface of the main walls of principal or accessory buildings or the
centerline of party walls separating such buildings or portions thereof, or
within lines drawn parallel to and two feet within the roofline of any
building or portions thereof without walls, but excluding arcades, porticos
and similar open areas which are accessible to the general public, and which
are not designed or used as sales, display, storage, service, production or
office area.



   INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE BUILDING. Any structure built for the
support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattels or movable property of any
kind for industrial or commercial purposes or to provide office space; the
term includes a mobile home.



   NONRESIDENTIAL. The development of any property for any use other than
residential use, except as may be exempted by this Act.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate
or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the plural as well as the
singular number.



   PLACE OF WORSHIP. That portion of a building owned by a religious
institution which has a tax exempt status, which is used for worship services
and related functions; provided, however, that a place of worship does not
include buildings or portions of buildings which are used for purposes other
than for worship and related functions or which are or are intended to be
leased, rented or used by persons who do not have tax exempt status.



   PUBLIC BUILDINGS. A  building owned by the State of Tennessee or any
agency thereof, a political subdivision of the State of Tennessee, including
but not necessarily limited to counties, cities, school districts and special
districts or the federal government or any agency thereof.



   RESIDENTIAL. The development of any property for a dwelling unit or
units.



(`83 Code, § 6-804)



§ 37.109  TAX RATE.



   There is levied a tax on each person engaging in new office, industrial
and commercial development within the corporate limits of the Town of
Collierville outside the Town Historic District, as defined by the Federal
Register of Historic Places and Town of Collierville, which tax is to be paid
at the time of the issuance of a building permit at a rate of $.25 per gross
square foot of floor area of all new office, industrial and commercial
developments.



(`83 Code, § 6-805)



§ 37.110  ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY;
PROHIBITION.



   No building permit or certificate of occupancy for new office,
industrial or commercial development within the Town of Collierville
municipal limits shall be issued unless and until the tax herein imposed has
been paid in full by the person engaging in such new development.



(`83 Code, § 5-806)



§ 37.111  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   (A)   Each applicant for a building permit for new office,
commercial or industrial development shall state, on a form provided by the
Building Official, the amount of gross square footage contained in the
development subject to the application.



   (B)   The Building Official shall calculate the tax due on the
development and collect such tax in cash or by a negotiable instrument, prior
to the acceptance of the building permit application.



   (C)   In the event a building permit is not required for the new
development, the applicant for a certificate of occupancy shall state the
amount of gross square footage contained in the development subject to the
application, and the Building Official shall calculate the tax due on the
development and collect such tax in cash or by a negotiable instrument, prior
to acceptance of the application for the certificate of occupancy.



   (D)   Upon application, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, in their
sole discretion, may permit a  person engaging in the business of new
office, industrial and commercial development, upon application for a
building permit for a development, to defer payment of tax due until the time
of substantial completion of the development, as specifically defined and
determined by the Board at the hearing on each application, provided that
such person provides security for the full amount of the tax due in a form
acceptable to the Board.



(`83 Code, § 6-807)



§ 37.112  USE AND SEGREGATION OF TAX FUNDS.



   All taxes on new office, commercial and industrial developments
collected pursuant to this chapter shall be accounted for separately. Account
funds shall be expended solely for those purposes identified by the Town of
Collierville.  In no event shall any taxes collected pursuant to this
chapter be used for the improvement of privately owned property, except where
said funds are used to improve or upgrade privately owned property which
through satisfactory and equitable lease agreement will be used for the
benefit of the Town’s residents.



(`83 Code, § 6-808)



§ 37.113  AMENDMENTS.



   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may, from time to time, amend this
subchapter and the tax imposed herein.



(`83 Code, § 6-809)



§ 37.114  EXEMPTIONS.



   No tax shall be assessed or collected for the development of:



   (A)   Residential structures;



   (B)   Buildings used for agricultural purposes;



   (C)   Public buildings;



   (D)   Places of worship;



   (E)   Industrial buildings.



(`83 Code, § 6-810) (Am. Ord. 2001-24, passed 11-26-01)



§ 37.115  APPEALS AND PROTESTS.



   Any person aggrieved by the calculation or assessment of the tax
authorized by this subchapter may protest such assessment pursuant to the
laws of the State of Tennessee.



(`83 Code, § 6-811)



§ 37.116  ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.



   The Collierville Historic Preservation Tax on new office, industrial
and commercial developments is in addition to all other authority the Town of
Collierville may exercise to impose taxes, fees, assessments or other revenue
raising or land development regulatory measures granted either by private or
public acts of the State of Tennessee and the imposition of such tax, in
addition to any other authorized tax, fee, assessment or charge, shall not be
deemed to constitute double taxation.



(`83 Code, § 6-812)



§ 37.117  EFFECT ON OTHER AUTHORITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall in no manner repeal, modify or
interfere with the authority granted by any other public or private law
applicable to the Town of Collierville.



(`83 Code, § 6-813)



FIRE PROTECTION FEE



§ 37.130  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Town of Collierville
Fire Protection Fee.”



(`83 Code, § 6-901)



§ 37.131  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen (the “Board”) finds that: 



   (A)   The fire protection system of the Town of Collierville (the
“Town”) are in need of repair, constant maintenance and expansion in
order to provide adequate protection for persons and property;



   (B)   The Town has prepared a study identifying the need and cost of
maintaining and expanding fire protection services throughout the Town’s
fire districts; and



   (C)   The fee established by this subchapter will be imposed and
collected for the purpose of providing additional funds necessary to ensure
the Town’s ability to maintain fire protection in accordance with its
current standards.



(`83 Code, § 6-902)



§ 37.132  AUTHORITY.



   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the Charter powers of the Town
of Collierville, Tennessee, and all applicable laws of the State of Tennessee.



(`83 Code, § 6-903)



§ 37.133  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD. The municipal legislative body of the Town of Collierville,
Tennessee.



   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, chattels or movable property of any kind, including a mobile home,
but excluding buildings used for agricultural purposes and residential
accessory structures.



   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Town of Collierville Building
Official authorizing the construction or placement of a building or structure
within the Town municipal limits.



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A license for occupancy of a building or
structure after the building or structure has been inspected to determine the
construction has been undertaken in compliance with the building permit
application and in conformity with the Zoning Code and other pertinent
ordinances and codes adopted by the Town of Collierville.



   DWELLING UNIT. A room or rooms connected together constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, rental
or lease on a daily, weekly, monthly or longer basis; physically separated
from any other room(s) or dwelling units which may be in the same structure;
and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.



   FEEPAYER. A person who applies to the Town of Collierville for a
building permit which is for new single family residential or commercial
structures.



   FIRE PROTECTION. The prevention and extinguishment of fires; the
protection of life and property from fire; and the enforcement of municipal,
state and federal fire codes.



   FLOOR AREA. The total of the gross horizontal area of all floors,
including usable basements and cellars, below the roof and within the outer
surface of the main walls of principal accessory buildings or portions
thereof or within lines drawn parallel to and two feet within the roofline of
any building or portions thereof without wall, but excluding arcades,
porticos and similar openings which are not used as aisles, display, storage,
service, production or office area.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate
or other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the
singular number.



   PUBLIC BUILDING. A building owned by the State of Tennessee or any
agency thereof, a political subdivision of the State of Tennessee, including
but not necessarily limited to counties, cities, Towns, school districts and
special districts or the federal government or any agency thereof.



   RESCUE. What commonly is called RESCUE, a service which generally
includes the provision of basic life support, the extrication of accident
victims from entrapment.



   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. The development of any property for dwelling unit or
units.



(`83 Code, § 6-904)



§ 37.134  ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No building permit or certificate of occupancy for a new residential or
commercial structure within the Town of Collierville municipal limits shall
be issued unless and until the fee herein imposed has been paid in full as
provided in § 150.029.



(`83 Code, § 6-905)



§ 37.135  COLLECTION OF FIRE FEE.



   (A)   Each applicant for a building permit for new residential and
commercial structures shall state, on a form provided by the Building
Official, the amount of gross square footage contained in the structure
subject to the application.



   (B)   The Building Official shall calculate the fee due on the
permit and collect such fee in cash or by a negotiable instrument, prior to
issuance of the building permit.



   (C)   In the event that a building permit is not obtained for any
new structure, the applicant for a certificate of occupancy shall state the
amount of gross square footage contained in the project subject to
application, and the Building Official shall calculate the fee due on the
project and collect such fee in cash or by a negotiable instrument, prior to
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.



   (D)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until the fee required has been paid.



(`83 Code, § 6-906)



§ 37.136  COMPUTATION OF FIRE FACILITIES FEE.



   (A)   One and two family dwellings. The fire fee schedule shall be
calculated at $.15 per gross heated square foot of floor area for the first
3,500 gross heated square feet and $.30 per gross heated square foot of floor
area above 3,500 gross heated square feet up to 5,500 gross heated square
feet.



   (B)   Multi-family dwellings/apartments. The fire fee schedule shall
be calculated at $300 per dwelling unit for all dwelling units within a
multi-family dwelling or apartment.



   (C)   All other buildings. Except as set forth in divisions (A) and
(B) of this section, the fire fee schedule for the gross square footage for
the first two floors of all buildings shall be calculated as follows:



      (1)   All buildings with gross square footage of up to 3,500
gross square feet shall pay a fire fee of $.30 per gross square foot for the
first 3,500 gross square feet;



      (2)   All buildings that are between 3,501 gross square feet
and 50,000 gross square feet shall pay the fee set forth in division (C)(1)
of this section for the first 3,500 gross square feet and a fee of $.06 per
gross square foot for each gross square foot between 3,501 and 50,000 gross
square feet;



      (3)   All buildings that are between 50,001 and 100,000 gross
square feet shall pay the fee set forth in division (C)(1) of this section
for the first 3,500 gross square feet, the fee set forth in division (C)(2)
of this section for each gross square foot between 3,501 gross square feet
and 50,000 gross square feet, and a fee of $.03 per gross square foot for
each gross square foot between 50,001 gross square feet and 100,000 gross
square feet;



      (4)   All buildings over 100,000 gross square feet shall pay
the fee set forth in division(C)(1) of this section for the first 3,500 gross
square feet, the fee set forth in division(C)(2) of this section for each
gross square foot between 3,501 gross square feet and 50,000 gross square
feet, the fee set forth in division(C)(3) of this section for each gross
square foot between 50,001 gross square feet and 100,000 gross square feet,
and a fee of $.01 per gross square foot for each gross square foot over
100,001 gross square feet;



      (5)   The maximum fire fee that shall be charged for a single
floor of any building shall be $7,500;



      (6)   Persons receiving a building permit(s) to develop
property that is part of a master development plan, including, but not
limited to strip malls, shall be charged a fee per gross square foot of floor
area only for that portion of the property for which the person receives a
building permit. If improvements are later construction such property to
accommodate specific uses, no fire fee shall be payable incident to the
issuance of a building permit relating thereto;



      (7)   When a master development plan includes a common area
that is covered and fully enclosed, persons receiving building permits to
develop property that is part of the master development plan shall, in
addition to the fees set forth in subsections (1) through (4), be assessed a
fire fee for the common area. The amount of the common area fee shall be at
the rates set forth herein and shall be calculated based upon the percentage
of property within the entire master development plan for which the person
receives a building permit in relation to the entire gross square footage of
the master development plan.



   (D)   Structures with stories above a second floor. Beginning with
the third floor and each additional floor of all buildings, except
multi-family dwellings/apartments, the fire fee shall be calculated at $.15
per gross square foot. The maximum fire fee per floor shall not exceed $7,500.



   (E)   Fire fees. All funds collected pursuant to this subchapter
shall be properly identified as fire fees and accounted for separately as
determined by this chapter and used solely for the purpose specified herein.



(`83 Code, § 6-907)  (Ord. 98-14, passed 6-22-98; Am. Ord. 2015-15, passed
8-10-15)



§ 37.137  USE OF FUNDS.



   (A)   All funds collected from the fire fee shall be used for the
purposes of maintaining and extending fire protection and other related
emergency services.



   (B)   Each fiscal year, the Town Administrator shall present to the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen a proposed capital improvement program for the
fire services, assigning funds, including accrued interest, from fire
protection funds to fire and other related emergency services and expenses.
Monies, including any accrued interest, that are not assigned in any fiscal
period shall be reserved in the fund balance in the next fiscal period.



(`83 Code, § 6-908)  (Ord. 98-14, passed 6-22-98; Am. Ord. 2015-15, passed
8-10-15)



§ 37.138  AMENDMENTS.



   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may, from time to time, amend this
subchapter and the fee imposed herein, based upon adoption of a revised
capital improvements program for fire services, which identifies new capital
improvements and costs reasonably attributed to new residential and
commercial structures.



(`83 Code, § 6-909)



§ 37.139  EXEMPTIONS.



   No fees shall be assessed or collected for the construction of the
following:



   (A)   Public buildings;



   (B)   Single family dwelling units containing less than 1,300 square
feet of floor area where such units are proposed for construction in census
blocks that are designed by the U.S. Federal Census Bureau as being low and
moderate income areas;



   (C)   One and two family dwellings protected by an automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA standards and
recommendations.



(`83 Code, § 6-910)  (Ord. 98-14, passed 6-22-98)



§ 37.140  APPEALS AND PROTESTS.



   Any person aggrieved by the calculation or assessment of the fee
authorized by this subchapter may protest such assessment pursuant to the
laws of the State of Tennessee.



(`83 Code, § 6-911)



HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX



§ 37.155  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSIDERATION. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for
the occupancy in a hotel valued in money whether to be received in money,
goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property
and services of any kind or nature without any deduction there from
whatsoever; provided, however, nothing in this definition shall be construed
to imply that consideration is charged when the space provided to the person
is complimentary from the operator and no consideration is charged to or
received from any person.



   FINANCE DIRECTOR. The Finance Director of the Town of Collierville,
Tennessee.



   HOTEL. Any structure or space, or any portion thereof, which is
occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwellings,
lodging or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist camp,
tourist court, tourist cabin, motel or any place in which rooms, lodgings or
accommodations are furnished to transients for a consideration.



   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room, lodgings or accommodations in any hotel.



   OPERATOR. The person operating the hotel whether as owner, lessee or
otherwise.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation,
estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other
group or combination acting as a unit.



   TRANSIENT. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations in a hotel for a period
of less than 30 continuous days.



(`83 Code, § 6-1001)  (Ord. 96-15, passed 7-8-96)



§ 37.156  LEVY OF OCCUPANCY TAX.



   The Town levies a privilege tax upon the privilege of occupancy in any
hotel of each transient in any amount of 5% of the rate charged by the
operator. The tax is a privilege tax upon the transient occupying such room
and is to be collected as provided in this subchapter.



(`83 Code, § 6-1002)  (Ord. 96-15, passed 7-8-96)



§ 37.157  COLLECTION BY OPERATOR; INCLUSION IN RATE.



   (A)   The tax shall be added by each and every operator to each
invoice prepared by the operator for the occupancy of the hotel and given
directly or transmitted to the transient for the occupancy in the
operator’s hotel. The tax shall be collected by such operator from the
transient and remitted to the Town.



   (B)   When a person has maintained occupancy for 30 continuous days,
that person shall receive from the operator a refund or credit for the tax
previously collected from or charged to him or her, and the operator shall
receive credit for the amount of such tax if previously paid or reported to
the Town of Collierville.



(`83 Code, § 6-1003)  (Ord. 96-15, passed 7-8-96)



§ 37.158  REMITTANCE OF TAX BY OPERATOR.



   (A)   The tax levied shall be remitted to the Finance Director or
his or her designee by all operators who lease, rent or charge for any rooms,
lodgings, spaces or accommodations in hotels within the Town which Finance
Director shall be charged by ordinance of the Town with the duty of
collection thereof, such tax to be remitted to such officer not later than
the twentieth day of each month for the preceding month. The operator is
required to collect the tax from the transient at the time of the
presentation of the invoice for such occupancy, whether prior to occupancy or
after occupancy as may be the custom of the operator, and if credit is
granted by the operator to the transient, then the obligation to the Town for
such tax shall be that of the operator.



   (B)   For the purpose of compensating the operator in accounting for
and remitting the tax authorized and levied pursuant hereto and the related
ordinances of the Town, the operator shall be allowed 2% of the amount of the
tax due and accounted for and remitted to the Town in the form of a deduction
in submitting his or her report and paying the amount due by such operator,
provided the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment.



(`83 Code, § 6-1004)  (Ord. 96-15, passed 7-8-96)



§ 37.159  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   The Finance Director shall be responsible for the collection of such
tax and shall place the proceeds of such tax in the general funds of the
Town. A monthly tax return under oath shall be filed with the Finance
Director by the operator with such number of copies thereof as the Finance
Director may reasonably require for the collection of such tax. The report of
the operator shall include such facts and information as may be deemed
reasonable for the verification of the tax due. The form of such report shall
be developed by the Finance Director and approved by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen of the Town prior to use. The Finance Director shall cause an audit
of each operator in the Town at least once per year and shall report on the
audits made to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town. The Board of
Mayor and Aldermen is authorized to adopt reasonable rules and regulations
for the implementation of the provisions of this chapter.



(`83 Code, § 6-1005)  (Ord. 96-15, passed 7-8-96)



§ 37.160  DISCLOSURE OF TAX.



   No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether
directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or
absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rent, or that if
added, any part will be refunded.



(`83 Code, § 6-1006)  (Ord. 96-15, passed 7-8-96)



§ 37.161  FAILURE OF OPERATOR TO COLLECT TAX.



   Taxes collected by an operator which are not remitted to the Finance
Director on or before the due dates are delinquent. An operator shall be
liable for interest on such delinquent taxes from the due date at the rate of
12% per annum and is liable for an additional penalty of 1% for each month or
fraction thereof such taxes are delinquent. The interest and penalty shall
become a part of the tax herein required to be remitted. Each occurrence of
willful failure or refusal of an operator to collect or remit the tax or
willful refusal of a transient to pay the tax imposed is unlawful and shall
be punishable by a civil penalty not in excess of $500. In addition, it is
unlawful for any operator to knowingly file a false tax return and a
violation shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $500.



(`83 Code, § 6-1007)  (Ord. 96-15, passed 7-8-96)



§ 37.162  RULES AND REGULATIONS; REPORTS; RECORDS.



   (A)   It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection and
payment to the Town of any tax imposed by this subchapter to keep and
preserve for a period of three years all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax for which he or she may have been liable for
the collection of and payment to the Town, which records the Finance
Director, his or her designee, or any accounting firm or accountant employed
by the Town, shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.



   (B)   In administering and enforcing the provisions of this
subchapter and any ordinance pursuant hereto, the Finance Director shall have
as additional powers, those powers and duties with respect to collecting
taxes as provided in Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-1-1801 et seq., or as otherwise
provided by law for county clerks and/or municipal officers.



   (C)   Upon any claim of illegal assessment and collection, the
taxpayer has the remedies provided in Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-1801 et seq.



      (1)   The Finance Director shall also possess those powers and
duties, as provided in Tenn. Code Ann. § 67-1-707, for the county clerks
with respect to the adjustment and refunds of such tax.



      (2)   Any claim for such refund by the Town of taxes or
revenue alleged to have been erroneously or illegally paid shall be filed
with the Finance Director, supported by proper proof within one year from the
date of payment; otherwise, the taxpayer shall not be entitled to a refund,
and the claim for refund shall be barred.



   (D)   With respect to the adjustment and settlement with taxpayers,
all erroneous taxes collected by the Finance Director under authority of this
subchapter shall be refunded by the Town.



   (E)   (1)   Notice of any tax paid under protest shall be given
to the Finance Director.



      (2)   Suit may be brought for recovery.



(`83 Code, § 6-1008)  (Ord. 96-15, passed 7-8-96; Am. Ord. 2004-24, passed
12-13-04)



§ 37.163  ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.



   The proceeds of tax authorized by this subchapter shall be allocated to
such funds as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town shall direct.



(`83 Code, § 6-1009)  (Ord. 96-15, passed 7-8-96)



§ 37.164  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter are declared to be severable. If any
of its sections, provisions, exceptions or parts be held unconstitutional or
void, the remainder of the act shall continue to be in full force and effect,
if being the legislative intent now declared, that this subchapter would have
been adopted even if such unconstitutional or void matter had not been
included herein.



(`83 Code, § 6-1010)  (Ord. 96-15, passed 7-8-96)



CHAPTER 38:  HERITAGE COMMISSION



Section



Name



   38.01   Name



Purpose and Mission



   38.10   Purpose



   38.11   Mission



   38.12   Acceptance of materials and artifacts



Board of Commissioners



   38.20   Number and qualifications



   38.21   Tenure



   38.22   Method of appointment



   38.23   Resignation



   38.24   Removal



   38.25   Meetings



Liaison to the Commission



   38.30   Liaison to the Commission



Officers



   38.40   Generally



   38.41   Duties of Chairman



   38.42   Duties of Vice Chairman



   38.43   Duties of the Secretary



Committees



   38.50   Committees



Reports



   38.60   Reports



NAME



§ 38.01  NAME.



   The name of the commission shall be the Town of Collierville Heritage
Commission (the “Commission”).



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



PURPOSE AND MISSION



§ 38.10  PURPOSE.



   The Commission shall serve as the Town of Collierville (the “Town”)
authority on matters regarding Town history.  The Commission will conduct
research and, subject to the provisions of § 38.12 of the Town Code, collect
information, stories and documents regarding the history of the Town and its
people.  The ownership of such collection shall be vested in the Town.  The
Commission will strive to document the history of the Town and will promote
the relevance and importance of the Town’s history.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



§ 38.11  MISSION.



   The mission of the Commission is to preserve, interpret and impart
knowledge of the history of the Town and to foster an appreciation of its
historic significance.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



§ 38.12  ACCEPTANCE OF MATERIALS AND ARTIFACTS.



   The Commission shall review all proposals relative to the donation to
the Town of materials and artifacts of historical significance and make
recommendations to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town with respect
thereto.  The Town’s ability to store and safe keep property of such a
nature is limited and the Commission shall consider such limitations when
making its recommendations.  The Commission shall have no authority to
accept donations of materials and artifacts as that authority will be vested
solely in the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



§ 38.20  NUMBER AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   The government of the Commission shall be vested in the Board of
Commissioners, which shall consist of nine members who shall be residents of
the Town and who shall have knowledge of and a demonstrated interest in Town
history.  Experience and contributions to historic preservation efforts
shall be considered in the selection process.  Notwithstanding any contrary
provision in any ordinance of the Town, a member of the Board of
Commissioners may also serve on another Board or Commission of the Town as
permitted by § 8.04 of the Town Charter.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



§ 38.21  TENURE.



   The term of office of the members of the Board of Commissioners shall
be five years beginning upon their appointment by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen and ending with the appointment and qualification of their
successors; provided, however, that during the initial appointments, three
members’ terms shall expire in three years, three members’ terms shall
expire in four years, and three members’ terms shall expire in five years,
as designated by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen at the time of
appointment.  Despite the expiration of a Board member’s term, he or she
shall continue to serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



§ 38.22  METHOD OF APPOINTMENT.



   The initial members of the Board of Commissioners shall be nominated by
the Mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.  Thereafter, in each year in which members of the Board of
Commissioners are to be appointed or whenever a vacancy shall occur, the
Mayor shall nominate an individual to serve on the Board and the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen shall confirm such individual by majority vote.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



§ 38.23  RESIGNATION.



   A member of the Board of Commissioners may resign at any time by
delivering written notice to the Board of Commissioners.  A resignation
shall be effective when the notice is delivered unless the notice specifies a
later effective date.  A vacancy created by a resignation that will occur at
a specific later date may be filled before the vacancy occurs, but the new
Board member may not take office until the vacancy occurs.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



§ 38.24  REMOVAL.



   Any member of the Board of Commissioners may be removed with or without
cause by majority vote of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



§ 38.25  MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings of the Board of Commissioners may be held at such time
and place as such Board shall from time to time determine.  The Board of
Commissioners may hold special meetings, and such meetings may be called by
the Chairman or any two Commissioners.  All meetings shall be open to the
public and shall comply with the requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. §§
8-44-101 et seq.  A record shall be made of all meetings and actions taken
by the Commission.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



LIAISON TO THE COMMISSION



§ 38.30  LIAISON TO THE COMMISSION.



   (A)   A member of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall be selected
by a majority vote of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to serve as a liaison
to the Commission.  The term of the liaison shall be for one year.  The
liaison shall be entitled to all notices of meetings and shall be entitled to
attend such meetings, but will not be a member of the Board of Commissioners
and will have no voting rights.



   (B)   One member shall be a high school student appointed by the
BMA.  The principal of each high school will be asked to submit two
nominations for the BMA to consider.  Students from private schools and
those who are home schooled may also apply.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



OFFICERS



§ 38.40  GENERALLY.



   The Commission shall have a Chairman, a Vice Chairman, and a Secretary,
and such other officers as may be duly authorized and elected by the Board of
Commissioners.  The officers shall be elected annually by majority vote of
the Board of Commissioners.  Despite the expiration of an officer’s term,
he or she shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed and
qualified.  An officer may resign at any time by delivering his or her
resignation to the Commission.  A resignation shall be effective when
delivered unless it specifies a later effective date.  The Board of
Commissioners may remove any officer at any time with or without cause.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



§ 38.41  DUTIES OF CHAIRMAN.



   The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Board of
Commissioners.  The Chairman shall have the authority to generally manage
the business and affairs of the Commission and perform all the duties
incidental to the office.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



§ 38.42  DUTIES OF VICE CHAIRMAN.



   In the absence or disability of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall
perform all the duties of the Chairman, and in addition shall have such other
powers and duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the Chairman of
the Commission.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



§ 38.43  DUTIES OF THE SECRETARY.



   The Secretary shall keep the minutes of the meetings of the Board of
Commissioners; he or she shall authenticate records of the Commission; he or
she shall attend to the giving and serving of all notices of the Commission
as required by him or her; he or she shall have charge of the minute book and
such other records of the Commission as the Board may direct; he or she shall
attend to such correspondence as may be assigned to him or her and perform
all duties incidental to the office.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



COMMITTEES



§ 38.50  COMMITTEES.



   The Commission may establish committees for the purpose of conducting
research or carrying out special projects within the purview of the
Commission.  Such committees shall be designated for a specific purpose and
shall be given a specific charge and duration of time in which to complete
their work.  Committees shall be created and members appointed by majority
vote of the Commission.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



REPORTS



§ 38.60  REPORTS.



   A report shall be forwarded to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of all
findings, publications, rulings and actions of the Commission.  All such
reports, actions, and the like shall be made public in accordance with
applicable law and shall be archived in the official records of the
Commission.



(Ord. 2009-19, passed 1-25-10)



CHAPTER 39:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



School Board



   39.01   Municipal school board establishment



SCHOOL BOARD



§ 39.01  MUNICIPAL SCHOOL BOARD ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   A municipal school board for the Town shall be established in
compliance with applicable state law.



   (B)   The municipal school board for the Town shall consist of five
members to be elected from the municipality at large.



   (C)   In order to be eligible to be a member of the municipal school
board for the Town, one must be a citizen of the State of Tennessee, be a
resident and qualified voter of the Town, have achieved a high school diploma
or GED and filed documentation satisfactory to the Shelby County Election
Commission evidencing same, have attained the age of 18 years at the time of
their election, and otherwise meet all other requirements of applicable state
law at the time one seeks election.



   (D)   All elections for the municipal school board for the Town
shall be conducted on a non-partisan basis.



   (E)   No member of the governing body of the Town shall be eligible
for election as a member of the municipal school board for the Town.



   (F)   The initial terms for members of the municipal school board
for the Town shall vary in length, provided that all subsequently elected
members, other than members appointed to fill a vacancy, shall be elected to
four-year terms, with members elected to even numbered positions for an
initial term of one year and members elected to odd numbered positions for an
initial term of three years, as follows:



      (1)   Position 1:  Initial three year term



      (2)   Position 2:  Initial one year term



      (3)   Position 3:  Initial three year term



      (4)   Position 4:  Initial one year term



      (5)   Position 5:  Initial three year term



   (G)   Members of the municipal school board for the Town may succeed
themselves.



   (H)   Vacancies occurring on the municipal school board for the Town
shall be filled by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen by appointment of a person
who would be eligible to serve as a member of the municipal school board,
with such member to serve until a successor is elected and qualifies
according to applicable law, the successor to be elected at the next general
election for which candidates have sufficient time to qualify under
applicable law.



   (I)   The initial municipal school board for the Town shall take
office on the first day of the first month following certification of the
results of the election to select the members of the initial municipal board.



   (J)   Compensation for members of the municipal school board for the
Town shall be $2,400 per annum.



(Ord. 2013-12, passed 8-22-13)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC SERVICES



   Chapter



      50.   REFUSE



      51.   WATER AND SEWER SERVICE



      52.   WATER SERVICE



      53.   PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS



CHAPTER 50:  REFUSE



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Definition



   50.02   Premises to be kept clean



   50.03   Nuisances



Containers



   50.15   Residential refuse containers



   50.16   Commercial refuse containers



   50.17   Location of containers



   50.18   Disturbing containers



Collection



   50.30   Residential collection



   50.31   Commercial collection



   50.32   Collection vehicles



   50.33   Disposal



   50.34   Sanitation collection fee



   50.35   Yard waste collection fee



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  DEFINITION.



   REFUSE shall mean and include garbage, rubbish, leaves, brush and bulk
refuse, as those terms are generally defined, or any other goods or materials
left for abandonment or disposal in a place other than one designated by the
Town for the receipt of such materials.



(`83 Code, § 8-201)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed
3-27-17)



§ 50.02  PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN.



   (A)   All persons within the Town are required to keep their
premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from accumulations of
refuse, except where stored as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Upon finding that such unsanitary conditions exist, as
enumerated in § 50.01, the Town Administrator or his or her designee shall
notify, in writing, the owner of the property that the conditions must be
remedied within ten days.  The notice shall be given in person or by
registered mail to the last known address of the owner.



   (C)   The property owner may, within the ten day corrective period,
file a written request for appeal to the Town Administrator. The Town
Administrator shall hear the appeal within a reasonable time period after
receiving the written appeal from the aggrieved property owner. The Town
Administrator shall have the authority to determine whether such unsanitary
conditions exist on the property and what corrective actions, if any, shall
be undertaken to correct any violations present on the property.



   (D)   If the owner fails to remedy such conditions within the
prescribed time period, the Town Administrator or his or her designee shall
determine the reasonable cost for corrective action, initiate corrective
action upon said property and bill the property owner for the cost of the
corrective action within 30 days from the date of the corrective action. The
amount of the billing shall constitute a lien upon the property for which the
expenditure was made, which lien may be enforced by suit as other tax liens
of the Town.



   (E)   Each owner, occupant or other responsible person using or
occupying any building or other premises within this municipality where
refuse accumulates or is likely to accumulate shall provide, use and keep
covered an adequate number of refuse containers for the proper and orderly
disposal of refuse, garbage and other materials suitable for collection by
the Town. The refuse containers shall be strong, durable and rodent and
insect proof. The refuse container shall have a capacity of 90 to 95 gallons
and provided by the Town of Collierville after receipt of the registration
fee set by resolution.



(`83 Code, § 8-202)  (Ord. 99-44, passed 12-13-99; Ord. 00-09, passed
7-10-00)



§ 50.03  NUISANCES.



   Discharging, littering or disposal of refuse in a manner that is
offensive or deleterious to public health, safety or welfare or otherwise not
permitted by law shall be considered a public nuisance, punishable by a fine
of $50 per day (or to the fullest amount and extent allowed by law). It is
expressly prohibited to cause refuse to be upon any street, sidewalk, alley,
public park/greenbelt, square or other public place, except as may otherwise
be permitted by law.



(Ord. 2017-06, passed 3-27-17)



CONTAINERS



§ 50.15  RESIDENTIAL REFUSE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Each residential owner, occupant or other responsible person
using or occupying any residential building or other similar premises within
this Town where refuse accumulates or is likely to accumulate shall keep
covered its refuse containers. The Town shall provide one refuse container
for a non- refundable administrative fee set yearly with the adoption of the
Town budget. All refuse shall be placed within the containers and only refuse
within Town-distributed regulated containers will be collected.



   (B)   If additional containers are requested, they may be acquired
at the current administrative rate set yearly with the adoption of the Town
budget for additional carts and will be the property of the Town. The
combined weight of any refuse container and its contents shall not exceed 75
pounds. No refuse shall be placed in a refuse container until such refuse has
been drained of all free liquids. The Town of Collierville will provide all
normal maintenance of the containers. Damaged through neglect or stolen
containers will be the responsibility of the property owner.



(`83 Code, § 8-203)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00)



§ 50.16  COMMERCIAL REFUSE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Each commercial owner, occupant or other responsible person
using or occupying any commercial building or other similar premises within
this Town where refuse accumulates or is likely to accumulate shall keep
covered its refuse containers. Commercial owners who generate small amounts
of refuse may select the Town of Collierville to provide their solid waste
service.



   (B)   The Town shall provide one refuse container for a
nonrefundable administrative fee set yearly with the adoption of the Town
budget. All refuse shall be placed within containers and only refuse within
Town-distributed regulated containers will be collected.



   (C)   If additional containers are requested, they may be acquired
at the current rate set yearly with the adoption of the Town budget. All
containers will remain the property of the Town. The combined weight of any
refuse container and its contents shall not exceed 75 pounds. No refuse shall
be placed in a refuse container until such refuse has been drained of all
free liquids. The Town of Collierville will provide all normal maintenance of
the containers. Damaged through neglect or stolen containers will be the
responsibility of the business owner.



   (D)   The Town shall provide twice a week collection for up to three
90 to 95 gallon refuse containers.  Those commercial owners who generate
more than can be contained in three 90 to 95 gallon containers are required
to collect their waste in properly secured dumpsters for disposal by other
solid waste service companies.



(`83 Code, § 8-204)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00)



§ 50.17  LOCATION OF CONTAINERS.



   Where the municipal refuse collectors approve alleys for use,
containers shall be placed on or within six feet if the alley line is in such
a position as not to intrude upon the traveled portion of the alley. Where
streets are used by the municipal refuse collectors, containers shall be
placed adjacent to and back of the curb out of the street, or adjacent to and
back of the ditch or street line if there is no curb, at such time as shall
be scheduled by the municipality for the collection of refuse therefrom. As
soon as practicable, and within 24 hours after such containers have been
emptied, they shall be removed by the owner and returned to the premises. All
refuse collected must be in regulated containers for collection on scheduled
days. 



(`83 Code, § 8-205)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00)



§ 50.18  DISTURBING CONTAINERS.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn
over or in any way disturb or use any refuse container assigned to another.
This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public refuse
containers for their intended purpose.



(`83 Code, § 8-207)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00) Penalty, see §10.99



COLLECTION



§ 50.30  RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION.



   All refuse accumulated within the corporate limits shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of under the supervision of the Director of Public
Services. Collections shall be once per week in accordance with the announced
schedule.



(`83 Code, § 8-208)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00)



§ 50.31  COMMERCIAL COLLECTION.



   Commercial collections within the corporate limits shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of under the supervision of the Director of Public
Services. Collections shall be twice per week in accordance with the
announced schedule.



(`83 Code, § 8-209)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00)



§ 50.32  COLLECTION VEHICLES.



   The collection of refuse shall be by means of a vehicle with beds
constructed so there will be no leakage of liquids draining from the refuse
onto the streets and alleys. Furthermore, all refuse collection vehicles
shall utilize closed beds or such coverings as will effectively prevent the
scattering of refuse over the streets and alleys.



(`83 Code, § 8-210)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00)



§ 50.33  DISPOSAL.



    The disposal of refuse in any quantity by any person in any place,
public or private, other than at the sites designated by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen is expressly prohibited.



(`83 Code, § 8-211)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00)



§ 50.34  SANITATION COLLECTION FEE.



   (A)   All residential, business or industrial units receiving
sanitation collection and disposal services rendered by the Town of
Collierville shall be levied a monthly fee as follows:



      (1)   Residential units:      Set by resolution;



      (2)   Commercial and industrial:   Set by resolution.



   (B)   Fees shall be paid monthly as indicated on the utility bills
of the Town of Collierville. Be it provided, however, that those residential,
business or industrial units utilizing a private collection service as
authorized now or in the future by the Town shall be exempt from this fee. Be
it further provided that elderly citizens, age 65 or older, who can
demonstrate low income will pay a reduced monthly fee set by resolution for
their primary residence.



   (C)   The Town may also from time to time establish such fees as
necessary for special collection needs for any residential, business or
industrial unit.



   (D)   An administrative fee set by resolution will be collected for
all new residential service requests.  This fee is nonrefundable and will be
paid upon the sanitation service request. Upon payment of this fee, one 90 to
95 gallon wheeled garbage container will be delivered to the resident within
a week of the request. An administrative fee set by resolution will be
collected for all new approved commercial service requests. This fee is
nonrefundable and will be paid upon the sanitation service request. Upon
payment of this fee, one 90 to 95 gallon wheeled garbage container will be
delivered to the business within a week of the request. Appropriate
collection fees will be assessed dependent on the number of collection
containers issued (maximum of three). (Effective date for collection of fees
for commercial service is 11/1/00).



(`83 Code, § 8-212)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00)



§ 50.35  YARD WASTE COLLECTION FEE.



   (A)   All residential property within the Town of Collierville will
receive yard waste collection service. Yard waste may consist of bagged grass
in bags less than 40 pounds each, tree limbs less than 10 feet in length,
bushes and shrubs and wood type construction material. All such debris shall
be placed at curbside in dome shaped piles away from structures such as
mailboxes, fire hydrants, power poles and the like.



   (B)   The Town will not provide collections for contractor-related
projects. Dirt, concrete, brick, large amounts of carpet or roofing will not
be collected. Tree and landscape service companies are required to haul off
all trees and brush they generate. The Town will collect grass cuttings from
contracted service.



   (C)   When tree limbs or construction debris exceed one truckload,
the excess material may be left for the following weeks collection. If the
property owner agrees to pay the established yard waste collection fee for
excess brush and a truck is available, it will return before the next
scheduled collection day. The fee charged will be set by resolution.



   (D)   The Town of Collierville will collect loose leaves between
November 1 and March 31. Leaves are to be placed in dome shaped piles and not
placed in ditches that will interfere with drainage. Leaves placed in bags
will be collected weekly throughout the year.



(`83 Code, § 8-213)  (Ord. 00-09, passed 7-10-00)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER AND SEWER SERVICE



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Administration of services



   51.02   Application and scope



   51.03   Definitions



   51.04   Variances



   51.05   Enforcement



Meters



   51.20   General



   51.21   Meter tests



   51.22   Schedule of rates



   51.23   Multiple service through a single meter



Charges



   51.35   Billing



   51.36   Reconnection charge



   51.37   Service charges for temporary service



   51.38   Connection charges



   51.39   Disconnection for late payment



Service; Regulations



   51.50   Application for obtaining service



   51.51   Water and sewer main extensions



   51.52   Discontinuance or refusal of service



   51.53   Termination of service by customer



   51.54   Access to customer’s premises



   51.55   Inspections



   51.56   Customer’s responsibility for system’s property



   51.57   Customer’s responsibility for violations



   51.58   Supply and resale of water



   51.59   Unauthorized use or interference with water supply



   51.60   Limited use of unmetered private fire line



   51.61   Damages to property due to water pressure



   51.62   Liability for cutoff failures



   51.63   Restricted use of water



   51.64   Interruption of service



   51.65   Fluoridation of water supply



   51.98   Violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  ADMINISTRATION OF SERVICES.



   (A)   There is within the Public Services Department a division
known as Public Utilities which will be responsible for providing the water
and sanitary sewer services of the Town.



   (B)   The Public Utilities Division shall be administered by a
Public Utilities Division Manager.



(`83 Code, § 13-101)  (Ord. 86-06, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 2018-18, passed
1-14-19)



§ 51.02  APPLICATION AND SCOPE.



   The provisions of this chapter are a part of all contracts for
receiving water and/or sewer service from the municipality and shall apply
whether the service is based upon contract, agreement, signed application or
otherwise.



(`83 Code, § 13-102)



§ 51.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APARTMENT COMPLEXES. Multi-residential dwellings consisting of greater
than two units, with the exception of those complexes individually metered
and individually billed.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person, firm or corporation who receives water and/or
sewer service from the municipality under either an express or implied
contract.



   DWELLING. Any single structure, with auxiliary buildings, occupied by
one or more persons or households for residential purposes.



   GROSS DATE.  The date 15 days after the date of a bill, except when
some other date is provided by contract. The GROSS DATE is the last date upon
which water and/or sewer bills can be paid at net rates.



   HIGH RISK USERS. Occupants of any single residential rental property.



   HIGH VOLUME USERS. Business typically consuming large amounts of water.



   HOUSEHOLD.  Any two or more persons living together as a family group.



   PREMISES. Any single structure or group of structures operated as a
single business or enterprise, provided, however, the term PREMISES shall not
include more than one dwelling.



   RENTAL PROPERTY RECONNECT PROGRAM. When a tenant orders service
terminated, the meter will automatically be read and service reestablished in
the property owner’s name. The terms of the terminated service will apply
to the service reestablished in the property owner’s name.



   SERVICE LINE. Pipe line extending from any water or sewer main of the
municipality to private property, the service line shall be construed to
include pipe line extending from the municipality’s water main to and
including the meter and meter box.



   TENANT. Any individual business within a premises with separate access
to facilities that use water and produce wastewater or a group of businesses
within a premises with common access to facilities that use water and produce
wastewater; (for example, kitchen and restroom facilities).



(`83 Code, § 13-103)  (Ord. 99-32, passed 9-27-99; Am. Ord. 2002-17, passed
10-28-02)



§ 51.04  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Whenever the Board is of the opinion that it is to the best
interest of the municipality and its inhabitants to construct a water and/or
sewer main extension without requiring strict compliance with the preceding
section, such extension may be constructed upon such terms and conditions as
shall be approved by the Board.



   (B)   The authority to make water and/or sewer main extensions under
the preceding section is permissive only and nothing contained therein shall
be construed as requiring the municipality to make such extensions or to
furnish service to any person or persons.



(`83 Code, § 13-108)



§ 51.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   The enforcement of this chapter rests with the Public Utilities
Director of the Town and his or her designee. 



(`83 Code, § 13-130)  (Ord. 99-17, passed 5-24-99)



METERS



§ 51.20  GENERAL.



   (A)   Each dwelling or premises where water is furnished by the
municipality is required to install and maintain a water meter so that
accurate measurement of water used may be maintained and the proper charge
made therefore.



   (B)   All meters shall be installed, tested, required and removed
only by the Town. No one shall do anything which will in any way interfere
with or prevent the proper operation of a meter. No one shall tamper with or
work on a water meter without the permission of the Town. No one shall
install any pipe or other device which will cause water to pass through or
around a meter without the passage of such water being fully registered by
the meter.



(`83 Code, § 13-109)  (Ord. passed 8-10-62)



§ 51.21  METER TESTS.



   (A)   The municipality will, at its own expense, make routine tests
of meters when it considers such tests desirable.



   (B)   In testing meters, the water passing through a meter will be
weighed or measured at various rates of discharge and under varying
pressures. To be considered accurate, the meter registration shall check with
the weighed or measured amounts of water within the percentage shown in the
following table.



 

Meter Size
 
Test Charge


5/8”, 3/4”, 1”, 2”
 
2%


3”
 
3%


4”
 
4%


6”
 
5%



 



   (C)   The municipality will also make tests or inspections of its
meters at the request of the customer.  However, if a test requested by a
customer shows a meter to be accurate within the limits stated above, the
customer shall pay a meter testing charge in the amount stated in the
following table.



 

Meter Size
 
Test Charge


5/8”, 3/4”, 1”
 
$2


1½”, 2”
 
$5


3”
 
$8


4”
 
$12


6” and over
 
$20



 



   (D)   If such test shows a meter not to be accurate within such
limits, the costs of such meter test shall be borne by the municipality.



(`83 Code, § 13-110)



§ 51.22  SCHEDULE OF RATES.



   (A)   Rates and collection. All water service shall be furnished to
customers according to the following schedule of rates.  The Town shall
begin collecting the rates for each year with the monthly bills sent to the
Town’s water customers in February for January usage.  For each subsequent
year shown below, the Town shall begin collecting the rates for each year
with the monthly bills sent to the Town's water customers in February of each
year.  The Town shall charge customers the applicable amount within each of
the following four categories of charges:  (1) the customer service charge;
(2) the base rate charge; and (3) the volumetric charge as follows:



      (1)   Customer service charge.



 


$2.30

 

$2.60

 

$2.60

 

$2.60

 

$2.90

 

$2.90

 

$2.90

 

$3.20

 

$3.20

 

$3.20



¹ For years subsequent to 2022, the rates shall be the same rates as for
2022, unless modified by appropriate ordinance.



 



      (2)   Base rate charge.  All residential customers are
charged at applicable 3/4" meter size rates:



         (a)   Service inside the Town:



 


Meter Size

 

2013

 

2014

 

2015

 

2016

 

2017

 

2018

 

2019

 

2020

 

2021

 

20221





¾inch
 

$3.45

 

$3.45

 

$3.45

 

$3.45

 

$3.45

 

$3.45

 

$3.45

 

$3.45

 

$3.45

 

$3.45



1-inch
 

   8.63

 

8.63

 

8.63

 

8.63

 

8.63

 

8.63

 

8.63

 

8.63

 

8.63

 

8.63



2-inch
 

27.60

 

27.60

 

27.60

 

27.60

 

27.60

 

27.60

 

27.60

 

27.60

 

27.60

 

27.60



3-inch
 

51.75

 

51.75

 

51.75

 

51.75

 

51.75

 

51.75

 

51.75

 

51.75

 

51.75

 

51.75



4-inch
 

86.25

 

86.25

 

86.25

 

86.25

 

86.25

 

86.25

 

86.25

 

86.25

 

86.25

 

86.25



6-inch
 

172.50

 

172.50

 

172.50

 

172.50

 

172.50

 

172.50

 

172.50

 

172.50

 

172.50

 

172.50



8-inch
 

276.00

 

276.00

 

276.00

 

276.00

 

276.00

 

276.00

 

276.00

 

276.00

 

276.00

 

276.00



1 For years subsequent to 2022, the rates shall be the same rates as for
2022, unless modified by appropriate ordinance.




 



         (b)   Service outside the Town:



 


Meter Size

 

2013

 

2014

 

2015

 

2016

 

2017

 

2018

 

2019

 

2020

 

2021

 

20221



¾inch
 

$5.18

 

$5.18

 

$5.18

 

$5.18

 

$5.18

 

$5.18

 

$5.18

 

$5.18

 

$5.18

 

$5.18



1-inch
 

12.95

 

12.95

 

12.95

 

12.95

 

12.95

 

12.95

 

12.95

 

12.95

 

12.95

 

12.95



2-inch
 

41.40

 

41.40

 

41.40

 

41.40

 

41.40

 

41.40

 

41.40

 

41.40

 

41.40

 

41.40



1 For years subsequent to 2022, the rates shall be the same rates as for
2022, unless modified by appropriate ordinance.



 



         (c)   Service in Piperton:



 


Meter Size

 

2013

 

2014

 

2015

 

2016

 

2017

 

2018

 

2019

 

2020

 

2021

 

20221



2-inch
 

$31.74

 

$31.74

 

$31.74

 

$31.74

 

$31.74

 

$31.74

 

$31.74

 

$31.74

 

$31.74

 

$31.74



6-inch
 

198.38

 

198.38

 

198.38

 

198.38

 

198.38

 

198.38

 

198.38

 

198.38

 

198.38

 

198.38



8-inch
 

317.40

 

317.40

 

317.40

 

317.40

 

317.40

 

317.40

 

317.40

 

317.40

 

317.40

 

317.40



10-inch
 

456.26

 

456.26

 

456.26

 

456.26

 

456.26

 

456.26

 

456.26

 

456.26

 

456.26

 

456.26



1 For years subsequent to 2022, the rates shall be the same rates as for
2022, unless modified by appropriate ordinance.



 



      (3)   Volumetric charge (per 1,000 gallons).



         (a)   Service inside the Town:



 


$1.45

 

$1.50

 

$1.50

 

$1.50

 

$1.50

 

$1.50

 

$1.50

 

$1.50

 

$1.50

 

$1.50



1 For years subsequent to 2022, the rates shall be the same rates as for
2022, unless modified by appropriate ordinance.



 



         (b)   Service outside the Town:



 


$2.18

 

$2.25

 

$2.25

 

$2.25

 

$2.25

 

$2.25

 

$2.25

 

$2.25

 

$2.25

 

$2.25



1 For years subsequent to 2022, the rates shall be the same rates as for
2022, unless modified by appropriate ordinance.



 



         (c)   Service in Piperton:



 


$1.67

 

$1.73

 

$1.73

 

$1.73

 

$1.73

 

$1.73

 

$1.73

 

$1.73

 

$1.73

 

$1.73



1 For years subsequent to 2022, the rates shall be the same rates as for
2022, unless modified by appropriate ordinance.



 



   (B)   Piperton regulations.



      (1)   Rates effective for all usage in excess of the current
annual allowed monthly volume in any given calendar month or such lesser
amount if the Town determines that supply conditions warrant conservation,
unless the Town has provided written authorization for such excess usage,
shall be as follows:



         (a)   Rates for the first 500,000 gallons in excess of
the current year’s gallon limit for any calendar month, or such lesser
amount if supply conditions warrant conservation, in any given calendar month
shall be 130% of the then current Town customer volumetric rates for
residents inside the Town as established from time to time by § 51.22 or its
successor.



         (b)   Rates for the second 500,000 gallons in excess of
the current year’s gallon limit for any calendar month, or such lesser
amount if supply conditions warrant conservation, shall be 135% of the then
current Town customer volumetric rates for residents inside the Town as
established from time to time by § 51.22 or its successor.



         (c)   Rates for 1,000,000 gallons and above in excess of
the current year’s gallon limit for any calendar month, or such lesser
amount if supply conditions warrant conservation, shall be 140% of the then
current Town customer volumetric rates for residents inside the Town as
established from time to time by § 51.22 or its successor.



      (2)   Service in Piperton for all usage subsequent to the
termination of the water agreement between the Town and Piperton for the
provision of water to Piperton:



         (a)   Rates for months one through six after the date of
termination shall be 135% of the then current Town customer volumetric rates
for residents inside the Town as established from time to time by § 51.22 or
its successor.



         (b)   Rates for months seven through 12 after the date
of termination shall be 150% of the then current Town customer volumetric
rates for residents inside the Town as established from time to time by §
51.22 or its successor.



         (c)   Rates for months beyond one year shall be 175% of
the then current Town customer volumetric rates for residents inside the Town
as established from time to time by § 51.22 or its successor.



   (C)   Special charges.



      (1)   Volume charge carrier for water plant #2 discharge (per
1,000 gal.)



         (a)   Thirty percent (30%) off the prevailing rate for
town residents.



         (b)   Note: rates are discounted 30% from inside
customer sewer volume rates.



      (2)   These rates will be calculated on the basis of pumping
months. A pumping month shall consist of a period of 30.5 days on which
pumping activities occur. Any pumping activity, no matter what the duration,
during a 24-hour period shall be considered a “day” for the purposes of
calculating a pumping month. The rates established in this division (C)(2)
shall be effective from July 25, 2015 and terminate no later than July 26,
2020. Unless this agreement is extended, these special charges shall expire
on July 26, 2020 and the applicable charges will revert back to the rates
then in effect.



(`83 Code, § 13-111)  (Ord. 82-018, passed 1-24-83; Am. Ord. 93-23, passed
8-23-93; Am. Ord. 2005-02, passed 2-28-05; Am. Ord. 2005-15, passed 10-24-05;
Am. Ord. 2006-23, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. 2008-04, passed 2-11-08; Am. Ord.
2008-16, passed 6-23-08; Am. Ord. 2009-09, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord. 2009-18,
passed 1-25-10; Am. Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. 2010-10, passed
11-23-10; Am. Ord. 2010-12, passed 1-24-11; Am. Ord. 2011-09, passed 9-12-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-25, passed 1-9-12; Am. Ord. 2012-14, passed 7-23-12; Am. Ord.
2012-17, passed 10-8-12; Am. Ord. 2013-16, passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 2015-08,
passed 6-8-15)



§ 51.23  MULTIPLE SERVICE THROUGH A SINGLE METER.



   (A)   No customer shall supply water or sewer service to more than
one dwelling or premises from a single service line and meter without first
obtaining the written permission of the municipality.



   (B)   Where the municipality allows more than one dwelling, tenant
or business to be served through a single service line and meter, the charges
for water and sewer shall be billed to and become the responsibility of the
property owner or management company of such premises.



   (C)   Charges for total actual water usage and total actual sewer
usage shall be billed to the customer in whose name the service is supplied
(which will be, in the case of tenants or separate businesses served through
a single service line or a single meter, the property owner or management
company as stated above).  Such computation shall be made at the
municipality’s applicable water and sewer rate schedules, including the
categories of charges associated with water rates (which shall include a
customer service charge, a base rate charge, and a volumetric charge) and the
categories of charges associated with sewer rates (which shall include, for
all customers, a customer service charge, a base rate charge, and a
volumetric charge and with respect to certain customers, additional treatment
costs, as applicable and industrial cost recovery, as applicable).



(`83 Code, §13-112) (Ord. 2005-02, passed 2-28-05)



CHARGES



§ 51.35  BILLING.



   (A)   Bills for residential water and sewer service will be rendered
monthly. Bills for commercial and industrial service may be rendered weekly,
semimonthly, or monthly, at the option of the municipality. Both charges
shall be collected as a unit; no municipal employee shall accept payment of
water service charges from any customer without receiving at the same time
payment of all sewer service charges owed by such customer. Water service may
be discontinued for nonpayment of the combined bill.



   (B)   Water and sewer bills must be paid on or before the gross date
shown thereon to obtain the net rate, otherwise, the gross rate shall apply.
Failure to receive a bill will not release a customer from payment
obligation, nor will it extend the discount rate.



   (C)   In the event a bill remains unpaid five days after the gross
date, the service is subject to be discontinued subject to the provisions of
§ 51.39. The municipality shall not be liable for any damages resulting from
discontinuing service under the provisions of this section, even though
payment of the bill is made at any time on the day that service is actually
discontinued.



   (D)   Should the final date of payment of the bill at the net rate
fall on Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, the business day following the final
date will be the last day to obtain the net rate.



   (E)   If a meter fails to register properly, if a meter is removed
to be tested or repaired, if the meter is inaccessible or if water is
received other than through a meter, the municipality reserves the right to
render an estimated bill based on the best information available.



(`83 Code, § 13-113)  (Ord. 2003-10, passed 5-12-03)



§ 51.36  RECONNECTION CHARGE.



   Whenever service has been discontinued as provided for above, a
reconnection charge will be based on the time that the customer requests the
reconnection, as provided by the adoption of resolution.



(`83 Code, § 13-115)



§ 51.37  SERVICE CHARGES FOR TEMPORARY SERVICE.



   Customers requiring temporary service shall pay all costs for service
establishment incidental to the supplying and removing of service in addition
to the regular charge for water and/or sewer service.



(`83 Code, § 13-105)



§ 51.38  CONNECTION CHARGES.



   (A)   The water connection charges shall be set by resolution.



   (B)   The service lines will be laid by the municipality at the
expense of the applicant as per the subdivision standards of the Town. When a
service line is completed, the Town shall be responsible for the maintenance
and upkeep of such service line from the main to and including the meter and
meter box, and such portion of the service line shall belong to the Town. The
remaining portion of the service line commencing at the union on the
downstream side of the meter, to which the plumber connects, shall belong to
and be the responsibility of the customer.



(`83 Code, § 13-106)  (Ord. 96-07, passed 4-22-96; Am. Ord. 2013-13, passed
9-9-13)



§ 51.39  DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   (A)   It is the policy of the Town to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The Town’s form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to
the title, address, and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:



      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date
set forth on the bill; and



      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not
paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and



      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and must
present in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the Town official
in charge of utility billing.  A recording of any such hearing shall be made
by the Town official. This official shall be authorized to order that the
customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.



   (B)   In the absence of payment of the bill rendered, arrangements
for payment acceptable to the Town or resort to the hearing procedure
provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in
no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 20 days.



   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the Town to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after arrangements satisfactory to the Town for payment of arrearages
have been made, in addition to payment of any reconnect charge then in effect
as established by resolution of the Town Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 5-12-03)



SERVICE; REGULATIONS



§ 51.50  APPLICATION FOR OBTAINING SERVICE.



   (A)   A formal application for either original or additional service
must be made and approved by the municipality before connection or meter
installation orders will be issued for work performed. The receipt of a
prospective customer’s application for service, whether or not accompanied
by the service establishment fee, shall not obligate the Town to render the
service applied for. If the service applied for cannot be supplied in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and general practice, the
liability of the Town shall be limited to the return of any service
establishment fee paid by the applicant. All applications for service shall
be made with the Town at the Town’s designated location.



   (B)   The deposit and fees required for service establishment during
service hours, as established by the Town, by adoption of fee resolution.



(`83 Code, § 13-104)



§ 51.51  WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS.



   Persons desiring water and/or sewer main extensions must pay all of the
costs of making such extensions as per the subdivision standards of the Town
of Collierville, adopted by the Planning Commission of the Town of
Collierville on July 13, 1970, and adopted by reference in §§ 151.075 and
151.077.



(`83 Code, § 13-107)



§ 51.52  DISCONTINUANCE OR REFUSAL OF SERVICE.



   (A)   The municipality shall have the right to discontinue water
and/or sewer service or to refuse to connect service for a violation of, or a
failure to comply with, any of the following:



      (1)   These rules and regulations;



      (2)   The customer’s application for service;



      (3)   The customer’s contract for service.



   (B)   Such right to discontinue service shall apply to all service
received through a single connection or service, even though more than one
customer or tenant is furnished service therefrom, and even though the
delinquency or violation is limited to only one such customer or tenant.



   (C)   Discontinuance of service by the municipality for any cause
stated in these rules and regulations shall not release the customer from
liability for service already received or from liability for payments that
thereafter become due under other provisions of the customer’s contract.



(`83 Code, § 13-114)



§ 51.53  TERMINATION OF SERVICE BY CUSTOMER.



   Customers who have fulfilled the terms of their applications and wish
to discontinue service must give reasonable notice to that effect. Notice to
discontinue service will not relieve the customer from any minimum or
guaranteed payment under the applicable rate schedule. Written notice may be
required at the Town’s discretion.



(`83 Code, § 13-116)



§ 51.54  ACCESS TO CUSTOMER’S PREMISES.



   The municipality’s identified representatives and employees shall be
granted access to all customer’s premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of reading meters, for testing, inspecting, repairing, removing and
replacing all equipment belonging to the municipality and for inspecting
customer’s plumbing and premises generally in order to secure compliance
with these rules and regulations.



(`83 Code, § 13-117)



§ 51.55  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The municipality shall have the right, but shall not be
obligated, to inspect any installations or plumbing system before water
and/or sewer service is furnished or at any later time. The municipality
reserves the right to refuse service or to discontinue service to any
premises not meeting standards fixed by municipal ordinances regulating
building and plumbing, or not in accordance with any special contract, these
rules and regulations or other requirements of the municipality.



   (B)   Any failure to inspect or reject a customer’s installation
or plumbing system shall not render the municipality liable or responsible
for any loss or damage which might have been avoided had such inspection or
rejection been made.



(`83 Code, § 13-118)



§ 51.56  CUSTOMER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR SYSTEM’S PROPERTY.



   Except as herein elsewhere expressly provided, all meters, service
connections and other equipment furnished by or for the municipality shall be
and remain the property of the municipality. Each customer shall provide
space for and exercise proper care to protect the property of the
municipality on his or her premises. In the event of loss or damage to the
property, arising from the neglect of a customer to properly care for same,
the cost of necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the customer.



(`83 Code, § 13-119)



§ 51.57  CUSTOMER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.



   Where the municipality furnishes water and/or sewer service to a
customer, such customer shall be responsible for all violations of these
rules and regulations which occur on the premises so served. Personal
participation by the customer in any such violations shall not be necessary
to impose such personal responsibility on him or her.



(`83 Code, § 13-120)



§ 51.58  SUPPLY AND RESALE OF WATER.



   All water shall be supplied within the municipality exclusively by the
municipality and no customer shall, directly or indirectly, sell, sublet,
assign, otherwise dispose of the water or any part thereof, except with
written permission from the municipality.



(`83 Code, § 13-121)



§ 51.59  UNAUTHORIZED USE OR INTERFERENCE WITH WATER SUPPLY.



   No person shall turn on or turn off any municipality’s stopcocks,
valves, hydrants, spigots or fire plugs without permission or authority from
the municipality.



(`83 Code, § 13-122)



§ 51.60  LIMITED USE OF UNMETERED PRIVATE FIRE LINE.



   (A)   When a private fire line is not metered, no water shall be
used from such line or from any fire hydrant thereon, except to fight fire or
except when being inspected in the presence of an authorized agent.



   (B)   All private fire hydrants shall be sealed by the municipality
and shall be inspected at regular intervals to see that they are in proper
condition and that no water is being used therefrom in violation of these
rules and regulations. When the seal is broken on account of fire, or for any
other reason, the customer taking such service shall immediately give the
municipality a written notice of such occurrence.



(`83 Code, § 13-123)



§ 51.61  DAMAGES TO PROPERTY DUE TO WATER PRESSURE.



   The municipality shall not be liable to any customer for damages caused
to his or her plumbing or property by high pressure, low pressure or
fluctuations in pressure in the municipality’s water main.



(`83 Code, § 13-124)



§ 51.62  LIABILITY FOR CUTOFF FAILURES.



   (A)   The municipality’s liability shall be limited to the
forfeiture of the right to charge a customer for water that is not used but
is received from a service line under any of the following circumstances:



      (1)   After receipt of at least ten days written notice to cut
off a water service, the municipality has failed to cut off such service;



      (2)   The municipality has attempted to cut off a service but
such service has not been completely cut off;



      (3)   The municipality has completely cut off a service, but
subsequently the cutoff develops a leak or is turned on again so that water
enters the customer’s pipes from the municipality’s main.



   (B)   Except to the extent stated above, the municipality shall not
be liable for any loss or damage resulting from cutoff failures. If a
customer wished to avoid possible damage for cutoff failures, the customer
shall rely exclusively on privately owned cutoffs and not on the
municipality’s cutoff. Also, the customer (and not the municipality) shall
be responsible for seeing that his or her plumbing is properly drained and is
kept properly drained, after his or her water service has been cut off.



(`83 Code, § 13-125)



§ 51.63  RESTRICTED USE OF WATER.



   In times of emergencies or in times of water shortage, the municipality
reserves the right to restrict the purpose for which water may be used by a
customer and the amount of water which a customer may use.



(`83 Code, § 13-126)



§ 51.64  INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   The municipality will endeavor to furnish continuous water and
sewer service, but does not guarantee to the customer any fixed pressure or
continuous service. The municipality shall not be liable for any damages for
any interruption of service whatsoever.



   (B)   In connection with the operation, maintenance, repair and
extension of the municipal water and sewer systems, the water supply may be
shut off without notice when necessary or desirable and each customer must be
prepared for such emergencies. The municipality shall not be liable for any
damages from such interruption of service or for damages from the resumption
of service without notice after any such interruption.



(`83 Code, § 13-127)



§ 51.65  FLUORIDATION OF WATER SUPPLY.



   The Public Utilities Division of the Town is authorized and instructed
to make plans for the fluoridation of the water supply of the Town, to submit
such plans to the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, and
upon approval from same, to add such chemicals as fluoride to the water
supply, in accordance with such approval, as will adequately provide for the
fluoridation of the water supply. 



(`83 Code, § 13-128)  (Ord. passed 5-14-75)



§ 51.98  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision
of this chapter.



   (B)   Tampering with the water meter in any way that interferes with
the measurement of the water flow (usage) or installing a pipe or device to
cause the water to bypass the meter shall be a felony.



(`83 Code, § 13-129)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 52:  WATER SERVICE



Section



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Compliance with regulations



   52.03   Interconnections and the like



   52.04   Agreement of compliance



   52.05   Inspections of water supplies authorized



   52.06   No advance notice required for inspection



   52.07   Corporation has right to disconnect water supply under
certain circumstances



   52.08   Backflow prevention device to be installed under certain
circumstances



   52.09   Warning sign to be displayed



   52.10   Shelby County Groundwater Quality Control Board



   52.99   Penalty



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUXILIARY INTAKE. Any piping or other arrangement whereby the water may
be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant.



   BY-PASS. Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the water
may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant.



   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection whereby the public water
supply is connected with any other water supply system whether public or
private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such
manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either
through the manipulation of valves or because of any other arrangement.



   INTER-CONNECTION. Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the
public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool,
storage reservoir or other device which does or may contain sewage or other
waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting contamination to the
public water supply.



   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.



   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. The waterworks system furnishing water to the Town
of Collierville for general use and which supply is recognized as the public
water supply by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation.



(`83 Code, § 8-101)



§ 52.02  COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.



   The Collierville public water supply is to comply with Tenn. Code Ann.
§§ 68-221-101 and 68-221-104, as well as the rules and regulations for
public water supplies, legally adopted in accordance with this code, which
pertain to cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes and
inter-connections and establish an effective, ongoing program to control
these undesirable water uses.



(`83 Code, § 8-102)



§ 52.03  INTERCONNECTIONS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection to be
made or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever unless the construction
and operation of same have been approved by the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation, and the operation of such cross-connection
auxiliary intake, by-pass or inter-connection is at all times under the
direct supervision of the Director of Public Utilities of the Town of
Collierville.



(`83 Code, § 8-103)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.04  AGREEMENT OF COMPLIANCE.



   Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public water
supply and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water
supply or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from
which the water stored therein is circulated through a piping system shall
file with the Director of Public Utilities a statement of the nonexisting of
unapproved or unauthorized auxiliary intakes, by-passes or inter-connections.
The statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross- connection,
auxiliary intake, by-pass or inter-connection will be permitted upon the
premises.



(`83 Code, § 8-104)



§ 52.05  INSPECTIONS OF WATER SUPPLIES AUTHORIZED.



   It shall be the duty of the Collierville Public Utilities to cause
inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply
where cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The
frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards
involved shall be established by the Superintendent of Public Utilities and
as approved by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation.



(`83 Code, § 8-105)



§ 52.06  NO ADVANCE NOTICE REQUIRED FOR INSPECTION.



   The Director of Public Utilities or authorized representative shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the Collierville Public Water Supply for the purpose of
inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections,
auxiliary intakes, by- passes or inter-connections. On request, the owner,
lessee or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection
agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on
such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when
requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections.



(`83 Code, § 8-106)



§ 52.07  CORPORATION HAS RIGHT TO DISCONNECT WATER SUPPLY UNDER CERTAIN
CIRCUMSTANCES.



   (A)   Any person who now has cross-connections, auxiliary intakes,
by-passes or inter-connections in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be allowed reasonable time within which to comply with provisions of
this chapter. After a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an
appraisal of time required to complete the work, the amount of time shall be
designated by the Director of Public Utilities. The failure to correct
conditions threatening the safety of the public water system as prohibited by
this chapter and the Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-221-104, within reasonable time
and within the time limits set by the Collierville Public Services, shall be
grounds for denial of water service. If proper protection has not been
provided after a reasonable time, the utility shall give the customer legal
notification that water service is to be discontinued and physically separate
the public water supply from the customers on-site piping system in such a
manner that the two systems cannot again be connected by an unauthorized
person.



   (B)   Where cross-connections, interconnections auxiliary intakes or
by-passes are found that constitutes an extreme hazard of immediate concern
of contaminating the public water system, the director of the utility shall
require that immediate corrective action be taken to eliminate the threat to
the public water system unless the imminent hazard(s) is corrected
immediately.



(`83 Code, § 8-107)



§ 52.08  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TO BE INSTALLED UNDER CERTAIN
CIRCUMSTANCES.



   (A)   Where the nature of use of the water supplied a premises by
the Utilities Division is such that it is deemed:



      (1)   Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation;



      (2)   The owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is
not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge or the system, or his or
her designated representative, that the water use and protective features of
the plumbing as such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability of
the water supply;



      (3)   That the nature and mode of operation within a premises
are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing;



      (4)   There is a likelihood that protective measures may be
subverted, altered or discontinued.



   (B)   The Director of Public Utilities, or his or her designated
representative, shall require the use of an approved protective device on the
service line serving the premises to assure that any contamination that may
originate in the customer’s premises is contained therein. The protective
devices shall be reduced pressure zone type backflow preventer approved by
the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation as to manufacture,
model and size. The method of installation of backflow protective devices
shall be approved by the Director of Public Utilities prior to installation
and shall comply with the criteria set forth by the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation. The installation shall be at the expense of the
owner or occupant of the premises.



   (C)   Personnel of Collierville Public Services shall have the right
to inspect and test the device or devices on an annual basis or whatever
deemed necessary by the Director of Public Utilities or his  or her
designated representative. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the
device without the knowledge of the occupant of the premises.



   (D)   Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of
normal operations or protection of life, property or equipment, duplicate
units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service
to test or repair the protective device or devices. Where it is found that
only one unit has been installed and the continuance of service is critical,
the Director of Public Utilities shall notify, in writing, the occupant of
the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually
acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The water supply shall
require the occupant of the premises to make all repairs indicated promptly,
to keep the unit(s) working properly and the expense of such repairs shall be
borne by the owner or occupant of the premises.



   (E)   Repairs shall be made by qualified personnel, acceptable to
the Director of Public Utilities. If necessary, water service shall be
discontinued (following legal notification) for failure to maintain backflow
prevention devices in proper working order. Likewise, the removal, by-passing
or altering the protective device(s) or the installation thereof so as to
render the device(s) ineffective shall constitute grounds for discontinuance
of service.



   (F)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
customer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects to the
satisfaction of the Collierville Public Services.



(`83 Code, § 8-108)



§ 52.09  WARNING SIGN TO BE DISPLAYED.



   (A)   The potable water supply made available to premises served by
the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as
specified herein. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or
domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be
labeled in a conspicuous manner as follows.



WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING



   (B)   Minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters at least one
inch high located on a red background.



(`83 Code, § 8-109)



§ 52.10  SHELBY COUNTY GROUNDWATER QUALITY CONTROL BOARD.



   Establishment of participation by reference and authority of a Shelby
County Groundwater Quality Control Board is herewith provided. 



(`83 Code, § 8-111)  (Ord. 87-35, passed 11-23-87)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, § 8-110)   (Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03)



CHAPTER 53:  PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS



Section



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Use of public sewers required



   53.03   Private sewage disposal



   53.04   Building sewers, connections and development fees



   53.05   Wastewater discharge permits



   53.06   Use of public sanitary sewers



   53.07   Sewer fees and charges



   53.08   Powers and authority of inspectors



   53.09   Protection from damage



   53.10   Pretreatment enforcement



   53.11   Appeals



 



   53.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Storm water regulations, see Ch. 152



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACT or THE ACT. Federal Water Pollution Control, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et. seq.



      ADDITIONAL TREATMENT COST.  That portion of the service charge
which is levied on those users whose wastes are greater in strength than the
concentration values established as representative of normal sewage or
wastewater.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation, Division of Water Resources.



      AUTHORIZED or DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.



         (a)   If the user is a corporation:



            1.   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or



            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility
including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital
investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or
actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual
wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.



         (c)   If the user is a federal, state, or local
governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated
to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or their designee.



         (d)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through
(3) above may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
control authority.



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 53.06 (Tenn. Rule. §
0400-40-14-05(1)(a) and (2)). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



      BENEFICIAL USE.  Uses of the waters of the state that may be
protected against quality degradation uses, including domestic, municipal,
agricultural and industrial supply, power generation, recreation, aesthetic,
enjoyment, navigational and the preservation and enhancement of fish,
wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves and other uses, both
tangible or intangible as specified by federal or state law.



      BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



      BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection.



      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and
(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category of users
that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 400-471.



      CHLORINE REQUIREMENT.  The amount of chlorine in milligrams per
liter, which must be added to sewage to produce a residual chlorine content
or to meet the requirements of some other objective in accordance with
procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136.



      COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer receiving or intended to receive both
wastewater and storm or surface water.  (“Intend” is the active verb).



      COMPATIBLE WATER.  Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants identified in
the publicly owned treatment works NPDES permits, for which the publicly
owned treatment works is designed to treat such pollutants and in fact does
remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.



      CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Town of Collierville.



      EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. Environmental Protection
Agency, an agency of the United States or, where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the Administrator or duly authorized
official of said agency.



      FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that
it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
treatment facility. All wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pretreated and does not interfere with the collection
system.



      GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage
and sale of produce.



      GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and is
collected over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. Grab sampling
procedure: where composite sampling is not an appropriate sampling technique,
a grab sample(s) shall be taken to obtain influent and effluent operational
data. Collection of influent grab samples should precede collection of
effluent samples by approximately one detention period. The detention period
is to be based on a 24-hour average daily flow value. The average daily flow
used will be based upon the average of the daily flows during the same month
of the previous year. Grab samples will be required, for example, where the
parameters being evaluated are those, such as cyanide and phenol, which may
not be held for any extended period because of biological, chemical or
physical interactions which take place after sample collection and affect the
results.



      HOLDING TANK WASTE.  Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump
tank trucks.



      HYDROGEN CONCENTRATION. See pH.



      INCOMPATIBLE WASTE.  All pollutants other than compatible as
defined within.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants
into a POTW from any non-domestic source.



      INDUSTRIAL USER.  A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to
Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342).



      INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal; or exceeds the design capacity of the treatment works or the
collection system.



      LOCAL HEARING AUTHORITY. Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



      MASS EMISSION RATE. The weight of material discharged to the
community sewer system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise
specified, the MASS EMISSION RATE shall mean pounds per day of a particular
constituent or combination of constituents.



      MAY.  This term is permissive.



      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES PERMIT.
A permit issue to a publicly-owned treatment works pursuant to Section 402 of
the Act (33 USC 1342).



      NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which
applies to industrial users.



      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or ground water.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation
from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if
such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



            1.   The building structure, facility or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generated
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source should be considered.



         (b)   Construction of a new source as defined under this
section has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a
continuous onsite construction program:



               a.   Any placement, assembly, or
installation of facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Significant site preparation work
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures,
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this division.



      PASS THROUGH. Discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).



      PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.



      pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight  of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution. Natural water, for example, has a pH value of seven
and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10 to the negative seventh power.



      POLLUTED WATERS.  Those waters which when discharged to a
watercourse cause the deterioration of water quality so as to make the water
unsuitable for uses as defined by the regulatory agency.



      PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alternation of the nature of pollutant
properties in the wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the publicly-owned
treatment works. The reduction and alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means except as
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard, imposed on an industrial user.



      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in
any dimension.



      PUBLIC SEWER.  A common sewer controlled by the Town.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works which is
owned by the Town. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater
to such a treatment works, but does not include pipes, sewers, or other
conveyances that are not connected to a facility providing treatment. The
term also includes the Town, which has jurisdiction over the indirect
discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works.



      REGULATORY AGENCY.  The Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation or the Memphis/Shelby County Health Department of Public Health,
whichever has jurisdiction.



      SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage or wastewater to
which storm, surface and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.



      SERVICE CHARGE.  The assessment levied on all users of public
sewer system.



      SEWAGE or WASTEWATER.  A combination of the water carried wastes
from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with any ground water, surface water and storm water
that may be present.



      SEWAGE or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.  An arrangement of devices
and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge.
Sometimes used as synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WATER POLLUTION
CONTROL PLANT.



      SHALL.  This term is mandatory.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU. Any industrial/commercial
user of the Town  wastewater system or wastewater systems connected to the
Town wastewater system that is subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N. and/or has a discharge
flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day; and/or has a discharge
which is greater than 5% of the hydraulic flow, and/or organic design
capacity of the portion of the town wastewater system being utilized; and/or
has a discharge which contains toxic pollutants or priority pollutants as
defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act of Tennessee Statutes and rules
and regulations; and/or is found by the Town, the State of Tennessee or the
EPA to have significant impact either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries on the wastewater system, the quality of sludge
produced, the wastewater system’s effluent quality, groundwater in the
area, or air emission generated by the wastewater system.



      SLUDGE or WASTEWATER TREATMENT.  All facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.



      SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration
which could cause a violation of any terms of this chapter. A slug discharge
is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, which has a reasonable
potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate
the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION or SIC.  A classification
pursuant to the National Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.



      STORM DRAIN/STORM SEWER.  A sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface or, is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and
that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed by “Standard
Methods” and referred to as nonfiltering residue.



      TOWN.  The Town of Collierville, Tennessee.



      TOXIC POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
listed as toxic and regulation promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of 33 USC 1317.



      TWENTY-FOUR HOUR FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A sample
consisting of several effluent portions collected during a 24-hour period in
which the portions of samples are proportionate to the flow and combined to
form a representative sample.



      UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to
the POTW.



      USER.  Any person that discharges, causes or permits the
discharge of wastewater into a community sewer.



      WATERCOURSE.  A channel or conduit in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.



   (B)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the
regulatory agency when industrial wastes prior to discharge to a watercourse
are treated in a manner that is approved by the regulatory agency, no
connection to the public sewer shall be required.



   (C)   Terms for which definitions are not specifically herein
provided shall be interpreted as defined in the most recent edition of
“Glossary Water and Wastewater Control Engineering” as published by the
Water Pollution Control Federation, Washington, D.C., unless the definition
is not consistent with 40 CFR 403.



(`83 Code, § 13-201)  (Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)



§ 53.02  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the Town of Collierville or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town,
any untreated sewage or other polluted waters where suitable public
collection and/or treatment have been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this code.



   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   (C)   The owner, occupant or lessee of all houses, buildings or
other properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley,
right-of-way or easement in which there is now located or may in the future
be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the Town is required at his
or her expense to install suitable sanitary facilities therein and to connect
such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this code within 90 days after date of official notice to do so
by the regulatory agency.



   (D)   Any person wishing to demolish a building or remove the
sanitary sewer service from any point into their property shall comply with
the requirements of the building code as adopted by the Town and enforced by
the Division of Building Code and Code Compliance.



(`83 Code, § 13-202) (Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)  Penalty, see §
53.99



§ 53.03  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 53.02, the sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter, unless it
would be uneconomical to do so because the expected time between the date of
the availability of a public sanitary sewer that is presently planned.



   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
regulatory agency. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished to the applicant, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the
regulatory agency. A permit and inspection fee as designated by the agency
shall be paid at the time the application is filed.



   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
regulatory agency. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the regulatory agency when the work is ready for final inspection and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 72 hours of the receipt of notice by the regulatory agency.



   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the regulatory
agency. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.



   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made
to the public sewer in compliance with the code and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned
and filled with suitable material as required by the regulatory agency.



   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
Town. The removal of a septic from private sewage disposal facilities shall
be performed by individuals licensed to perform such work.



   (G)   Nothing in this code shall prevent any industry from applying
to the Tennessee Division of Water Pollution Control for a permit to properly
discharge their treated wastewater directly to a stream.



(`83 Code, § 13-203)  (Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)



§ 53.04  BUILDING SEWERS, CONNECTIONS AND DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   (A)   Building sewers and connection.  No person shall uncover,
make any connections with openings into, alter, or disturb any public sewer
or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
control authority. One copy of the permit shall at all times be available for
inspection at the site of the work.



   (B)   (1)   Sewer development charges and sewer connection fees.



         (a)   Sewer development charges.



            1.   There are established, in accordance with the
provisions hereof, sewer development charges to defray part of the
construction costs of sewer outfalls and treatment, which charges shall be
payable as set forth herein by the developer or owner of the subdivision or
developer or owner of industrial, commercial or residential sites.  Such
sewer development charges shall be payable upon the execution of the relevant
development agreement with the Town.



            2.   Sewer development charges shall apply to all
subdivisions, land development, new buildings, and any redevelopment of land
or buildings served by the Town’s sanitary sewer system, whether the
facility served requires modification of or enlargement of the existing
sewers or construction of new facilities and whether or not the facility is
within or without the corporate limits of the Town.



            3.   From time to time the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen of the Town shall establish by resolution for a designated fiscal
year of the Town, the sewer development charge to be paid in accordance
herewith.



         (b)   Sewer connection fees.



            1.   No permit to connect to the public sanitary
sewer system shall be granted unless the applicant shall first pay to the
Public Services Department of the Town a sanitary sewer connection fee, as
established from time to time by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen by
resolution for a designated fiscal year of the Town, based upon the following
classifications:



               a.   For each residential single-family
subdivision lot if a sewer main is already in place, such fees as established
as aforesaid by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen plus the actual cost incurred
by the Town to install a sewer tap;



               b.   For each residential single-family
subdivision lot if a sewer main is being laid (such as new development), such
fees as established as aforesaid by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen;



               c.   For each industrial, commercial and
multi-dwelling (residential or commercial), such fees as established as
aforesaid by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen; provided, however, that there
shall be excluded from the calculation of such fee, if based on acreage of
land, that acreage of land which lies in an area designated, at the time the
fee is due, as flood way by the federal government.



      (2)   (a)   If there is no sewer available at a property
line of an owner who wishes to develop such property, the owner shall be
responsible for extending a sewer to such property upon terms as shall be
acceptable to the Town.  Such terms shall be set forth in a development
agreement between the Town and such owner.



         (b)   Sewer development charges as provided for herein
shall not apply to existing municipalities or utility districts wishing to
tie into the Town sewer system, but the sewer development charges shall be
negotiated in such instances taking into consideration sewer fees and sewer
use fees to be paid to the Town and amounts necessary to defray part of the
Town’s sewer construction costs.  Agreements generated under this article
and section shall be for a specific period of time and shall be reviewed
annually.



         (c)   Whenever the Town enters into an agreement with a
developer or owner relative to the extension of a sewer to his or her
proposed development, a reasonable time limit shall be indicated in the
agreement for the completion of said project.



   (C)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owners
shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. All
construction on the owner’s property shall conform to the Town of
Collierville Plumbing Code.



   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot, and no private sewer is available or can be constructed
to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the Town does not and
will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or
resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.



   (E)   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and testing by the control
authority, to meet all requirements of this code.



   (F)   The size, slope, alignment materials of construction of a
building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code and other applicable rules and
regulations of the Town.



   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building gradient is too shallow to emit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building gradient shall be lifted by
an approved pumping system and discharged to the building sewer. The
installation and operational expenses of this system shall be borne solely by
the property owner.



   (H)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts,
foundation drains, area-way drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless connection is approved by the
control authority for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.



   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code and other
applicable rules and regulations of the Town. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the control
authority before installation. The control authority shall have the right to
inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in the event the covers of
all building sewer manholes, inspection chambers, cleanouts and the like
shall be watertight and shall be capable of withstanding without damage or
displacement any traffic load to which they may be subjected.



   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
control authority before performing those portions of the work to be done
underground, and when the building sewer is ready for final inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made
under supervision of the control authority.



   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Town. The posting of a bond of appropriate value may be required to safeguard
the interest of the Town as regards damage to public property.



(`83 Code, § 13-204)  (Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)



§ 53.05  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   (A)   Wastewater survey. When requested by the control authority,
all industrial users must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior
to commencing their discharge. The control authority is authorized to prepare
a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to
update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable
grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be
considered a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit requirement.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user
to discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit from the control authority. Any violation of the terms and
conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions
set out in § 53.10. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve
a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state and local law.



      (2)   The control authority may require other industrial
users, including liquid waste haulers, grease traps, and oil/water separators
to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes
of this chapter.



   (C)   Wastewater discharge permitting existing connections. Any
significant industrial user, which discharges industrial waste into the POTW
prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such
discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after said date, apply to the
Town for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with division (F) of
this section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue
after 180 days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance
with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the control authority, or in the
case a valid permit exists and does not violate any part of this chapter,
shall not have to re-apply until the permit expiration date.



   (D)   Wastewater discharge permitting new connections. Any
significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging
industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit
prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for
this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 60 days prior to the
date upon which any discharge will begin. The application must be accompanied
by the appropriate fee, and because of the review process required, such fee
shall be nonrefundable regardless of the determination regarding issuance of
a permit.



   (E)   Wastewater discharge permitting extra jurisdictional
industrial users.



      (1)   Any existing significant industrial user located beyond
the Collierville limits and discharging in the Collierville sewer system
shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with
division (F) below, within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter, or
in the case a valid permit exists and does not violate any part of this
chapter, shall not have to re-apply until the permit expiration date. New
significant industrial users located beyond the Collierville municipal limits
shall submit such applications to the control authority at least 60 days
prior to any proposed discharge into the POTW.



      (2)   Alternately, the control authority may enter into an
agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant
industrial user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement
of pretreatment program requirements against said industrial user.



   (F)   Wastewater discharge permit application contents.



      (1)   In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge
permit, all industrial users required to have a wastewater discharge permit
must submit the information required as follows. The control authority shall
approve a form to be used as a permit application. In addition, the following
information may be requested:



         (a)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant
process on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals
used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;



         (b)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation,
and proposed or actual hours of operation of the industry;



         (c)   Each product produced by type, amount, process,
and rate of production;



         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed
(average and maximum per day);



         (e)   The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and
plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation, and all points of discharge;



         (f)   Time and duration of the discharge;



         (g)   The amount, storage and disposal of any hazardous
waste on site, or generated by the industry;



         (h)   Any BMPs; and



         (i)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary
by the control authority to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application.



      (2)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be
processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision.



   (G)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater
discharge permit applications and industrial user reports submitted to the
Town must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user:



         "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were



         prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system



         designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate



         the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons



         who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for



         gathering the information, the information submitted is, to
the best of my



         knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am
aware that there



         are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the



         possibility of fines and imprisonment for knowing
violations."



   (H)   Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The control authority
will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require
additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a completed wastewater
discharge permit application, the control authority will determine whether or
not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The control authority may deny
any application for a wastewater discharge permit.



   (I)   Wastewater discharge permit duration. Wastewater discharge
permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five years, at the discretion of the control authority. Each wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.



   (J)   Wastewater discharge permit contents. Wastewater discharge
permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by
the control authority to prevent pass-through, interference, protect the
quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect
worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect
ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW.



      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following
conditions:



         (a)   Statement that indicates wastewater discharge
permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years;



         (b)   Statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification and approval from the control
authority, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a
copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;



         (c)   Effluent limits, including best management
practices, applicable to the user based on applicable standards in federal,
state and local law;



         (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, and
notification, requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;



         (e)   Statements of applicable civil, administrative,
and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal,
state, or local law;



         (f)   Requirements to control slug discharge and
immediate notification to the control authority of changes at the facility
affecting the potential to slug discharge;



         (g)   Statement prohibiting dilution as a substitute for
treatment;



         (h)   Statement requiring all industrial users to
promptly notify the control authority in advance of any substantial change in
the volume or the character of the pollutants in their discharge, including
the listed or hazardous wastes which the industrial user submitted under
Tenn. Rule 0400-40-14-.12(16);



         (i)   Statement on user's record keeping requirements.
All users subject to reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and
make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to monitoring activities required by this chapter, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring 
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with best management practices. Records for all
samples shall include the date, exact place, method of sampling, time of
sample, who performed the analyses, the analytical techniques or methods
used, and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available
for a period of at least three years. The period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the
control authority, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the control authority or the approval authority;



         (j)   Statement that if sampling performed by a user
indicates a violation, the user shall notify the control authority within
24-hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
control authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation;



         (k)   Statement for all significant industrial users
requiring periodic compliance reports. The reports must be submitted to the
control authority at least once every six months on the dates in the permit.
The report shall follow Tenn. Rule 0400-40-14-.12(8);



         (l)   Reporting requirements for industrial users upon
effective date of categorical pretreatment standard - base line report per
Tenn. Rule 0400-40-14-. 12(2);



         (m)   Requirement for industrial user to notify the
control authority, EPA Regional Waste Management Division, and the state
hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge of a substance,
which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under Tenn. Rule
0400-12-01. This includes the reporting requirements in § 53.06 (P); and



         (n)   A copy of the Town's "Enforcement Response Plan"
and a statement giving the control authority the legal authority to enforce
the Enforcement Response Plan.



      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not
be limited to, the following:



         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulations and
equalization;



         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly
average, and/or maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified
wastewater pollutants or properties;



         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;



         (d)   Development and implementation of spill control
plans, total toxic organics control plans, or other special conditions
including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;



         (e)   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;



         (f)   The unit charge or schedule of industrial user
charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;



         (g)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



         (h)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit;



         (i)   Categorical industrial users and significant
industrial users will submit documentation to show compliance with BMPs.
These documents shall be retained for at least three years;



         (j)   Requirement for a compliance schedule for meeting
categorical pretreatment standards following Tenn. Rule 0400-40-14-.12(3);



         (k)   Requirement for a report on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadline (90 days) following Tenn. Rule
0400-40-14-.12(4);



         (l)   Requirement for periodic reports on continued
compliance for any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard following Tenn. Rule 0400-40-14-.12(5); or



         (m)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
control authority to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and
federal laws, rules, and regulations.



   (K)   Wastewater discharge permit sampling.



      (1)   The control authority will specify the frequency,
number, and type of samples required in the discharge permit.



      (2)   Sample monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall
be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. Failure to keep monitoring or flow measurement facilities in good
working order shall not be grounds to claim that the sample results are
unrepresentative of the discharge.



      (3)   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must
be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed
during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative
of conditions occurring during the reporting period.



         (a)   Except as indicated below, wastewater samples must
be collected using the 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling
technique, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by the control authority. Where time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority the samples
must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA
guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be
composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and
sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for
volatile organic and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the control authority as appropriate. In addition, grab samples
may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.



         (b)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH,
cyanide, total phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be
obtained using grab collection techniques.



         (c)   For sampling required in support of baseline
monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in Section 6.1 and 6.3
[Tenn. Rule 0400-40-14-.12(2) and (4)], a minimum of four grab samples must
be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile
organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not
exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
control authority may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by
paragraphs Section 6.4 [Tenn. Rule 0400-40-14-.12(5) and (8)], the industrial
user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess
and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.



         (d)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a
violation, the user shall notify the control authority within 24-hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control
authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.



         (e)   If any industrial user subject to reporting
requirements of this chapter monitors or samples for any regulated pollutant
at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the
control authority the results of this monitoring or sampling and the methods
used shall be reported to the control authority.



   (L)   Wastewater discharge permit modification.



      (1)   The control authority may modify the wastewater
discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:



         (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state,
or local pretreatment standards, requirements, or BMPs;



         (b)   To address significant alterations or additions to
the industrial user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character
since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;



         (c)   A change in the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



         (d)   Information indicating that the permitted
discharge poses a threat to the POTW, POTW personnel, or the receiving waters;



         (e)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the
wastewater discharge permit;



         (f)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose
all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit applications or in any
required reporting;



         (g)   Revision of or a grant of variance from
categorical pretreatment pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;



         (h)   To correct typographical or other errors in the
wastewater discharge permit; and



         (i)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership
and/or operation to a new owner/operator.



      (2)   The filing of a request by the permittee for a
wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any wastewater
discharge permit condition.



   (M)   Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge
permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only
if the permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the control
authority and the control authority approves the wastewater discharge permit
transfer by written consent. The notice to the control authority must include
a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:



      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no
immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes;



      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to
occur; and



      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit. Failure to provide advance notice of a
transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of
facility transfer.



   (N)   Wastewater discharge permit revocation.



      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the
following reasons:



         (a)   Failure to notify the Town of significant changes
to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



         (b)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



         (c)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;



         (d)   Tampering with Town monitoring equipment;



         (e)   Refusing to allow the Town timely access to the
facility premises and records;



         (f)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



         (g)   Failure to pay fines, sewer charges and/or any
other appropriate fees or charges;



         (h)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



         (i)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
wastewater discharge permit application;



         (j)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer
of a permitted facility; or



         (k)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or
requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.



      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
non-use, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All
wastewater discharge permits are void upon issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit.



   (O)   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. All industrial users
shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a
complete wastewater discharge permit application a minimum of 60 days prior
to the expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge
permit.



(`83 Code, § 13-205)  (Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)



§ 53.06  USE OF PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS.



   (A)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
storm water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or uncontaminated
cooling water into any sanitary sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited
areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, except by permission of and
under permit from the control authority.



   (B)   (1)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or
to a natural outlet approved by the regulatory agency. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval to the
regulatory agency, to the storm sewer or natural outlet.



      (2)   No person shall discharge any substance directly into a
manhole or other opening in a public sewer other than through an approved
building sewer, unless he or she has been issued a permit by the control
authority. No person shall discharge any holding tank waste into a community
sewer unless he or she has been issued a permit by the control authority.
Unless otherwise allowed by the control authority under the terms and
conditions of the permit, a separate permit must be secured for each separate
discharge. This permit will state the specific location of discharge, the
time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge and
wastewater constituents and characteristics. If a permit is granted for
discharge of such waste into a community sewer, the user shall pay the
applicable charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required
by the control authority.



   (C)   No person or company corporation shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described contaminated waters to any
public sanitary sewers:



      (1)   Any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or
interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users whether or not
they are subject to categorical standards or any other national, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements.



      (2)   Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the POTW, the operation of the POTW, or cause acute worker health and
safety problems. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion
hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in
the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 20% of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited flammable materials including,
but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cap flash point of less than
140F or 60C using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toulene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, percholates, bromate, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any
other substances which the Town, the state or EPA has notified the user is a
fire hazard or a hazard to the system.



      (3)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to cause acute worker health and safety
problems, to injure or interfere with unit operations or sludge handling and
disposal at the POTW, to cause passing through of pollutants thus violating
the Town’s NPDES permit, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage or
wastewater treatment plant;



      (4)   Any contaminated waters or wastes having a pH lower than
5.5 or higher than 10.5, any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the POTW.



      (5)   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference.



      (6)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at points
designated by the control authority.



      (7)   Any pollutant or wastewater that exceeds any limit
established by the control authority. These limits are calculated by the
control authority and updated as needed. For information on the limits, or a
copy, contact the Public Utility Department.



   (D)   (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
the following described substances, materials, contaminated waters or wastes
if it appears likely in the opinion of the control authority that such waste
harms either the sanitary sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, has
an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.



      (2)   In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of
these waters, the control authority will give consideration to such factors
as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in
the sewer materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the POTW, degree of compatibility of the
particular materials involved with the treatment capabilities of the control
authority’s existing or contemplated treatment works and other pertinent
facts. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated are as follows:



         (a)   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will
cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in intereference;



         (b)   Any waste that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any waste grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the control authority;



         (c)   Any contaminated waters or wastes containing
concentrations of heavy metals, toxic substances or other inorganic
pollutants in excess of the limits established by the control authority.
These limits are calculated by the control authority and updated as needed.
For information on the limits or a copy contact the Public Utility Department;



         (d)   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such
quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40C
(104F) unless the approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves
alternate temperature limits;



         (e)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through. Any liquid or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils of
hydrocarbon or petroleum origin in excess of 100 mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32F
and 150F;



         (f)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of long
half-life (over 100 days) without special permit. The radioactive isotopes
(I-131) and P32 used at hospitals are not prohibited if diluted at the source;



         (g)   Materials which exert or cause:



            1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended
solids (such as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate;



            2.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load
or cause interference on the POTW; or



            3.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of
wastes constituting “slugs” as defined herein.



         (h)   Any wastewater that may cause the wastewater
treatment facility effluent or any product of the treatment plant residues
sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere
with the reclamation process. As a means of protecting the treatment
processes, no wastewater entering the plant shall have concentrations of
constituents exceeding those listed in the protection criteria at wastewater
treatment plant influent. The protection criteria is calculated by the
control authority and updated as needed. For information on the limits or a
copy contact the Public Utility Department.



         (i)   Any wastewater that could cause excessive
collection or treatment costs or may use a disproportionate share of the
agency facilities.



         (j)   Wastes not permitted to be discharged into the
POTW and not otherwise adequately treated and discharged or recycled must be
transported to a state approved disposal site by a permitted waste hauler.



         (k)   For industries covered under a discharge permit,
the aforementioned materials or characteristics of waste or wastewater
discharge limitations shall be agreed upon and incorporated into such permit.



   (E)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are
proposed to be discharged to the POTW, which waters contain substances or
possess characteristics which, in the judgement of the control authority, are
incompatible with the capabilities of the POTW and may, therefore, have a
deleterious effect upon the POTW, process, equipment or receiving waters or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
control authority at his or her discretion may:



         (a)   Reject the wastes;



         (b)   Require pretreatment or an acceptable condition
for discharge to the POTW;



         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rate of
discharge; or



         (d)   Require payment to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes as provided in § 53.07 (refers to
compatible wastes only).



      (2)   Protection criteria concentrations for different sewer
constituents are calculated. These concentrations are designed to protect the
POTW from exceeding its pass-thru limits as required by its NPDES permit. The
protection criteria provide guidelines to the control authority in
establishing limits for industrial user discharge permits. For information on
protection criteria or constituent concentrations contact the Public
Utilities Department.



      (3)   If the control authority permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of any non-process
pretreatment or flow equalization system installed in connection therewith
shall be subject to the review and approval of the control authority and
subject to the requirements of all applicable ordinances and laws.



   (F)   (1)   Interceptors, traps or separators shall be provided
by industrial and commercial dischargers when in the opinion of the control
authority they are necessary for the proper handling of water or waste
containing such materials as grease, sand, flammable liquids, substances
which may solidify or become viscous in the system or other harmful
ingredients.



      (2)   In maintaining these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the
captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of
disposal which are subject to review by the control authority. Any removal
and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner’s personnel
must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.



   (G)   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalization facilities
are required for any water or wastewater, they shall be maintained
continuously and satisfactorily and in effective operation by the owner at
his or her expense and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the control
authority. The owner shall maintain and make available as requested operating
records as prescribed by the control authority.



   (H)   The owner of any property serviced by a sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control facility, together with
such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. The facility, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the control authority. The facility shall
be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by
him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. Plans for such
facilities for the installation of control and related equipment must be
approved by the control authority before construction is begun.



   (I)   All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this code shall be determined
in accordance with 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto and shall be determined
at the control facility provided or upon suitable samples taken at said
control facility. Sampling shall be carried out following 40 CFR and
amendments thereto to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage
works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.



   (J)   Until an adequate analysis of a representative sample of the
user’s waste has been obtained, the control authority may for the purpose
of this code make a determination of the character and concentration of the
waste by using data based on analysis if similar processes or data for this
type of business are available. This method, if selected by the control
authority, shall continue until adequate analysis has been made.



   (K)   All industrial users are hereafter subject to the National
Pretreatment Standards as promulgated by the EPA and all State of Tennessee
regulations.



   (L)   All industrial users are prohibited from using dilution as a
substitute for treatment.



   (M)   All industrial users subject to a categorical standard shall
submit a base line report per Tenn. Rule 0400-40-14.12(2).



   (N)   All industrial users subject to a categorical standard shall
submit a compliance schedule for meeting the categorical standards per Tenn.
Rule 0400-40-14.12(3).



   (O)   All industrial users shall notify the control authority in
advance of any substantial change in the volume or the character of the
pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or hazardous wastes for
which the industrial user submitted under Tenn. Rule 0400-40-14-.12(16).



   (P)   (1)   All industrial users shall notify the control
authority, EPA Regional Waste Management Division, and the state hazardous
waste authorities in writing of any discharge of a substance, which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under Tenn. Rule 0400-12-01.



      (2)   Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in Tenn. Rule 0400-12-01, the EPA hazardous waste number,
and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).



      (3)   If the industrial user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month, the notification shall also
contain the following information to the extent such information is known and
readily available to the industrial user: An identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during the
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste
stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve months. All
notifications must take place within 180 days of the effective date of this
rule. Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of
this rule shall provide notification at least 30 days prior to the discharge
of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this
division need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.
However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under Tenn.
Rule 1200-4-14-.12 (10). The notification requirement in this rule does not
apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements
of Tenn. Rule 0400-40-12-.12 (2), (4), and (5).



      (4)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of
RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify
the WWF, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days
of the effective date of such regulations.



      (5)   In the case of any notification made under this
division, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to
reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it
has determined to be economically practical.



   (Q)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge
permits, and monitoring programs, and from inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the control authority that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted
at the time of submission of the information data. When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and
in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as
defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not be recognized as confidential information
and shall be available to the public without restriction.



(`83 Code, § 13-206)  (Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)



§ 53.07  SEWER FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   In accordance with the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et
seq., and the provisions of the Code of Federal Regulations applicable
thereto, which required the Town to implement a wastewater treatment users
charge, where each user will pay its proportionate share of the cost for
operation and maintenance of the total treatment works.  Direct and
incidental cost to the Town, including, but not limited to administrative,
technical and legal expenses shall be considered a part of the operations and
maintenance of the total treatment works.  There shall be six types of
charges:  the first type of charge is a customer service charge; the second
type of charge is a monthly base rate charge; the third type is a volumetric
charge; the fourth is a charge for treating wastewater which has an excessive
strength; the fifth is a nonrefundable fee for application for a new or
reissuance of a wastewater discharge permit; and the sixth are special
charges.



   (B)   All sewer service shall be furnished to customers according to
the following schedule of rates.  The Town shall begin collecting the rates
shown below with the monthly bills sent to the Town’s sewer customers in
February of each year.  The Town shall charge customers the applicable
amount within each of the following categories of charges:  (1) the customer
service charge; (2) the base rate charge; and (3) the volumetric charge; (4)
the additional treatment cost charge; (5) nonrefundable fee for application
for a new or reissuance of a wastewater discharge permit; and (6) special
charges:



      (1)   Customer service charge.  Certain sewage expenditures
or a portion of certain expenditures are incurred regardless of the use of
the treatment system and, therefore, a portion of these costs will be
recovered through a monthly customer service charge.



 


2013

 

2014

 

2015

 

2016

 

2017

 

2018

 

2019

 

2020

 

2021

 

20221




$3.50

 

$3.50

 

$3.50

 

$3.50

 

$3.85

 

$3.85

 

$3.85

 

$4.30

 

$4.30

 

$4.30



1 For years subsequent to 2022, the rates shall be the same rates as for
2022, unless modified by appropriate ordinance.



 



      (2)   Base rate charge.  All residential customers are
charged at 3/4" meter size rates:



         (a)   Service inside the Town:



 

Meter Size
 
2013
 
2014
 
2015
 
2016
 
2017
 
2018
 
2019
 
2020
 
2021
 
20221





¾- inch

 

$11.20

 

$11.20

 

$11.20

 

$11.20

 

$11.20

 

$11.20

 

$11.20

 

$11.20

 

$11.20

 

$11.20




1-inch

 

28.00

 

28.00

 

28.00

 

28.00

 

28.00

 

28.00

 

28.00

 

28.00

 

28.00

 

28.00




2-inch

 

89.60

 

89.60

 

89.60

 

89.60

 

89.60

 

89.60

 

89.60

 

89.60

 

89.60

 

89.60




3-inch

 

168.00

 

168.00

 

168.00

 

168.00

 

168.00

 

168.00

 

168.00

 

168.00

 

168.00

 

168.00




4-inch

 

280.00

 

280.00

 

280.00

 

280.00

 

280.00

 

280.00

 

280.00

 

280.00

 

280.00

 

280.00




6-inch

 

560.00

 

560.00

 

560.00

 

560.00

 

560.00

 

560.00

 

560.00

 

560.00

 

560.00

 

560.00




8-inch

 

896.00

 

896.00

 

896.00

 

896.00

 

896.00

 

896.00

 

896.00

 

896.00

 

896.00

 

896.00



1 For years subsequent to 2022 the rates shall be the same rates as for 2022,
unless modified by appropriate ordinance.




 



         (b)   Service outside the Town:



 

Meter Size
 
2013
 
2014
 
2015
 
2016
 
2017




¾-inch
 
$16.80
 
$16.80
 
$16.80
 
$16.80
 
$16.80


1-inch
 
42.00
 
42.00
 
42.00
 
42.00
 
42.00


2-inch
 
134.40
 
134.40
 
134.40
 
134.40
 
134.40


3-inch
 
252.00
 
252.00
 
252.00
 
252.00
 
252.00


4-inch
 
420.00
 
420.00
 
420.00
 
420.00
 
420.00


6-inch
 
840.00
 
840.00
 
840.00
 
840.00
 
840.00


8-inch
 
1,344.00
 
1,344.00
 
1,344.00
 
1,344.00
 
1,344.00




 



 


Meter Size

 

2018

 

2019

 

2020

 

2021

 

20221






¾-inch

 

$16.80

 

$16.80

 

$16.80

 

$16.80

 

$16.80




1-inch

 

42.00

 

42.00

 

42.00

 

42.00

 

42.00




2-inch

 

134.40

 

134.40

 

134.40

 

134.40

 

134.40




3-inch

 

252.00

 

252.00

 

252.00

 

252.00

 

252.00




4-inch

 

420.00

 

420.00

 

420.00

 

420.00

 

420.00




6-inch

 

840.00

 

840.00

 

840.00

 

840.00

 

840.00




8-inch

 

1,344.00

 

1,344.00

 

1,344.00

 

1,344.00

 

1,344.00



1 For years subsequent to 2022 the rates shall be the same rates as for 2022,
unless modified by appropriate ordinance.




 



      (3)   Volumetric charge. In addition to the base charge, all
customers will be charged a volumetric rate as follows; provided, however,
that a cap of 20,000 gallons of water usage shall apply for residential
customers:



 


VOLUME CHARGE (PER 1,000 GAL)




2013

 

2014

 

2015

 

2016

 

2017

 

2018

 

2019

 

2020

 

2021

 

20221




Service Inside Town




$2.60

 

$2.60

 

$2.60

 

$2.60

 

$2.60

 

$2.60

 

$2.60

 

$2.60

 

$2.60

 

$2.60




Service Outside Town




$3.90

 

$3.90

 

$3.90

 

$3.90

 

$3.90

 

$3.90

 

$3.90

 

$3.90

 

$3.90

 

$3.90



1 For years subsequent to 2022, the rates shall be the same rates as for
2022, unless modified by appropriate ordinance.



 



      (4)   Additional treatment cost.  In addition to the base
rate revenue per customer charge and the volumetric charge, any user who
discharges wastewater with a strength greater than domestic sewage (BOD - 250
mg/l, T.S.S. - 225 mg/l) will be assessed an additional treatment charge
(ATC) based on the following formulas:



         Cost of Treatment (based on previous fiscal year) = Direct
costs + Indirect costs



         Direct costs = Acct. #52213 Departmental Total (From
expense report)



         Indirect costs = Sum of Allocations (Mayor & Board of
Aldermen, City Administrator’s Office, Personnel, Financial Administration,
Development Administration, Office of Planning, Office of Engineer, Economic
Development, Attorney’s fees, Insurance costs, Special Appropriations,
Public Utilities, Debt Service & Depreciation) ÷ 4



         Lbs. BOD Removed = Avg. Flow (mgd) * (BOD avg. Influent
Conc. - BOD avg. Effluent Conc.) * 3045.69



         Lbs. TSS Removed = Avg. Flow (mgd) * (TSS avg. Influent
Conc. - TSS avg. Effluent Conc.)  * 3045.69



         $/Lb BOD = Cost of Treatment * Lbs. BOD ÷ (Lbs. BOD + Lbs.
TSS)2



         $/Lb TSS = Cost of Treatment * Lbs. TSS ÷ (LBs. BOD + Lbs.
TSS)2



         BOD (ATC) = (BOD eff. Conc. - 250 mg/l) * 8.34 * Monthly
Water Consumption (mm gals)  * $/Lb BOD



         TSS (ATC) = (TSS eff. Conc. - 225 mg/l) * 8.34 * Monthly
Water Consumption (mm gals)



* $/Lb TSS



         Total (ATC) = BOD (ATC) + TSS (ATC)



         Definitions.



         BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand



         TSS - Total Suspended Solids



         Mg/l - Milligrams per liter



         mm gals - millions of gallons



         mgd - millions of gallons per day



         Conc. - Concentration in mg/l



         Avg. - Daily average based on previous calendar year



         $ - Expenses based on previous fiscal year



      (5)   Nonrefundable fee for application for a new or
reissuance of a wastewater discharge permit.



      (6)   Special charges for Cotton Creek and Kirkland Estates.
Users of sewer service furnished by the Town, who (i) are situated outside
the municipal limits of the Town in the areas of Cotton Creek and Kirkland
Estates subdivisions, (ii) start to receive in the first instance sewer
service from the Town, and (iii) are billed for such Town sewer service by
the Memphis Light, Gas and Water Division of the City of Memphis
(“MLGW”), shall pay, in addition to the monthly customer service charge
for sewer expenditures in effect for the Town from time to time and any other
fees or charges of the Town in effect from time to time which are applicable
for sewer and related services, a fee equal to 2% of such user’s respective
bills for such Town services, which fee is the fee or charge being required
by MLGW to bill such users for such services.



   (C)   The control authority shall institute an accounting system
reflecting an equal distribution of total funds produced under the code based
upon the respective needs of each segment of the wastewater treatment
operations and maintenance functions, including and not limited to, plant
operations, sewer maintenance, sewer design, sewer construction, pollution
control monitoring, wastewater treatment capital improvements bond
indebtedness, direct and incidental cost to the Town, including, but not
limited to, administrative, technical and legal expenses and other
expenditures necessary for an effective wastewater treatment program. Revenue
generated under this code shall be used exclusively for the wastewater
treatment program.



   (D)   Review of system. The user charge system shall be reviewed
annually and revised periodically as required in order to generate sufficient
revenue to pay for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement of
equipment of the wastewater treatment system.



(`83 Code, § 13-207)  (Ord. 82-017, passed 1-24-83; Am. Ord. 93-23, passed
8-23-93; Am. Ord. 99-16, passed 9-13-99; Am. Ord. 2005-02, passed 2-28-05;
Am. Ord. 2007-04, passed 4-23-07; Am. Ord. 2008-16, passed 6-23-08; Am. Ord.
2010-02, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 2010-05, passed 5-10-10; Am. Ord. 2010-08,
passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. 2011-25, passed 1-9-12; Am. Ord. 2012-17, passed
10-8-12; Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)



§ 53.08  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   Representatives of the control authority, regulatory agency
and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter appropriate property areas at
all reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this code. The
control authority shall have authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries. The control authority shall have the right to inspect and copy
all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this chapter.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in the section above, the control authority or duly authorized
employees of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the Town employees, except as hereinafter provided,
and the Town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its
property caused by Town employees and against liability claims and demands
for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and
growing out of the performance of the necessary work on private property by
the Town employees, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the company to maintain safe conditions as required in § 53.06(H).



   (C)   The control authority and other duly authorized employees of
the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be
done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.



   (D)   (1)   The control authority may enter upon private property
and terminate service to the property in which a violation of any rule or
regulation of this code is found to exist.



      (2)   Prior to termination of service, the control authority
shall notify, in writing, the owner and tenant, if any, of such property that
service is intended to be so terminated and conduct a hearing; provided,
however, that the control authority shall act in accordance with the
provisions of § 53.10 in cases of pretreatment enforcement as herein
provided.  The notice shall be mailed to the owner at the address shown on
the records of the assessor of the county or to the Town Clerk,  and a copy
shall be delivered to the tenant or posted conspicuously on the property. The
notice shall state the date of the proposed termination of service and
reasons therefore and the date the control authority shall hold a hearing
upon such intended termination. The hearing shall not be held less than 60
days subsequent to the giving of notice as herein required.



      (3)   If the control authority determines that a discharge of
pollutants reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons, termination of service will take place
immediately upon informal notice to the discharger. If a discharge of
pollutants appears to present an endangerment to the environment or the
operation of the POTW, the control authority shall make written notice to the
discharger. The notice shall include the date of the proposed termination and
reasons for the action. The discharger has the right to provide a written
response. Upon review of the written response, the control authority shall
take such action as it deems necessary to halt or prevent any discharge which
may present or presents an endangerment to the environment or the operation
of the POTW up to and including immediate termination of sewer service.



(`83 Code, § 13-208) (Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)



§ 53.09  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.



   (A)   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance
or equipment which is a part of the POTW. Any person violating this provision
shall be subject to immediate arrest and shall be guilty of misdemeanor
punishable by fine and shall be responsible for the expenses incurred for
correcting said damages.



   (B)   If a public sewer becomes obstructed or damaged because of any
substances improperly discharged into it, the person or persons responsible
for such discharges shall be billed and shall pay for the expenses incurred
by the Town in cleaning out, repairing or rebuilding the sewer.



   (C)   No unauthorized person shall enter or alter any manhole or
similar appurtenance of any public sewer, put anything therein or interfere
therewith. No person shall insert or place in any public sewer, manhole or
other appurtenance thereof any sticks, rubbish or other materials which said
sewer, manhole or appurtenance thereof was not intended to receive.



   (D)   The control authority shall have the authority to implement a
program for acquiring the necessary qualified personnel to perform all tasks
related to all wastewater functions to insure the integrity of the total
program.



   (E)   In case of accidental discharge, including any discharge that
would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), it is the responsibility
of the industrial user to immediately notify the POTW of the incident. The
notification shall include volume of discharge, duration of event and
corrective actions. Within five days following an accidental discharge the
industrial user shall submit to POTW a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the
industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage
to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial
user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
by these regulations or other applicable law.



(`83 Code, § 13-209) (Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)  Penalty, see §
53.99



§ 53.10  PRETREATMENT ENFORCEMENT.



      (1)   General duties. The local hearing authority, pursuant to
Tenn. Code Ann. § 69-3-123, is responsible for the administration and
enforcement of the pretreatment program and the said state statute.



      (2)   Hearings. Any hearing or rehearing brought before the
local hearing authority shall be conducted in accordance with the following:



         (a)   Upon receipt of a written petition from the
alleged violator pursuant to this section, the director shall give the
petitioner 30 days written notice of the time and place of the hearing, but
in no case shall such hearing be held more than 60 days from the receipt of
the written petition, unless the director and the petitioner agree to a
postponement;



         (b)   The hearing herein provided may be conducted by a
local hearing authority at a regular or a special meeting;



         (c)   A verbatim record of the proceedings of such
hearing shall be taken and filed with the local hearing authority, together
with the findings of fact and conclusions of law made pursuant to division
(A)(f) of this section. The transcript so recorded shall be made available to
the petitioner or any party to a hearing upon payment of a charge set by the
local hearing authority to cover the costs of preparation;



         (d)   In connection with the hearing, the Director shall
issue subpoenas in response to any request by any party to the hearing
requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing. In case of contumacy
or refusal to obey a notice of hearing or subpoena issued under this section,
the Shelby County Chancery Court shall have jurisdiction upon the application
of the local hearing authority or the Director to issue an order requiring
such person to appear and testify or produce evidence as the case may require
and any failure to obey such order of the court may be punished by such court
as contempt thereof;



         (e)   The local hearing authority may administer oaths
and examine witnesses;



         (f)   On the basis of the evidence produced at the
hearing, the local hearing authority shall make findings of fact and
conclusions of law and enter such decisions and orders as in its opinion will
best further the purposes of the pretreatment program and shall give written
notice of such decisions and orders to the alleged violator. The order issued
under this division shall be issued no later than 30 days following the close
of the hearing by the person or persons designated by the local hearing
authority;



         (g)   The decision of the local hearing authority shall
become final and binding on all parties; and



         (h)   Any person to whom an emergency order is directed
pursuant to § 53.10(B)(4) shall comply therewith immediately but on petition
to the local hearing authority shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
possible, but in no case shall such hearing be held later than three days
from the receipt of such petition by the local hearing authority.



      (3)   Appeal. An appeal may be taken from any final order or
other final determination of the local hearing authority by any party,
including the pretreatment agency, who is or may be adversely affected
thereby, to the chancery court pursuant to the common law writ of certiorari
set out in the Tenn. Code Ann., § 27-8-101, within 60 days from the date
such order or determination is made.



   (B)   Complaints.



      (1)   Whenever the control authority has reason to believe
that a violation of any provision of the pretreatment program of the
pretreatment agency or orders of the control authority issued pursuant
thereto has occurred, is occurring, or is about to occur, the control
authority may cause a written complaint to be served upon the alleged
violator or violators.



      (2)   The complaint shall specify the provision or provisions
of the pretreatment program or order alleged to be violated or about to be
violated, the facts alleged to constitute a violation thereof, may order that
necessary corrective action be taken within a reasonable time to be
prescribed in such order, and shall inform the violators of the opportunity
for a hearing before the control authority.



      (3)   Any such order shall become final and not subject to
review unless the person or persons named therein request by written petition
a hearing before the control authority as provided, no later than 30 days
after the date such order is served; provided, however, that the control
authority may review such final order on the same grounds upon which a court
of the state may review default judgments.



      (4)   Emergency circumstances.



         (a)   Whenever the control authority finds that an
emergency exists imperatively requiring immediate action to protect the
public health, safety or welfare, the health of animals, fish or aquatic
life, a public water supply, or the facilities of the POTW, the control
authority may, without prior notice, issue an order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as the control
authority deems necessary to meet the emergency up to and including immediate
termination of sewer service.



         (b)   If the violator fails to respond or is unable to
respond to the order, the control authority may take such emergency action as
deemed necessary, or contract with a qualified person or persons to carry out
the emergency measures. The control authority may assess the person or
persons responsible for the emergency condition for actual costs incurred by
the Town in meeting the emergency.



      (5)   Except as otherwise expressly provided, any notice,
complaint, order or other instrument issued by or under authority of this
part may be served on any person affected thereby personally, by the control
authority, or such service may be made in accordance with Tennessee statutes
authorizing service of process in civil action.



   (C)   Violations.



      (1)   Any person including, but not limited to residential,
carwash, restaurant, commercial, industrial user, who does any of the
following acts or omissions may be subject to a civil penalty of up to $
10,000 per day for each day during which the act or omission continues or
occurs, or be subject to criminal penalties:



         (a)   Violates an effluent standard or limitation
imposed by the control authority;



         (b)   Violates the terms or conditions of a discharge
permit issued;



         (c)   Fails to complete a filing requirement of a
discharge permit;



         (d)   Fails to allow or perform an entry, inspection,
and monitoring or reporting requirement of a discharge permit;



         (e)   Fails to pay user or cost recovery charges imposed
by the control authority;



         (f)   Violates a final determination or order of the
control authority; or



         (g)   Violates the regulations for transportation or
disposal of hauled wastes.



      (2)   All industrial users are subject to the Enforcement
Response Plan.



      (3)   Any civil penalty shall be assessed in the following
manner:



         (a)   The control authority may issue a notice of
violation, assessment, cease and desist order, or an administrative order
with a fine against any person or industrial user responsible for the
violation;



         (b)   Any person or industrial user against whom an
assessment has been issued may secure a review of such assessment by filing
with the control authority a written petition setting forth the grounds and
reasons for his or her objections and asking for a hearing in the matter
involved before the control authority and if a petition for review of the
assessment is not filed within 30 days after the date the assessment is
served, the violator shall be deemed to have consented to the assessment and
it shall become final; and



         (c)   Whenever any assessment has become final because
of a person's failure to appeal the control authority, the control authority
may apply to the appropriate court for a judgment and seek execution of such
judgment and the court, in such proceedings, shall treat a failure to appeal
such assessment as a confession of judgment in the amount of the assessment.



         (d)   In assessing the civil penalty the control
authority may consider the following factors:



            1.   Whether the civil penalty imposed will be
substantial economic deterrent to illegal activity;



            2.   Damages to the pretreatment agency, including
compensation for the damage or destruction of the facilities of the POTW, and
also including any penalties, costs and attorney's fees incurred by the
control authority as the result of the illegal activity, as well as the
expenses involved in enforcing this section and the costs involved in
rectifying any damages;



            3.   Cause of the discharge or violation;



            4.   The severity of the discharge and its effect
upon the facilities of the POTW and upon the quality and quantity of the
receiving waters;



            5.   Effectiveness of action taken by the violator
to cease the violation;



            6.   The technical and economic reasonableness of
reducing or eliminating the discharge; and



            7.   The economic benefit gained by the violator.



         (e)   The control authority may institute proceedings
for assessment in the chancery court in which all or part of the pollution or
violation occurred.



      (4)   (a)   The control authority may establish by
regulation a schedule of the amount of civil penalty which can be assessed
for certain specific violations or categories of violations.



         (b)   Any civil penalty assessed to a violator pursuant
to this section may be in addition to any civil penalty assessed by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environment and Conservation for violations
of Tenn. Code Ann., § 69-3-115(a)(1)(F). Provided, however the sum of
penalties imposed by this section and by Tenn. Code Ann., § 69-3-115(a)
shall not exceed $10,000 per day for each day during which the act or
omission continues or occurs. The state's share of any additional costs of
this section shall be funded in accordance with Tenn. Code Ann., § 9-6-303,
from the increase in state imposed taxes which are earmarked to counties and
which are not designated by such counties for a particular purpose.



      (5)   Public notification and significant noncompliance. As
required by 40 CFR 403.8, Federal Pretreatment Requirement, the Town of
Collierville will publish annually in the largest daily newspaper the names
of all industrial/commercial users, which at any time during the year were in
significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. For
purposes of this provision, an industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:



         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter taken during a six month period exceed (by any
magnitude) the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limit;



         (b)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations,
defined here as those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equals or
exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);



         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement (daily maximum, long term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that control authority determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of POW personnel or general public);



         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has
resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority;



         (e)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule
date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism
or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;



         (f)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due
date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90 day compliance
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and



         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations,
including violation of BMPs, which the control authority determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.



   (D)   Damages assessment.



      (1)   The control authority may assess the liability of any
polluter or violator for damages to the POTW resulting from any person's or
industrial users pollution or violation, failure, or neglect in complying
with any permits or orders issued pursuant to the provisions of the
pretreatment program of this section.



      (2)   If an appeal from such assessment is not made to the
control authority by the polluter or violator within 30 days of notification
of such assessment, he or she shall be deemed to have consented to such
assessment and it shall become final.



      (3)   Damages may include any expenses incurred in
investigating and enforcing the pretreatment program or Tenn. Code Ann., §
69-3-123-129 in removing, correcting, and terminating any pollution, and also
compensation for any actual damages caused by the pollution or violation.



      (4)   Whenever any assessment has become final because of a
person's failure to appeal within the time provided, the control authority
may apply to the appropriate court for a judgment, and seek execution on such
judgment. The court, in such proceedings, shall treat the failure to appeal
such assessment as a confession of judgment in the amount of the assessment.



(Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)



§ 53.11  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any user affected by any decision, action or determination,
including cease and desist orders, made by the Town, interpreting or
implementing the provision of this code or in any permit or agreement issued
herein may file with the control authority a written request for
reconsideration within 60 days of such decision, action or determination
setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user’s request for
reconsideration; provided, however, that the appeals process established in
§ 53.10 herein shall apply for purposes of pretreatment enforcement.



   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of appeals, a three-part hierarchy
shall, in ascending order, consist of:



         (a)   Director of Public Services;



         (b)   Town Administrator; and



         (c)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



      (2)   Any appeal will be heard within 30 days from receipt of
the notice of appeal. A decision will be made not more than 15 days after the
appeal is heard at each level.



(`83 Code, § 13-211) (Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 5-8-17)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal
entity violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more
than $50 or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater,
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day of violation; provided, however, that this section does not limit any
penalties established pursuant to § 53.10 herein for violation of
pretreatment enforcement.



   (B)   If the ruling made by the control authority is unsatisfactory
to the person requesting reconsideration, he or she may within 90 days after
notification of control authority action file a written appeal.



(`83 Code, § 13-210)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. 2017-07,
passed 5-8-17)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      72.   STOPPING, YIELDING AND PARKING



      73.   MOTORCYCLES, ATV AND MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Motor vehicle requirements



   70.02   Authorized emergency vehicles defined



   70.03   Vehicles and operators to be licensed



   70.04   One-way streets



   70.05   Unlaned streets



   70.06   Laned streets



   70.07   Yellow lines



   70.08   School safety patrols



Traffic-Control Signs



   70.20   Miscellaneous signs and the like



   70.21   General requirements



   70.22   Unauthorized signs and the like



   70.23   Presumption with respect to signs



Automobile Registration



   70.35   License required for residents



   70.36   License required for auto dealers



   70.37   Time period



   70.38   Exceptions



Enforcement



   70.50   Issuance of traffic citations



   70.51   Failure to obey traffic citations



   70.52   Illegal parking



   70.53   Impoundment of vehicles



   70.54   Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles



   70.55   Adoption of state traffic statutes and regulations



 



   70.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  MOTOR VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle within
the corporate limits unless such vehicle is equipped with properly operating
muffler, lights, brakes, horn and such other equipment as is prescribed and
required by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 55-9-201 et seq.



(`83 Code, § 9-101)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.02  AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES DEFINED.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES shall be Fire Department vehicles, Police
vehicles and  such ambulances and other emergency vehicles as are designated
by the Chief of Police, or as otherwise provided by Tenn. Code Ann. §
55-8-101.



(`83 Code, § 9-102)



§ 70.03  VEHICLES AND OPERATORS TO BE LICENSED.



   (A)   All motor vehicles required by state law to be registered with
the County  Clerk with an address within the Town must be registered with
the County Clerk. Registration shall be valid for a term concurrent with the
State Automobile Registration.



   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on any street
without having in his or her possession an operator’s license or a
chauffeur’s license valid under the laws of this state or a valid license
of his  or her state of residence.



(`83 Code, § 9-125)



§ 70.04  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   On any street for one-way traffic with posted signs indicating the
authorized direction of travel at all intersections offering access thereto,
no person shall operate any vehicle except in the indicated direction.



(`83 Code, § 9-109)



§ 70.05  UNLANED STREETS.



   (A)   Upon all unlaned streets of sufficient width, a vehicle shall
be driven upon the right half of the street except:



      (1)   When lawfully overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction;



      (2)   When the right half of the roadway is closed to traffic
while under construction or repair;



      (3)   Upon a roadway designated and sign-posted by the
municipality for one-way traffic.



   (B)   All vehicles proceeding at less than the normal speed of
traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be
driven as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway,
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction or when preparing for a left turn.



(`83 Code, § 9-110)



§ 70.06  LANED STREETS.



   (A)   On streets marked with traffic lanes, it shall be unlawful for
the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep his or her vehicle
within the boundaries of the proper lane for his or her direction of travel
except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a
lawful turning movement.



   (B)   On two and three lane streets, the proper lane for travel
shall be the right hand lane unless otherwise clearly marked. On streets with
four or more lanes, either of the right hand lanes shall use the extreme
right hand lane. On one-way streets, either lane may be lawfully used in the
absence of markings to the contrary.



(`83 Code, § 9-111)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.07  YELLOW LINES.



   On streets with a yellow line placed to the right of any lane line or
center line, such yellow line shall designate a no-passing zone, and no
operator shall drive his or her vehicle or any part thereof across or to the
left of such yellow line except when necessary to make a lawful left turn
from such street.



(`83 Code, § 9-112)



§ 70.08  SCHOOL SAFETY PATROLS.



   All motorists and pedestrians shall obey the directions or signals of
school safety patrols when such patrols are assigned under the authority of
the Chief of Police and are acting in accordance with instructions; provided
that such persons giving any order, signal or direction shall at the time be
wearing some insignia and/or using authorized flags for giving signals.



(`83 Code, § 9-117)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS



§ 70.20  MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or the operator of any
vehicle to violate or fail to comply with any traffic-control sign, signal,
marking or device placed or erected by the state or municipality unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or the operator of any
vehicle to willfully violate or fail to comply with the reasonable directions
of any police officer.



(`83 Code, § 9-113)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.21  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All traffic-control signs, signals, markings and devices shall conform
to the latest revision of the Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, published by the U.S. Department of Transportation,
Federal Highway Administration and shall, so far as practicable, be uniform
as to type and location throughout the municipality. This section shall not
be construed as being mandatory but is merely directive.



(`83 Code, § 9-114) 



§ 70.22  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
street any unauthorized sign, signal marking or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control sign, signal,
marking or device has been placed, the presumption shall be that it is
official and that it has been lawfully placed by the proper municipal
authority. All presently installed traffic-control signs, signals, markings
and devices are expressly authorized, ratified, approved and made official.



(`83 Code, § 9-115)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.23  PRESUMPTION WITH RESPECT TO SIGNS.



   Refer to § 70.22.



(`83 Code, § 9-116)



AUTOMOBILE REGISTRATION



§ 70.35  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR RESIDENTS.



   (A)   Every resident of the Town who owns or operates a motor
vehicle in the Town shall upon receiving the state license and number for
operating a motor vehicle, under the laws of the State of Tennessee or within
30 days after he or she shall begin such operation, actually register his or
her vehicle with the Shelby County Clerk as may be designated by resolution
of the Board, giving the name of the vehicle, the type of machine, the year
of make, the state license number, the residence address of the owner, the
residence telephone number of the owner and for such registration he or she
shall pay an annual fee as follows:



      (1)   Automobiles:  $35;



      (2)   Motorcycles:  $35.



   (B)   Provided, however, that elderly residents, age 65 or older,
meeting tax relief income criteria or who have been approved for tax relief,
will be eligible for a rebate of $5. The vehicle for which the rebate is
sought must be privately licensed and titled in the name of the elderly
resident in question. Be it further provided that only one vehicle per
household be eligible for reimbursement.



   (C)   Current employees of the Town are allowed an exemption for one
vehicle per household.  An exemption letter will be provided the employee to
present to the Shelby County Clerk at the time of registration.



(`83 Code, § 9-701)  (Am. Ord. 2010-07, passed 6-28-10; Am. Ord. 2018-09,
passed 6-11-18)



§ 70.36  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR AUTO DEALERS.



   Every regularly licensed automobile dealer, whether an individual,
partnership, corporation or other organization whose place of business is
within the Town, shall be required to pay annually the stated fee for
registering one such automobile hereunder, and upon payment of such fee shall
be issued a license tag which shall be transferable to any automobile which
such owner owns and is holding for sale and which shall entitle the said
dealer to drive the vehicle upon the streets of the Town for demonstration
purposes only. The license tag when so issued may be permanently fixed to any
one such automobile and need not be actually, physically transferred to each
vehicle which is being driven over the streets of the Town for demonstration
purposes. In the event of the sale of the vehicle to which the license tag
has been permanently fixed, the tag may be removed and retained if
practicable or may be sold with the vehicle, in which event the dealer shall
immediately pay the fee and secure another license tag in the manner herein
set out.



(`83 Code, § 9-702)



§ 70.37  TIME PERIOD.



   Every person, except as provided in § 70.36, who operates a motor
vehicle in the Town for a period of 60 days or more which is duly licensed by
some other state or the District of Columbia shall, within 60 days after
bringing such automobile into the Town, register the same with the Shelby
County Clerk or designee as provided in this chapter. 



(`83 Code, § 9-703)



§ 70.38  EXCEPTIONS.



   There is expressly excepted from the operation of this subchapter
tourists using the streets and highways as an incident to passing through the
Town and nonresident employees of any industry in Collierville who are
regularly employed in the Town. 



(`83 Code, § 9-704)  (Ord. passed 8-10-62; Am. Ord. passed 10-11-69)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 70.50  ISSUANCE OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.



   When a police officer halts a traffic violator other than for the
purpose of giving a warning and does not take such person into custody under
arrest, he or she shall take the name, address and operator’s license
number of the person, the license number of the motor vehicle involved and
such other pertinent information as may be necessary and shall issue to him
or her a written traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge
against him or her in the Town Court at the specified time. The officer, upon
receiving the written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified
in the citation, shall release such person from custody. It shall be unlawful
for any alleged violator to give false or misleading information as to his or
her name or address.



(`83 Code, § 9-601)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.51  FAILURE TO OBEY CITATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his or her written
promise to appear in court after giving the promise to an officer upon the
issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the charge
for which the citation was originally issued.



(`83 Code, § 9-602)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.52  ILLEGAL PARKING.



   (A)   Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or
stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this code, the
officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number and may take any
other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and
shall conspicuously  affix to the vehicle a citation for the owner/or
operator to answer for the violation within 30 days and at the City Court as
specified in the citation.



   (B)   If the parking citation is not satisfied by payment of the
forfeiture or court appearance and payment of the fine and costs assessed
within 30 days, a judgement with appropriate fines, fees, and costs will be
assessed for each offense charged and warrant may be issued for the arrest of
the offender.



(`83 Code, § 9-603) (Am. Ord. 2008-13, passed 5-12-08)



§ 70.53  IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.



   Members of the Police Department are authorized, when reasonably
necessary for the security of the vehicle or to prevent obstruction of
traffic, to remove from the streets and impound any vehicle whose operator is
arrested or any unattended vehicle which is parked so as to constitute an
obstruction or hazard to normal traffic. Any impounded vehicle shall be
stored until the owner or other person entitled thereto claims it, gives
satisfactory evidence of ownership or right to possession and pays all
applicable fees and costs or until it is otherwise lawfully disposed of.



(`83 Code, § 9-604)



§ 70.54  DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Abandoned motor vehicles, as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-16-103,
shall be impounded and disposed of by the Police Department in accordance
with the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 55-16-103 through 55-16-112.



(`83 Code, § 9-605)



§ 70.55  ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC STATUTES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All violations of state regulations for the operation of
vehicles committed within the corporate limits of the municipality and which
are defined by state law are hereby designated and declared to be offenses
against the Town of Collierville also. This provision shall not apply to any
offenses in which the state courts have exclusive jurisdiction.



   (B)   A violation of this section shall be punishable by the maximum
fine allowable under state law.



(Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-23-15)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, § 9-705)  (Ord. passed 8-10-62; Am. Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



General Regulations



   71.01   Operation of authorized emergency vehicles



   71.02   Following emergency vehicles



   71.03   Running over fire hoses



   71.04   Driving on streets closed for repairs



   71.05   Reckless driving



   71.06   Driving under the influence



   71.07   Driving through funerals or other processions



   71.08   Damaging pavements



   71.09   Clinging to vehicles in motion



   71.10   Riding on outside of vehicles



   71.11   Backing vehicles



   71.12   Projections from rear of vehicles



   71.13   Title, registration, and license violations



   71.14   Passing



   71.15   Bicycle riders and the like



   71.16   Trucks



   71.17   Transportation of loose material



Speed Limits



   71.30   General



   71.31   At intersections



   71.32   In school zones



   71.33   In congested areas



   71.34   Caution to be exercised



Turning Movements



   71.45   Generally



   71.46   Right turns



   71.47   Left turns on two-way roadways



   71.48   Left turns on other two-way roadways



   71.49   U-turns



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 71.01  OPERATION OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions herein stated.



   (B)   (1)   A driver of an authorized emergency vehicle operating
such vehicle in accordance with the provisions of division (A) may:



         (a)   Park or stand, notwithstanding other provisions of
this chapter which regulate parking or standing;



         (b)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign,
but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



         (c)   Exceed the speed limits so long as life or
property is not thereby endangered; and



         (d)   Disregard regulations governing direction of
movement or turning in specified directions.



      (2)   The provisions of division (B)(1) shall not relieve the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the
driver from the consequences of the driver’s own reckless disregard for the
safety of others.



   (C)   (1)   The exemptions granted under division (B) to a driver
of an authorized emergency vehicle shall only apply when such vehicle is
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the
applicable laws of this state, except that while parked or standing, an
authorized emergency vehicle shall only be required to make use of visual
signals meeting the requirements of the applicable laws of this state.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, while parked or standing, from
making use of both audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the
applicable laws of this state, in the discretion of the driver.



   (D)   An authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle
may be equipped with or display a red light only in combination with a blue
light visible from in front of the vehicle.



   (E)   Notwithstanding the requirement of this section that drivers
of authorized emergency vehicles exercise due regard for the safety of all
persons, neither this municipality nor any of the political subdivisions, nor
their officers or employees, shall be liable for any injury proximately or
indirectly caused to an actual or suspected violator of a law or ordinance
who is fleeing pursuit by law enforcement personnel.  The fact that law
enforcement personnel pursue an actual or suspected violator of a law or
ordinance who flees from such pursuit shall not render the law enforcement
personnel, or the employers of such personnel, liable for injuries to a third
party proximately caused by the fleeing party unless the conduct of the law
enforcement personnel was negligent and such negligence was a proximate cause
of the injuries to the third party.



(Tenn. Code Ann. § 5-8-108)  (`83 Code, § 9-103)  (Ord. 2003-06, passed
4-14-03)



Cross reference:



   Authorized emergency vehicles defined, see § 70.02



§ 71.02  FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   No driver of any vehicle shall follow any authorized emergency vehicle
upon the approach of an emergency vehicle apparently traveling in response to
an emergency call closer than 500 feet or drive or park any vehicle within
the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.



(`83 Code, § 9-104)



Cross reference:



   Authorized emergency vehicles defined, see § 70.02



§ 71.03  RUNNING OVER FIRE HOSES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive over any hose lines or
other equipment of the Fire Department, except in obedience to the direction
of a firefighter or police officer.



(`83 Code, § 9-105)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-169



§ 71.04  DRIVING ON STREETS CLOSED FOR REPAIRS.



   Except for necessary access to property abutting thereon, no motor
vehicle shall be driven upon any street that is barricaded or closed for
repairs or other lawful purpose.



(`83 Code, § 9-106)



§ 71.05  RECKLESS DRIVING.



    Irrespective of the posted speed limit, no person, including operators
of emergency vehicles, shall drive any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard
for the safety of persons or property.



(`83 Code, § 9-107)



§ 71.06  DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE.



   No person shall drive or operate any automobile or other motor driven
vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicant or while under the
influence of drugs producing stimulating effects on the central nervous
system. 



(`83 Code, § 9-108)



§ 71.07  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERALS OR OTHER PROCESSIONS.



   Except when otherwise directed by a police officer, no driver of a
vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated.



(`83 Code, § 9-118)



§ 71.08  DAMAGING PAVEMENTS.



   No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon any street of the
municipality any vehicle, motor propelled or otherwise, which by reason of
its weight or the character of its wheels, tires or track is likely to damage
the surface or foundation of the street.



(`83 Code, § 9-119)



§ 71.09  CLINGING TO VEHICLES IN MOTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle,
motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any other vehicle to cling to or
attach himself or herself or his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle
upon any street, alley or other public way or place.



(`83 Code, § 1-120)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-174



§ 71.10  RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, or for the owner or
operator of any motor vehicle being operated on a street, alley or other
public way or place to permit any person to ride on any portion of such
vehicle not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This section
shall not apply to persons engaged in the necessary discharge of lawful
duties nor to persons riding in the load-carrying space of trucks.



(`83 Code, § 9-121)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.11  BACKING VEHICLES.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement
can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(`83 Code, § 9-122)



§ 71.12  PROJECTIONS FROM REAR OF VEHICLES.



   Whenever the load or any projecting portion of any vehicle shall extend
beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, the operator shall display at the
end of such load or projection, in such position as to be clearly visible
from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag being not less than 12 inches
square. Between one-half hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed in
place of the flag a red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric
conditions at least 200 feet from the rear of such vehicle.



(`83 Code, § 9-123)



§ 71.13  TITLE, REGISTRATION, AND LICENSE VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in
violation of the “Tennessee Motor Vehicle Title and Registration Law, Tenn.
Code Ann. §§ 55-1-101 et seq.,” or the “Uniform Classified and
Commercial Driver License Act of 1988, Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 55-50-101 et
seq.”



(`83 Code, § 9-124)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.14  PASSING.



   (A)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted,
the driver of a vehicle passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle. The driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the
right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not
increase the speed of his or her vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.



   (B)   When the street is wide enough, the driver of a vehicle may
overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about
to make a left turn.



   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a
street of sufficient width for four or more lanes of moving traffic when such
movement can be made in safety.



   (D)   No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of
the street in overtaking or passing on the right.



   (E)   When any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the street, no operator of any
other vehicle approaching from the rear shall overtake and pass such stopped
vehicle.



   (F)   No vehicle operator shall attempt to pass another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction unless he or she can see that the way ahead
is sufficiently clear and unobstructed to enable him or her to make the
movement in safety.



(`83 Code, § 9-126)



§ 71.15  BICYCLE RIDERS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Every person riding or operating a bicycle, motorcycle or
motor driven cycle shall be subject to the provisions of all traffic
ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town applicable to the driver or
operator of other vehicles, except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application to bicycles, motorcycles or motor driven
cycles.



   (B)   No person operating or riding a bicycle, motorcycle or motor
driven cycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular
seat attached thereto, nor shall the operator carry any other person upon
such vehicle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon.



   (C)   No bicycle, motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.



   (D)   No person operating a bicycle, motorcycle or motor driven
cycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider
from keeping both hands upon the handlebar.



   (E)   No person under the age of 16 years shall operate any
motorcycle or motor driven cycle while any other person is a passenger upon
the motor vehicle.



   (F)   All motorcycles and motor driven cycles operated on public
ways within the corporate limits shall be equipped with crash bars approved
by the state’s Commissioner of Safety.



   (G)   Every motorcycle or motor driven cycle operated upon any
public way within the corporate limits shall be equipped with a windshield of
a type approved by the state’s Commissioner of Safety, or, in the
alternative, the operator and any passenger on any such motorcycle or motor
driven cycle shall be required to wear safety goggles of a type approved by
the state’s Commissioner of Safety for the purpose of preventing any flying
object from striking the operator or any passenger in the eyes.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride on any
vehicle in violation of this section and it shall also be unlawful for any
parent or guardian to knowingly permit any minor to operate a motorcycle or
motor driven cycle in violation of this section. 



   (I)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a
business district.



   (J)   The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any
sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person,
and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey same.



   (K)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon
the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



   (L)   Every bicycle when in use at night time shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front which will emit a white light visible from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the
rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps if a motor
vehicle.



(`83 Code, § 9-127)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.16  TRUCKS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, a TRUCK is defined to be any
vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property and whose
gross vehicle weight exceeds 10,000 pounds. This definition shall also
include travel buses and all large recreational vehicles which may be a
traffic obstruction.



   (B)   Any truck over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight shall be
prohibited from using streets within the corporate limits except those
designated as state highway system streets. This prohibition shall include
the parking of the truck in the public right-of-way of a street in a
residential district of the Town.



   (C)   The following exceptions shall apply to this section:



      (1)   The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary
to the conduct of business at a designated point within the Town, provided
that streets designated as truck routes are used until reaching the
intersection nearest the destination point;



      (2)   The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in
the Town;



      (3)   The operation of trucks owned or operated by the Town,
any contractor or materialman while engaged in the repair, maintenance or
construction of the streets, street improvements or street utilities within
the Town;



      (4)   The operation of trucks for which escort service has
been arranged for in advance and provided by the Collierville Police
Department.



(`83 Code, § 9-128)



§ 71.17  TRANSPORTATION OF LOOSE MATERIAL.



   Any truck or other motor vehicle with an open bed which is operated on
any highway, road or street open for public use within the Town shall be
loaded so that any loose material transported therein remains at least four
inches below the walls of such open bed, measured at the front, back and
sidewalls; such load may be piled higher in the center of such open bed.
Loose material includes any substance which could spill, drop off or blow
away from the open bed when the vehicle is operated. Loose material shall not
include materials such as sand or salt which are purposely discharged from
truck beds to clear roadways or improve traction and shall not include water
sprayed on streets for purposes of sanitation.



(`83 Code, § 9-129)



SPEED LIMITS



§ 71.30  GENERAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle
upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of 30 miles per hour
except where official signs have been posted indicating other speed limits,
in which case the posted speed limit shall apply.



(`83 Code, § 9-201)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.31  AT INTERSECTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle
through any intersection at a rate of speed in excess of 15 miles per hour
unless such person is driving on a street regulated by traffic-control
signals or signs which require traffic to stop or yield on the intersecting
streets.



(`83 Code, § 9-202)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.32  IN SCHOOL ZONES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle
at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour when passing a school during recess
or while children are going to or leaving school during its opening or
closing hours.



(`83 Code, § 9-203)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.33  IN CONGESTED AREAS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle
through any congested area at a rate of speed in excess of any posted speed
limit when such speed limit has been posted by authority of the municipality.



(`83 Code, § 9-204)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.34  CAUTION TO BE EXERCISED.



   Notwithstanding any speed limit zone in effect at the time or
right-of-way rules that may be applicable, every driver shall:



   (A)   Operate his or her vehicle at a safe speed;



   (B)   Maintain a safe lookout;



   (C)   Use due care to keep his or her vehicle under control.



(`83 Code, § 9-205)



TURNING MOVEMENTS



§ 71.45  GENERALLY.



   No person operating a motor vehicle shall make any turning movement
which might affect any pedestrian or the operation of any other vehicle
without first ascertaining that such movement can be made in safety and
signaling his or her intention in accordance with the requirements of the
state law.



(`83 Code, § 9-301)



§ 71.46  RIGHT TURNS.



   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.



(`83 Code, § 9-302)



§ 71.47  LEFT TURNS ON TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.



   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the center line thereof and by passing to the right of the intersection of
the center lines of the two roadways.



(`83 Code, § 9-303)



§ 71.48  LEFT TURNS ON OTHER TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.



   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one
or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left
hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of
such vehicle, and after entering the intersection, as nearly as practicable,
proceed in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving such
direction upon the roadway being entered.



(`83 Code, § 9-304)



§ 71.49  U-TURNS.



   U-turns are prohibited except at designated locations.  To be
designated for a U-turn, the location shall be reviewed by the Town Engineer
or designee and found to have adequate sight lines and turning radii based on
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
standards and guidelines.  All U-turn locations shall be marked with
appropriate signage meeting AASHTO standards.



(`83 Code, § 9-305) (Am. Ord. 2012-06, passed 5-29-12)



(`83 Code, § 9-305)



CHAPTER 72:  STOPPING, YIELDING AND PARKING



Section



Stopping and Yielding



   72.01   Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles



   72.02   When emerging from alleys



   72.03   To prevent obstructing an intersection



   72.04   At railroad crossings



   72.05   At “stop” signs



   72.06   At “yield” signs



   72.07   At traffic-control signs generally



   72.08   At flashing traffic-control signals



   72.09   At pedestrian-control signals



   72.10   Stops to be signaled



Parking



   72.25   Generally



   72.26   Angle parking



   72.27   Occupancy of more than one space



   72.28   Where prohibited



   72.29   Loading and unloading zones



   72.30   Regulation by parking meters



   72.31   Lawful parking in parking meter spaces



   72.32   Unlawful parking in parking meter spaces



   72.33   Unlawful to occupy more than one parking meter space



   72.34   Unlawful to deface or tamper with meters



   72.35   Unlawful to deposit slugs in meters



   72.36   Presumption with respect to all illegal parking



   72.37   Restricted parking in residential zones



   72.38   Special parking permit



STOPPING AND YIELDING



§ 72.01  UPON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and/or visible signals meeting the requirements of the laws of
this state, the driver of every vehicle shall immediately drive to a position
parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the
roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position
until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.



(Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-132)  (`83 Code, § 9-401)



§ 72.02  WHEN EMERGING FROM ALLEYS.



   The drivers of all vehicles emerging from alleys, parking lots,
driveways or buildings shall stop such vehicles immediately prior to driving
onto any sidewalk or street until they can safely do so without colliding or
interfering with approaching pedestrians or vehicles.



(`83 Code, § 9-402)



§ 72.03  TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTING AN INTERSECTION.



   No driver shall enter any intersection or marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of such intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the
passage of traffic in or on the intersecting street or crosswalk. This
provision shall be effective notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.



(`83 Code, § 9-403)



§ 72.04  AT RAILROAD CROSSINGS.



   Any driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing shall
stop within not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and
shall not proceed further while any of the following conditions exist:



   (A)   A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the approach of a railroad train;



   (B)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman signals the
approach of a railroad train;



   (C)   A railroad train is approaching within approximately 1,500
feet of the highway crossing and is emitting an audible signal indicating its
approach;



   (D)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to the crossing.



(`83 Code, § 8-404)



§ 72.05  AT “STOP” SIGNS.



   The driver of a vehicle facing a “stop” sign shall bring his or her
vehicle to a complete stop immediately before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection, or, if there is no crosswalk, then immediately
before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until he or she
can proceed through the intersection in safety. 



(`83 Code, § 9-405)



§ 72.06  AT “YIELD” SIGNS.



   The drivers of all vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to approaching
vehicles before proceeding at all places where “yield” signs have been
posted.



(`83 Code, § 9-406)



§ 72.07  AT TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Traffic-control signals exhibiting the words “Go,”
“Caution” or “Stop” or exhibiting different colored lights
successively one at a time or with arrows shall apply to drivers of vehicles
and pedestrians as follows.



      (1)   Green alone or “Go.”



         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
such turn, but vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.



         (b)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across
the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



      (2)   Steady yellow alone or “Caution.”



         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby
warned that the red or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the
intersection when the red or “stop” signal is exhibited.



         (b)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the
roadway unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian “walk” signal.



      (3)   Steady red alone or “Stop.”



         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection and shall
remain standing until green or “Go” is shown alone.



         (b)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the
roadway unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian “walk” signal.



      (4)   Steady red with green arrow.



         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make movement indicated by such
arrow but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully using the
intersection.



         (b)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the
roadway unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian “walk” signal.



   (B)   In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made a vehicle length
short of the signal.



(`83 Code, § 9-407)



§ 72.08  AT FLASHING TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used
in a traffic sign or signal placed or erected by the municipality, it shall
require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.



      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal).  When a red lens is
illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to
proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.



      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal).  When a yellow lens
is illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.



   (B)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings.
Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by the rules set forth in § 72.04.



(`83 Code, § 9-408)



§ 72.09  AT PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Wherever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
“Walk” or “Wait” or “Don’t Walk” have been placed or erected by
the municipality, such signals shall apply as follows.



   (A)   “Walk.”  Pedestrians facing such signals may proceed
across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the
right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.



   (B)   “Wait or Don’t Walk.”  No pedestrian shall start to
cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his or her crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to
the nearest sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is showing.



(`83 Code, § 9-409)



§ 72.10  STOPS TO BE SIGNALED.



   No person operating a motor vehicle shall stop such vehicle, whether in
obedience to a traffic sign or signal or otherwise, without first signaling
his or her intention in accordance with the requirements of state law, except
in an emergency.



(`83 Code, § 9-410)



PARKING



§ 72.25  GENERALLY.



   (A)   No person shall leave any motor vehicle unattended on any
street without first setting the brakes thereon, stopping the motor, removing
the ignition key and turning the front wheel of such vehicle toward the
nearest curb or gutter of the street.



   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, every vehicle parked should be
with its right wheels approximately parallel to and within 18 inches of the
right edge curb of the street. On one-way streets where the municipality has
not placed signs prohibiting the same, vehicles may be permitted to park on
the left side of the street and in such cases the left wheels shall be
required to be within 18 inches of the left edge or curb of the street.



   (C)   Notwithstanding anything else in this code to the contrary, no
person shall park or leave a vehicle parked on any public street or alley
within the fire limits between hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. or on any
other public street or alley for more than 72 consecutive hours without the
prior approval of the Chief of Police.



   (D)   Furthermore, no person shall wash, grease or work on any
vehicle, except to make repairs necessitated by an emergency, while such
vehicle is parked on a public street.



(`83 Code, § 9-501)



§ 72.26  ANGLE PARKING.



   On those streets which have been signed or marked by the municipality
for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the
angle indicated by such signs or markings. No person shall angle park any
vehicle which has a trailer attached thereto or which has a length in excess
of 24 feet.



(`83 Code, § 9-502)



§ 72.27  OCCUPANCY OF MORE THAN ONE SPACE.



   No person shall park a vehicle in any designated parking space so that
any part of such vehicle occupies more than one such space or beyond the
official markings on the street or curb designating such space unless the
vehicle is too large to be parked within a single designated space.



(`83 Code, § 9-503)



§ 72.28  WHERE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall park, stand, or stop a vehicle in violation of
any sign placed or erected by the municipality, nor:



      (1)   On a sidewalk;



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection or within 15 feet thereof;



      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



      (5)   Within a pedestrian crosswalk;



      (6)   Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing;



      (7)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of the entrance when properly signposted;



      (8)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when other traffic would be obstructed;



      (9)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street;



      (10)   Upon any bridge; or



      (11)   Alongside any curb painted yellow or red by the
municipality.



   (B)   (1)   For purposes of this section, PARK shall mean the
standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading persons or
cargo.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, STOP or STAND means any
stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.



(`83 Code, § 9-504)  (Am. Ord. 2018-16, passed 11-12-18)



§ 72.29  LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.



   No person shall park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other
than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or merchandise in
any place marked by the municipality as a loading and unloading zone.



(`83 Code, § 9-505)



§ 72.30  REGULATION BY PARKING METERS.



   In the absence of an official sign to the contrary which has been
installed by the municipality, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
on all days except Sundays and holidays declared by the Board, parking shall
be regulated by parking meters where the same have been installed by the
municipality. The presumption shall be that all installed parking meters were
lawfully installed by the municipality.



(`83 Code, § 9-506)



§ 72.31  LAWFUL PARKING IN PARKING METER SPACES.



   Any parking space regulated by a parking meter may be lawfully occupied
by a vehicle only after a proper coin has been deposited in the parking meter
and the said meter has been activated or placed in operation in accordance
with the instructions printed thereon.



(`83 Code, § 9-507)



§ 72.32  UNLAWFUL PARKING IN PARKING METER SPACES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle
to park or allow his or her vehicle to be parked in a parking space regulated
by a parking meter for more than the maximum period of time which can be
purchased at one time. Insertion of additional time is unlawful.



   (B)   No owner or operator of any vehicle shall park or allow his or
her vehicle to be parked in such a space when the parking meter therefore
indicates no parking time allowed, whether such indication is the result of a
failure to deposit a coin or to operate the lever or other actuating device
on the meter, or the result of the automatic operation of the meter following
the expiration of the lawful parking time subsequent to depositing a coin
therein at the time the vehicle was parked.



(`83 Code, § 9-508)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.33  UNLAWFUL TO OCCUPY MORE THAN ONE PARKING METER SPACE.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to be
parked across on any line or marking designating a parking meter space or
otherwise so that such vehicle is not entirely within the designated parking
meter space; provided, however, that vehicles which are too large to park
within one space may be permitted to occupy two adjoining spaces, provided
proper coins are placed in both meters.



(`83 Code, § 9-509)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.34  UNLAWFUL TO DEFACE OR TAMPER WITH METERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to open, deface,
tamper with, willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking
meter.



(`83 Code, § 9-510)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.35  UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT SLUGS IN METERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in a parking meter any
slug or other substitute for a coin of the United States.



(`83 Code, § 9-511)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.36  PRESUMPTION WITH RESPECT TO ALL ILLEGAL PARKING.



   When any unoccupied vehicle is found parked in violation of any
provision of this chapter, there shall be a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of the vehicle is responsible for such illegal parking.



(`83 Code, § 9-512)



§ 72.37  RESTRICTED PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   (A)   No person shall park, leave standing or store any vehicle in
any public right-of-way or upon any street within a residential zone area of
the Town, except those commonly referred to as passenger vehicles or pickup
trucks, one ton capacity or less.



   (B)   No person shall leave standing or store any equipment,
machinery or material, except as provided for by division (A) of this section
on any street or public right-of-way within a residential zone area of the
Town.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit
the parking of such equipment upon any street for the actual purpose of
loading or unloading of goods, wares or merchandise or the accomplishment of
repairs within a residential area; provided, however, “loading,”
“unloading” and “accomplishment of repairs,” as used in this section,
shall be limited to the actual time consumed in such operation.



   (D)   This section shall not prohibit such parking when reasonably
necessitated by a breakdown or other emergency, provided the Chief of Police
is promptly notified of the circumstances.



   (E)   Vehicles used for the delivery of Town services or expansion
of Town services are specifically exempted from provisions of this section.



(`83 Code, § 9-513)



§ 72.38  SPECIAL PARKING PERMIT.



   The Director of Development Services may issue temporary exemption to
vehicles if it is deemed in the best interest of the Town to temporarily
suspend the enforcement of § 72.37 for development reasons. Written
explanation of these exemptions shall be forwarded to the Town Administrator
and the Chief of Police.



(`83 Code, § 9-514)



CHAPTER 73:  MOTORCYCLES, ATV AND MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES



Section



   73.01   Scope and purpose



   73.02   Definitions



   73.03   Prohibited operations



   73.04   Exceptions



   73.05   Contents of permit



   73.06   Appeal



   73.07   Revocation or suspension



   73.99   Penalty



§ 73.01  SCOPE AND PURPOSE.



   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Collierville finds that
the operation of licensed and unlicensed motorcycles and motor-driven cycles
on unimproved private property, sidewalks, park lands and other public
property (except public streets and highways) and paved surfaces designed for
vehicular traffic in the Town of Collierville creates excessive amounts of
irritating dust, fumes, noise, erosion and fire danger and constitutes a
public nuisance to the residents of Collierville. This chapter is designed to
regulate the operation of registered and unregistered ATV, motorcycles and
motor-driven cycles by all persons, whether they possess a valid Tennessee
motor vehicle operator’s license or not, upon unimproved private property
and upon all public property except public streets and highways and paved
surfaces designed for vehicular traffic in the Town of Collierville.



(`83 Code, § 12-301)



§ 73.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL TERRAIN VEHICLES. ATV motor driven two, three and four wheel
vehicles which are unregistered and are not designed for street usage.



   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and
open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel. HIGHWAY
includes street.



   MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE. Any motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with
a motor which produces not to exceed five horsepower and every bicycle with
motor attached.



   MOTORCYCLE. Any motor vehicle other than a tractor having a seat or
saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three
wheels in contact with the ground and weighing less than 1,500 pounds.



   UNIMPROVED PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any parcel of land which either contains
no structures or which is not surfaced with cement, concrete, asphaltic
concrete or other similar material or which does not have a hard surface made
up of a mixture of rock, sand or gravel bound together with a chemical or
mineral substance other than natural soil.



(`83 Code, § 12-302)



§ 73.03  PROHIBITED OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle or
ATV other than a publicly owned motorcycle or motor-driven cycle upon any
public sidewalk, walkway, park or upon any other publicly owned property
within the Town of Collierville. This shall not be construed to prohibit the
operation of a motorcycle or motor driven cycle having a valid Tennessee
vehicle registration by any person possessing a valid Tennessee operator’s
license upon the public highway or upon paved surfaces designed in the Town
of Collierville.



   (B)   No person shall operate an ATV, motorcycle or motor driven
cycle, other than a publicly owned motorcycle or motor driven cycle, upon any
unimproved parcel of real property within the Town of Collierville, except as
set forth in § 73.04.



(`83 Code, § 12-303)



§ 73.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   A person desiring to operate an ATV, motorcycle or motor
driven cycle and any owner of private property desiring to allow a person or
persons to operate a motorcycle or motor driven cycle on his or her private
property may do so upon first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police of
the Town of Collierville. Permits shall be issued upon his or her
determination that:



      (1)   The owner or owners of the real property concerned, or
the person or persons in lawful possession thereof, have consented in writing
to the proposed operation;



      (2)   That the Town Fire Chief has certified that such
proposed operation or by reason of the nature of the property concerned; and



      (3)   That such operation is of sufficient distance from
occupied residences, churches, assembly hall or schools as not likely to
constitute a noise, dust or fumes nuisance.



   (B)   Any owner of property meeting the requirements of this
section, or his or her agent, may in writing authorize the Chief of Police to
issue permits for the operation of motorcycles or motor driven cycles on his
or her property. The authorization is to be in the form prescribed by the
Chief of Police and must describe the real property and may limit the
authority to the persons set forth in the authorization. Any change of
interest in ownership in the real property shall be deemed an automatic
revocation of such authorization. All persons holding a title interest in and
to a parcel of real property must join in the authorization.



(`83 Code, § 12-304)



§ 73.05  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Name, birth date and physical description of the permittee.



   (B)   A statement that permittee shall not operate or cause to be
operated a motorcycle or motor driven cycle on any real property, except the
real property set forth in the permit by description.



   (C)   A statement of the hours that the permit authorizes operation
of the motorcycle or motor driven cycle.



   (D)   A statement that the permit shall be carried by the permittee
at all times that he or she is operating an ATV, motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle on public or private property, as defined in this chapter, and that the
permit shall be exhibited to any police officer upon demand.



   (E)   The date of expiration of the permit in no event to exceed one
year, unless sooner revoked or suspended.



   (F)   A statement that the permit is not an expression by the Town
that the proposed operation can be done with safety to the permittee or other
persons or property, all of which risks are assumed by permittee or property
owner.



(`83 Code, § 12-305)



§ 73.06  APPEAL.



   Any applicant refused a permit may appeal such refusal to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen by filing an appeal in writing, setting forth the grounds.



(`83 Code, § 12-306)



§ 73.07  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   Any permit issued hereunder is subject to suspension or revocation by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen after notice to the permittee and public
hearing on any of the following grounds:



   (A)   The owner or agent of the real property has withdrawn his or
her consent;



   (B)   Conditions concerning the real property covered by the permit
have changed so that conditions exist which would be grounds for refusal to
issue the permit;



   (C)   The permittee has violated any of the terms or conditions of
the permit or any law while on private or public property pursuant to the
permit issued herein.



(`83 Code, § 12-307)



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, § 12-308)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   PUBLIC PARKS AND FACILITIES



      91.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



      92.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      93.   ABANDONED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES



      94.   ANIMALS



      95.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



      96.   AIR POLLUTION CONTROL CODE



CHAPTER 90:  PUBLIC PARKS AND FACILITIES



Section



   90.01   Scope and purpose



   90.02   Parks; hours of operation



   90.03   Park use; golf



   90.04   Skateboards and the like



   90.05   Damaging Town property



   90.06   Skateboard ramps



   90.07   Traffic



   90.08   Noise control



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  SCOPE AND PURPOSE.



   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Collierville recognize
that certain activities in Town parks and upon public property pose
significant risk to public safety, transportation and well being of
Town-owned facilities and grounds and constitutes to the citizens of
Collierville a public nuisance.  This chapter is to regulate certain
activities as they relate to public parks and public facilities.



(`83 Code, § 12-401)



§ 90.02  PARKS; HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No person shall be upon the grounds of any Town park between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless it is a specific event authorized by the
Collierville Parks and Recreation Board.



(`83 Code, § 12-402)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  PARK USE; GOLF.



   No person shall use any Town park land to drive golf balls unless it is
in an area with posted signs that allows such usage.



(`83 Code, § 12-403)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  SKATEBOARDS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates, roller
blades or any similar device in, upon or on the grounds of Collierville Town
Hall, Collierville Police Facility, Collierville Library, Collierville
Community Center, Harrell Theater or any Town-owned parking structure.



(`83 Code, § 12-404)



   (B)   No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates, roller
blades or any similar device upon any sidewalk in a Town park or on any other
sidewalk designated by the Chief of Police and posted as a “No Skateboard,
Roller Skating, Roller Blading or Similar Activity Area.”



(`83 Code, § 12-405) 



   (C)   No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates, roller
blades or any similar device on a Town exercise trail except when lined for
bicycle traffic and then operation shall be only on the portion posted for
cyclists.



(`83 Code, § 12-406)  (Ord. 98-28, passed 1-11-99)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  DAMAGING TOWN PROPERTY.



   No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades or
any similar device on or against any Town owned table, bench, structure,
tennis court, swimming pool or other improvement which may suffer damage by
such use.



(`83 Code, § 12-407) Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  SKATEBOARD RAMPS.



   No person shall use or place a ramp, jump or any other device used to
force a skateboard, roller blades or any similar device off the pavement on
the grounds of any Town-owned parking lot or park.



(`83 Code, § 12-408) (Ord. 98-28, passed 1-11-99)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  TRAFFIC.



   No person in a public park shall:



   (A)   Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state
motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles,
together with such regulations as are contained in this chapter and the
Traffic Code of the Town of Collierville;



   (B)   Fail to obey any traffic officers and/or park employees, such
persons being authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and
wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads
immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations;



   (C)   Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed,
direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for proper
control and to safeguard life and property;



   (D)   Drive any vehicle on any area except paved park roads or
parking areas or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary parking areas by the Parks and Recreation Department;



   (E)   Park a vehicle in any other than an established or designated
parking area and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions
there and with the instructions of any park employee who may be present;



   (F)   Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night without lights
clearly visible for at least 100 feet from both front and rear on any
driveway or road area, except legally established parking areas;



   (G)   Fail to immediately notify an employee of an emergency in the
nature of a breakdown requiring the assistance of a tow truck, mechanic or
other person;



   (H)   Double park any vehicle on any road or parkway;



   (I)   Fail to use the stock muffler of the motor vehicle for which
it was designed to adequately deaden the sound of the engine of the motor
vehicle;



   (J)   Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path
designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push
a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area
reserved for pedestrian use;



   (K)   Ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the road
paving as close as conditions permit, and bicycles shall be kept in single
file when two or more are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times
operate their machines with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal
all turns, pass to the right of any vehicle they are overtaking and pass to
the right of any vehicle they may be meeting;



   (L)   Ride any other person on a bicycle;



   (M)   Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such
is provided and there is space available;



   (N)   Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, sit against
trees or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be
injured by them.



(`83 Code, § 12-409)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Cross reference:



   Traffic Code, see Title VII



§ 90.08  NOISE CONTROL.



   Except for activities for which the Collierville Parks and Recreation
Department has issued a permit, no person shall so operate, play or permit
the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, amplifier,
loud speaker or similar device so as to create a noise which is plainly
audible to any person other than the operator of the device in or on the
grounds of any Town park or its building facilities.



(`83 Code, § 12-410)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, § 12-411)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03)



CHAPTER 91:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Fire limits described



Fire Code



   91.15   Fire Code adopted



   91.16   Enforcement



   91.17   Definitions



   91.18   Causes of fire, investigation, inspection



   91.19   Hazardous materials placards vehicles



   91.20   Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals



   91.21   Automatic sprinkler system requirements



   91.22   Fire lane requirements



   91.23   Fire hydrant requirements



   91.24   Application for permits, service and user fees



   91.25   False emergency alarms



   91.26   Key boxes



   91.27   Gate override



   91.28   Violations



Fireworks



   91.40   Unlawful practices



   91.41   Exceptions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  FIRE LIMITS DESCRIBED.



   The corporate fire limits shall be all the area within the municipal
limits of the Town as such limits may change from time to time.



(`83 Code, § 7-101)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12)



FIRE CODE



§ 91.15  FIRE CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann. §
6-54-502, and for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion, the International
Fire Code 2012 Edition to include Appendix B, and Appendix D, as recommended
by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference included herein as
a part of this code.  Pursuant to the requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. §
6-54-502, one copy of the International Fire Code 2012 Edition has been filed
with the Town Clerk and is available for public use and inspection.  The
Fire Code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein
and shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the Town of
Collierville.



   (B)   The 2012 International Fire Code is amended and changed in the
following respects:



      (1)   Appendix D Section D106.1: Projects having more than 50
dwelling units. Multiple- family residential projects having more than 50
dwelling units shall be equipped throughout with two separate and approved
fire apparatus access roads;



      (2)   Appendix D Section D107.1: One or two family residential
developments. Developments of one or two family dwellings where the number of
dwelling units exceeds 50 shall be provided with two separate and approved
fire apparatus access roads and shall meet the requirements of Section D104.3;



      (3)   Hazardous materials placards vehicles as governed in §
91.19 shall remain in place and be an exception to International Fire Code
and NFPA references and standards;



      (4)   Automatic sprinkler system requirements as governed in
§ 91.21 shall remain in place and where it conflicts with the International
Fire Code or any other standards of the International Building or Residential
Code or NFPA, the more stringent code shall apply;



      (5)   Section 303.4 Attendant. An operating kettle shall be
attended by a minimum of one employee knowledgeable of the operations and
hazards. The employee shall be within 25 feet of the kettle and have the
kettle in sight. Ladders or similar obstacles shall not form a part of the
route between the attendant and the kettle.



      (6)   Amend Section 307: Open Burning, Recreational Fires and
Portable Outdoor Fire Places. These amendments are intended to promote the
public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort,
living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of
Collierville, Tennessee by regulating air pollution and fire hazards of
outdoor burning.



      (6a)   Section 307.1 General. A person shall not kindle or
maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless
conducted and approved in accordance with sections 307.1.1 through 307.5 and
all requirements established for open burning found in the Shelby County
Health Department’s Air Pollution Control requirements adopted by reference
by the Town of Collierville and found in Chapter 96 of the Town’s
Ordinances.



      (7)   Amend Section 307.1.1 Prohibited Open Burning. Open
burning shall be prohibited within the Town Limits of Collierville.  No
person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse, garbage,
trade waste, trees, limbs, brush, grass clippings, leaves, agriculture
stubble, or materials from salvage operations, in accordance with this
section and Town of Collierville Ordinances, Chapter 96.



         EXCEPTION:



            1)   This section does not apply to grilling,
barbeque, or cooking food using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in
cooking or grilling appliances.



            2)   This section does not apply to burning for
the purpose of generating heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other
heating device within a building used for human or animal habitation.



            3)   This section does not apply to fires used for
training and instruction of firefighters or for research in fire protection
or prevention.



            4)   This section does not apply to open burning
as described in section 307.2.1



            5)   This section does not apply to recreational
fires as outlined in section 307.4.2



            6)   This section does not apply to portable or
fixed outdoor fireplaces as outlined in section 307.4.3.



      (7a)   Add New Section 307.1.2 Agriculture Burning; Burning of
agriculture land and fields for the purpose of clearing trees, limbs, brush
grass, weeds, crop stubble and demolition waste that may be on site, is
prohibited within the Town Limits of Collierville, Tennessee.



      (7b)   Amend Section 307.2.1; Authorization; Where required by
state or local law or regulations, open burning shall only be permitted with
prior approval from the Shelby County Health Department Pollution Control,
and the Collierville Fire Department provided all conditions specified in the
authorization are followed;



         1)    Land clearing for construction using controlled
open burning with an Air Curtain Destructor (Blower) as outlined in the Rules
and Regulations of the Shelby County Health Department Pollution Control is
allowed on a, case by case bases with permits and approval from the Shelby
County Health Department Pollution Control and the Collierville Fire
Department.



         2)   The Collierville Fire Department maintains the
authority to revoke the issued permit for failure to follow requirements set
out in the permit or substantiated complaints regarding excessive smoke or
fly ash.



      (8)   Section 307.4.1 Bonfires. Delete this entire section.



      (8a)   Amend Section 307.4.2; Recreational Fires: Recreational
fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a structure or combustible
material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a
structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.



         1)   Shall not burn if atmospheric conditions are not
favorable, if complaints are received fires shall be extinguished.



         2)   Shall not burn when drought conditions are
declared, or burn bans ordered by Federal, State, County or the Town of
Collierville.



         3)   Shall not overload pit or fire area; keep fires
small within the limits of the pit or portable fire box, not more than 3 feet
wide and two feet in height.



         4)   Do not use flammable or combustible liquids to
start fires.



      (8b)   Amend Section 307.4.3; Portable or fixed outdoor
fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
and shall not be operated within 15 feet of a structure or combustible
materials.



      EXCEPTION:   Portable or fixed outdoor fireplaces used at
one-and two-family dwellings; except as noted below;



         1)   Shall not burn if atmospheric conditions are not
favorable, if complaints are received fire shall be extinguished. 



         2)   Shall not burn when drought conditions are
declared, or burn bans ordered by Federal, State, County or the Town of
Collierville.



         3)   Fuel burned in the outdoor fireplace shall be clean
wood, wood pellets made from clean wood, or other listed fuels specifically
permitted by or per the manufactures instruction.



         4)   Trash, yard waste, rubbish, or paper products shall
not be burned.



      (8c)   Amend Section 307.5: ATTENDANCE; Open burning,
bonfires, recreational fires and use of portable or fixed outdoor fireplaces
shall be constantly attended by an adult at least 18 years of age until the
fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying
with Section 906 with a minimum 4A rating or other approved on-site fire
extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or
water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.



      (9)   Educational facilities shall be inspected in accordance
with the shared State program under the adopted State Fire Code, which may
differ from the International Fire Code.



      (10)   Section 405.2 Frequency of Emergency Evacuation Drills.
Required emergency evacuation drills shall be held at intervals specified in
table 405.2 and in accordance with Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-102-137.



      (11)   Section 408.3.1. The first emergency evacuation drill
of each school year shall be conducted within the first 30 days of operation
in accordance with Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-102-137.



      (12)   Section 408.5 Group 1-1 shall be modified to be in
compliance with Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-102-137.



      (13)   Section 408.6 Group 1-2 shall be modified to be in
compliance with Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-102-137.



      (14)   Section 408.7 Group 1-3 shall be modified to be in
compliance with Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-102-137.



      (15)   Section 503.6 Security Gates. The installation of
security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the
Fire Chief or his or her designee. Where gates are installed, they shall have
an approved means of emergency operation. The security gates and emergency
operations shall be maintained operational at all times. Electric gate
operators, where provided shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates
intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed
to comply with requirements of ASTM F 2200. All automatic gates shall be
installed and meet requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 13-8-105.



      (16)   Fire lane requirements as governed in § 91.21 shall
remain in place and where it conflicts with chapter 5 of the International
Fire Code the more stringent shall apply.



      (17)   Section 507.4 Water Supply Test. The fire code official
shall be notified prior to the water supply test. Water supply tests shall be
witnessed by the fire code official, Town of Collierville Water Department or
approved documentation of the test shall be provided to the fire code
official prior to final approval of the water supply system. All water flows
for fire protection design purposes shall only be valid for a period of six
months from the date of the last test.



      (18)   Section 507.5.1 Fire Hydrant Systems where Required.
Delete Exceptions 1 and 2 in their entirety.



      (19)   Delete entire reference - 703.1.3 Fire and Smoke
Partition Identification.



      (20)   Section 901.4.3 Fire Areas. Where buildings, or
portions thereof, are divided into fire areas so as not to exceed the limits
established for requiring a fire protection system with this chapter or Town
of Collierville § 91.21, such fire areas shall be separated by fire barriers
in accordance with the most stringent of either the International Building
Code or § 91.21(F).



         Exception: Group R Occupancies, Fire areas as described in
§ 91.21(F) shall not apply.



      (21)   Section 903.1 General. Automatic sprinkler systems
shall comply with this section and § 91.21 and where there is a conflict
between the International Fire Code, International Building Code,
International Residential Code or any NFPA requirements, the most stringent
shall apply.



      (22)   Section 903.2.1.1 Group A-1. The fire area exceeds
3,500 square feet.



      (23)   Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2. The fire area exceeds
3,500 square feet.



      (24)   Section 903.2.1.3 Group A-3. The fire area exceeds
3,500 square feet.



      (25)   Section 903.2.1.4 Group A-4. The fire area exceeds
3,500 square feet.



      (26)   Section 903.2.3 Group E. Throughout all Group E fire
areas.



      (27)   Section 903.2.3 Group E. Delete Exception in its
entirety.



      (28)   Section 903.2.4 Group F-1. A Group F-1 fire area
exceeds 3,500 square feet.



      (29)   Section 903.2.6 Group I. Delete #(3) and #(4) in its
entirety.



      (30)   Section 903.2.7 Group M. A Group M fire area exceeds
3,500 square feet.



      (31)   Section 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all
buildings with a Group R fire area as described in § 91.21(A)(4) and (5).



      (32)   Section 903.2.9 Group S-1. A Group S-1 fire area
exceeds 3,500 square feet.



      (33)   Section 903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. A Group S-1 fire area
used for the repair of commercial trucks of buses where the fire area exceeds
3,500 square feet.



      (34)   Fire Alarm requirements as governed in § 91.21(J)(1)
through (6) shall remain in place and where it conflicts with Chapter 9 of
the International Fire Code the more stringent shall apply.



      (35)   Section 907.2.13.1.2 Duct Smoke Detectors. #1 In the
main return air and exhaust plenum and in the main supply air stream of each
air conditioning system having a capacity of 2,000 cubic feet per minute.



      (36)   Section 907.2.23  Battery Room. An approved smoke
detection system shall be installed in areas containing stationary lead-acid
battery systems having a liquid capacity of more than 50 gallons.  The
detection system shall be supervised by an approved central proprietary or
remote station service or local alarm which will sound an audible signal at a
constantly attended location.



      (37)   Section 907.9.3. Delete this section and create a new
section 907.6.2.1 Remote Fire Alarm Panel. A fire alarm annunciator panel
shall be installed at the point of Fire Department access.



      (38)   Section 912.2.1 Visible Location. Fire Department
connections shall be located on the street side of buildings, fully visible,
with an approved audible/visual device, located above the FDC and
recognizable from the street or nearest point of Fire Department vehicle
access or as otherwise approved by the Fire Chief.



      (39)   Section 914.6.1. Exception # 1, delete this entire
section.



      (40)   Section 914.6.1. Exception # 2, deleted this entire
section.



   (C)   Be it further ordained that the provisions of any ordinance or
regulations or parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.



(‘83 Code, § 7-201)  (Ord. 97-49, passed 1-5-98; Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed
11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 2-13-12; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-28-14)



§ 91.16  ENFORCEMENT.



   The International Fire Code herein adopted by reference shall be
enforced by the Chief of the Fire Department, the Fire Marshal, the Assistant
Fire Marshal or any other Fire Department personnel acting as a designee of
the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or the Assistant Fire Marshal.



(`83 Code, § 7-202)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12)



§ 91.17  DEFINITIONS.



   Whenever the words AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION are used in the
International Fire Code herein adopted, it shall be held to mean the Town of
Collierville, Tennessee.



   AGRICULTURE.  The science, art, and business of soil cultivation, crop
production, and the raising of live stock.



   AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR (BLOWER).  A portable or stationary combustion
device that directs a plane of high velocity forced draft air through a
manifold head into a burn chamber with vertical walls in such a manner as to
maintain a curtain of air over the surface of the burn chamber and
recalculating motion of air under the curtain. The use of an air curtain is
considered “controlled open burning”.



   CLEAN WOOD.  Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or
coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with
preservatives; and does not contain resin or glues as in plywood or other
composite products.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE.  Building waste materials;
including but not limited to waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated
wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubber that result from construction,
remodeling, repair and demolition operations on a house, commercial or
industrial building, or other structure.



   FIRE CHIEF.  The Chief of the Town of Collierville, Tennessee Fire
Department.



   MUNICIPALITY.  The Town of Collierville, Tennessee.



   OPEN BURNING.  The burning of materials wherein products of combustion
are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or
chimney from an enclosed chamber. OPEN BURNING does not include road flares,
smudge pots and similar devices associated with safety or occupational use
typically considered open flames, recreational fires or use of portable /
fixed outdoor fireplaces. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall
be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only
openings, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion
air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open.



   PORTABLE / FIXED OUTDOOR FIREPLACE.  A portable / fixed, outdoor,
solid-fuel-burning fireplace that may be constructed of steel, concrete, clay
or other noncombustible material. A PORTABLE/FIXED OUTDOOR FIREPLACE may be
open in design such as a “pit” or may be equipped with a small hearth
opening and a short chimney opening at the top.



   REFUSE.  Any waste material except trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves,
grass clippings, and other vegetation matter living or dead.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE.  An outdoor fire burning materials other than
refuse where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator,
portable / fixed outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a
total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in
height for, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purpose.



   TOWN OF COLLIERVILLE or TOWN.  As referenced and defined in Town
Ordinance Article 1 SECTION § 1.01; “INCORPORATION; NAME”.



   TOWN LIMITS.  As referenced and defined in Town Ordinance Article 1 §
1.02; “CORPORATE BOUNDARIES”.



   TOWNHOUSE.  A single family dwelling unit constructed in a group of
three or more attached units that extends from foundation to roof, not more
than three stories in height, with separate means of egress, and an open
space or public way on at least two sides.



(`83 Code, § 7-203)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-28-14; Am. Ord. 2015-16, passed
8-24-15)



§ 91.18  CAUSES OF FIRE, INVESTIGATION, INSPECTION.



   The Chief of the Fire Department or his or her duly qualified assistant
shall cause all buildings and their premises, and public thoroughfares to be
inspected, except; the interior of private dwelling houses, annually to
ascertain and cause to be corrected any condition that may cause a fire,
subject to the standards of the aforementioned International Fire Code.



(`83 Code, § 7-204)  (Ord. 99-12, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed
11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 2-13-12)



§ 91.19  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS PLACARDS VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate or park any hazardous material
placards vehicle within any commercial zoning district or within any
residential area at any time except for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious delivery of that material.



   (B)   Hazardous material placards shall include:



      (1)   Explosives;



      (2)   Gases;



      (3)   Flammable liquids;



      (4)   Flammable solids;



      (5)   Oxidizers;



      (6)   Poisons and etiological agents;



      (7)   Radioactive materials;



      (8)   Corrosives;



      (9)   Dangerous mix loads of above or other materials as
regulated by the United States Department of Transportation, Materials
Transportation Bureau.



(`83 Code, § 7-205)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.20  CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.



   The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals as established in §
150.022(A) shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and
interpretation of the International Fire Code.



(`83 Code, § 7-206)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12)



§ 91.21  AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
the following new or renovated buildings or structures:



      (1)   Group A; Assembly A1, A2, A3, A4:         all
buildings or structures 3,500 square feet gross floor area or more;



      (2)   Group E; Educational:              all
building or structures;



      (3)   Institutional Group: I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4: 
      all buildings or structures;



      (4)   Residential:                    all
residential buildings or structures as follows:



         (a)   Hotel/motel R-1, R-2:          NFPA 13;



         (b)   Lodging and rooming houses R-1, R-2:    NFPA
13R;



         (c)   Board and care facilities R-3, R-4:
      NFPA 13R – 16 or less occupants; NFPA 13 – more than 16
occupants;



         (d)   Multi-family R-2 (attached) three



            or more attached units up to



            four stories:               NFPA 13R;



            three or more attached units



            more than four stories:         (NFPA 13);



         (e)   Townhouse:               a single
family dwelling constructed in a group of three or more attached units
                              that extends from
foundation to roof, not more than three stories in height; all buildings
(NFPA 13R);



      (5)   One and two family dwellings; all



         buildings or structures as follows:



         (a)   5,500 square feet or more gross



            heated floor area; or



         (b)   Buildings or structures exceeding



            2,000 square feet and set back more



            than 300 feet from a public road:      (NFPA
13D)



      (6)   Group M: Mercantile:              all
buildings or structures 3,500 square feet or more gross floor area;



      (7)   Group B: Business:                 all
buildings or structures 3,500 square feet or more gross floor area;



      (8)   Group F; Factory/Industrial:  F-1, F-2; 
      all buildings or structures 3,500 square feet or more gross floor
area;



      (9)   Group S; Storage:  S-1, S-2;            all
buildings or structures 3,500 square feet or more gross floor area;



      (10)      Mixed uses:                 all
buildings or structures 3,500 square feet or more gross floor area;



      (11)      High-Hazard Group H: H-1,



            H-2, H-3, H-4, H-5;            all
buildings or structures.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, occupancies shall be
classified in accordance with Chapter 3 of the International Fire Code.



   (C)   (1)   For the purpose of this section only, MAJOR
RENOVATION shall be defined as construction to the building that is greater
than 50% of the estimated cost of reconstruction of the entire structure.



      (2)   In the event that a disagreement regarding the estimated
cost percentage occurs, the building owner or his or her agent shall provide
a certified appraisal of the structure and a certified construction estimate
shall be furnished to the Chief of the Fire Department or the Fire Marshal
upon request, as proof of compliance. Appraisal shall not include associated
land cost, furnishings or decorations.



   (D)   Any addition to an existing building or structure which brings
the gross floor area above the applicable square footage listed in division
(A) of this section shall cause the entire building or structure to meet the
requirements of that section, with the exception of A-5 one and two-family
dwellings.



   (E)   (1)   Any change in use and occupancy to a structure that
is of a higher hazard classification as defined in International Building or
Fire Code and the gross square footage is above the applicable square footage
as listed in division (A) of this section shall cause the entire building or
structure to meet the requirements of that section.



      (2)   High hazard shall be classified as those facilities that
are likely to burn with extreme rapidity or from which explosions are likely.



   (F)   For the purpose of this section, only approved three-hour
rated fire walls with properly protected openings shall be considered when
calculating the gross floor area or constituting a separate building in
occupancies specified in division (A) of this section;



   (G)   Where automatic sprinkler protection is determined to increase
the hazard to the property or its occupants to be protected, other automatic
extinguishing systems appropriate for the hazard shall be provided.



   (H)   Any building that is required to be equipped with a Fire
Department connection (FDC) shall be located on the front street side of the
facility. Special circumstances that would prevent this shall be reviewed and
altered only by the Fire Marshal or his or her designee on a case by case
basis. Physical location of the Fire Department connection (FDC) shall be
determined by the following factors:



      (1)   Hazard classification of the facility as defined in NFPA
13:



         (a)   Light hazard. May be located on the surface of the
structure. FDC shall be located not to exceed five feet from the corner of
the structure and shall not be higher than five feet from finished grade nor
less than 18 inches above finished grade.



         (b)   Ordinary hazard. Same as light hazard.



         (c)   Extra hazard. Fire Department connection (FDC)
shall be located a minimum of 40 feet from the structure.



      (2)   Height of structure or building.



         (a)   Any building or structure three stories or less
that meets the requirements as defined in this subchapter shall be permitted.



         (b)   Any building or structure exceeding three stories
in height shall have the Fire Department connection (FDC) located a distance
away from the structure or building at least half the height of the structure
but in no case shall the distance be less than 40 feet.



   (I)   Any building that is required to be equipped with a Fire
Department connection (FDC) for the automatic sprinkler system as described
in NFPA 13, 13D, 13R shall have a reliable water supply for use by the Fire
Department located within 100 feet of the (FDC). A RELIABLE WATER SUPPLY
shall mean a fire hydrant that meets the Town of Collierville Engineering,
Public Utilities and Fire Department requirements. A reliable water supply
shall be connected to the Town of Collierville water system. For special
circumstances, an alternative water supply may be proposed when connection to
the Town of Collierville system is not practical with the approval of the
Fire Chief or the Fire Marshal.



   (J)   Any automatic sprinkler system provided as a requirement of
this section or other code requirements shall be adequately supervised as
follows:



      (1)   The extinguishing system shall be electrically connected
to a central (UL) station facility meeting the requirements of NFPA 72;



      (2)   Where a system may be disabled by closing of valves,
interruption of power and the like, adequate supervision shall be provided to
sound at least a local alarm when the system is deactivated and a trouble
signal to the central station facility;



      (3)   Automatic sprinkler flow alarms shall be zoned to
indicate a water flow and not a general fire alarm to the central station;



      (4)   Where building fire alarm facilities are provided,
actuation of the extinguishing system shall also cause the building alarm to
sound in accordance with NFPA 72;



      (5)   Where building fire alarm facilities are not provided,
actuation of the extinguishing system shall require at least one building
alarm to sound within the facility. Alarms shall be installed in accordance
with NFPA 72;



      (6)   Where multiple tenants are located within a building or
structure, at least one alarm sounding device shall be provided for each
tenant space located in a constantly attended location that upon actuation of
the extinguishing system shall sound an alarm to notify occupants to be aware
of their surroundings. This device is not intended to be an evacuation
device, its function and intent is for notification purposes only. Alarms
shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72.



   (K)   Automatic sprinkler systems and appurtenances shall be
installed, tested, inspected and maintained in accordance with National Fire
Protection Standards and Tennessee Code Annotated laws.



   (L)   Where these requirements conflict with the Town of
Collierville Building Code, Fire Code or state or federal standards, the more
stringent requirement shall apply.



(`83 Code, § 7-207)  (Ord. 99-12, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed
11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 2-13-12; Am. Ord. 2015-15, passed 8-10-15;
Am. Ord. 2015-16, passed 8-24-15)



§ 91.22  FIRE LANE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   Fire lanes shall be provided for all commercial and
industrial buildings or that are set back more than 150 feet from a public
road or exceeds 30 feet in height and are set back more than 50 feet from a
public road. However, nothing shall prevent modification to this requirement
by the Fire Chief or his or her designee to impose fire lane requirements for
special use facilities; such as care homes, multi-family dwellings, hazardous
operation or any area that does not provide for immediate or adequate
emergency access for emergency apparatus for purposes of rescue and
extinguishment.



      (2)   Exception:  existing buildings or structures with less
than 20,000 square feet gross floor area between properly rated tenant
separation walls and adequate emergency vehicle access may be continued in
use without designated fire lanes.



   (B)   (1)   Fire lanes shall not be less than 20 feet of
unobstructed width, able to withstand live loads of fire apparatus and have a
minimum of 13 feet six inches of vertical clearance. An approved turnaround
for fire apparatus shall be provided where the access road is a dead-end and
is in excess of 150 feet in length. The turnaround shall have a minimum
centerline radius of 40 feet of pavement (50 foot of right-of-way).



      (2)   Exception: turnarounds shall be permitted for “T” or
“Y” arrangements and turnaround arrangements other than a cul-de-sac,
when acceptable to the Fire Chief or the Fire Marshal.



   (C)   Fire lanes shall be designated in the following manner:



      (1)   Fire lanes shall be properly marked with approved
reflective type signs;



      (2)   Signs shall be a minimum of one foot wide and one and
one-half foot tall and shall contain the words “Fire Lane – No Parking;”



      (3)   Letters shall be red in color against a white background
and shall be not less than two inches in height;



      (4)   Signs shall be mounted on both sides of a pole or
supporting structure, set back from the curb or roadway a minimum of one foot
but not more than four feet. Unless conditions warrant otherwise, signs are
to be positioned perpendicular to the roadway so as to be visible from both
directions of the driving surface;



      (5)   The bottom of the signs shall be a minimum of five feet
above the finished grade, at the base of the sign support and shall not
exceed seven feet above the finished grade from the bottom of the sign;



      (6)   Signs are to be posted at each end of the fire lane with
intermediate signs posted so as not to exceed 75 feet between signs;



      (7)   Curbs along the fire lane shall be pained either red or
yellow;



      (8)   Where fire lane lengths exceed 100 feet, the wording
“Fire Lane” shall be posted on the driving surface, no further than 50
feet from either end, and along the lane so as not to exceed 100 feet between
such posting. The lettering shall be either red or yellow letters that are a
minimum of 12 inches in height, with the principal strokes of the letter not
less than three inches.



   (D)   All fire lanes shall be approved by the Fire Chief or the Fire
Marshal, pursuant to these regulations, and thereafter shall be maintained by
the property owner. Designated fire lanes, or roads deemed necessary for Fire
Department access, shall be maintained free from unnecessary obstructions at
all times and are subject to frequent inspections and enforcement by the
Collierville Police and Fire Departments. Any removal of obstructing material
shall be at the owner’s expense.



   (E)   The disregard or disobedience of the instruction of signs
placed in accordance with the provisions of this section by the driver of a
vehicle shall be deemed prima facie evidence of violation of the law. The
parking of an unattended vehicle in a fire lane, other than authorized
emergency vehicles or commercial couriers involved in the immediate pick-up
or delivery of parcels, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $20.



(`83 Code, § 7-208)  (Ord. 99-12, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed
11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 2-13-12)



§ 91.23  FIRE HYDRANT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Fire hydrants shall be provided for the protection of
buildings or portions of buildings constructed within the corporate limits of
the Town of Collierville. Hydrants shall be installed per the requirements of
NFPA 24, Town of Collierville Engineering and Public Utilities Standards.
These standards are in addition to and generally consistent with the
technical regulations of the subdivision development standards of the Town of
Collierville.



   (B)   These standards shall apply to all residential, commercial and
industrial areas located within the Town of Collierville or its annexation
reserve area provided water service by the Town of Collierville.



      (1)   For any new development of residential, commercial or
industrial zoning located within the Town of Collierville or its annexation
reserve area, the project developer shall be responsible for the design,
acquisition and placement of on-site fire hydrants adequate to serve that
development. This shall include replacement of any existing hydrants and
appurtenances not in conformance with current standards. (ON-SITE shall be
defined to include public rights-of-way within or adjacent to the
development).



      (2)   The complete plans and specifications shall be
consistent with local government standards and specifications and shall be
reviewed by the Town of Collierville Engineering Department, Public Utilities
Department and Fire Department.



      (3)   For any redevelopment of existing residential,
commercial or industrial zoning, requirements of on-site fire hydrants
outlined in division (B)(1) above shall apply.



      (4)   For any new development of residential, commercial or
industrial zoning located within the Town of Collierville or its annexation
reserve area, the project developer shall be responsible for off-site fire
hydrants, if required to properly and adequately serve and protect the
development. This shall include the replacement of any existing hydrants and
appurtenances not in conformance with current standards.



      (5)   No person shall place or keep any fence, growth, trash
or other material within three feet in all directions of any fire hydrant
that would prevent such hydrant from being immediately accessible or in any
other manner hinder the Fire Department from gaining immediate access to the
fire hydrant.



      (6)   Generally, fire hydrants shall have a three-foot clear
radius around the hydrant.



      (7)   Fire hydrant placement or hose lay shall be measured
along roadways as the fire apparatus would travel to lay hose. Hose lay
measurements shall not be measured in a straight line, circular, over
obstacles or through buildings.



      (8)   Measurement shall be from the fire hydrant to the
furthermost point of the building (subject to egress point of the proposed
building).



      (9)   The minimum number of fire hydrants available shall be
measured and installed as follows:



         (a)   Commercial buildings:  400 feet on center;



         (b)   Industrial buildings:  400 feet on center;



         (c)   Multi family:  400 feet on center;



         (d)   Residential:  500 feet on center.



      (10)   Fire hydrants located in parking areas of complexes
shall be protected by barriers that will prevent physical damage from vehicle
traffic.



      (11)   Fire hydrants shall be located within three feet of the
curb line of fire lanes, streets or private streets when installed along such
access ways.



      (12)   For average conditions, fire hydrants shall be placed
at least 40 feet from any building, unless approved otherwise by the Fire
Marshal.



      (13)   Fire hydrants shall be properly installed and meet all
requirements of the Town of Collierville Engineering Department, Public
Utilities and NFPA 24.



      (14)   Private fire protection lines shall be installed per
NFPA 24 and plans and inspections shall be made by the Fire Department.



      (15)   Fire hydrants shall be supplied by not less than an
eight-inch main installed on a looped system or not less than a ten-inch main
if the system is not looped or the fire hydrant is on a dead-end main
exceeding 300 feet but not less than 600 feet.



      (16)   Dead-end mains 600 feet or greater shall require a
minimum ten-inch main and hydraulic calculations shall be provided to
determine if pipe needs to be increased even larger.



      (17)   All public fire hydrants installed within the Town of
Collierville or its annexation reserve area providing water shall be silver
in color.



      (18)   Private fire hydrants in private developments within
the Town of Collierville or the Town of Collierville annexation reserve area
shall be red in color. Any variation in color for private hydrants shall be
approved by the Fire Marshal.



      (19)   Private fire hydrants within the Town of Collierville
or the Town of Collierville annexation area shall be inspected by the owner
annually and proper records and documentation shall be maintained by the
owner and made available for inspection at the request of the Fire Marshal
and/or other personnel acting as a designee of the Fire Marshal.



(`83 Code, § 7-209)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12)



§ 91.24  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS, SERVICE AND USER FEES.



   On all buildings or structures required to obtain a permit, a fee for
each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in
accordance with the schedule established by the governing authority and
adopted by resolution.



(`83 Code, § 7-210)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12)



§ 91.25  FALSE EMERGENCY ALARMS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FALSE EMERGENCY ALARMS.  Any signal actuated by an emergency
alarm to which public safety personnel respond that is not the result of fire
or other actual emergencies and/or not caused by a violent act of nature.



      OWNER and/or OPERATOR. A person or persons who reside in or
operates a business in the premises to which the emergency alarm is
connected, including: owners; lessees; tenants; occupants; and persons having
charge or control of any premises or any part of any premises, and employees
and agents of all of the foregoing.



      PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL. The Town of Collierville (i) Police
Department, (ii) Fire Department, (iii) emergency management services, or
(iv) any other Town personnel who respond to calls for emergency assistance
prompted by an alarm system.



   (B)   Reliability of an emergency alarm system is of prime
importance.  The provision of early warning of fire and of illegal activity
accompanied by notification of appropriate authorities is a key element of an
alarm protection system.



   (C)   Certain owners and/or operators shall be required to install
and maintain alarm systems pursuant to the ordinances of the Town.  Other
owners and/or operators may elect to install and maintain alarm systems. 
All alarm systems, whether mandatory or not, must comply with the ordinances
of the Town and this section applies to all of same.



   (D)   The occurrence of false emergency alarms transmitted to public
safety personnel shall constitute a violation of this subchapter and shall
result in the owner and/or operator being subject to a penalty in accordance
with the following for false emergency alarms occurring during any
consecutive 12-month period to be calculated from the date of the first false
emergency alarm during such period:



      (1)   First false emergency alarm:  Notification to the owner
or operator;



      (2)   Second false emergency alarm:  Warning letter to the
owner or operator and a copy of the Town’s false alarm ordinance;



      (3)   Three or more false emergency alarms:  A fine of $25 on
the owner or operator for each such false emergency alarm.



   (E)   The party responsible for penalties which become due hereunder
(a) in the case of commercial establishments, shall be the owner and/or
operator, and (b) in the case of residences, shall be the record owner(s)
unless the property is leased, in which event the lessee(s) shall be the
responsible party.  The Town shall send notice and a summons to the
appropriate party by certified mail, return receipt requested.  The owner or
operator shall be required to pay any penalty within 30 days of service of
the notice thereof or shall have the opportunity to appear in court. 
Failure to pay will be a violation of this subchapter and the Town may
proceed to cite the offending party for such violations.



(`83 Code, § 7-211)  (Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 2004-11,
passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 2007- 13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed
2-13-12)



§ 91.26  KEY BOXES.



   (A)   The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or their designee shall have the
authority to require a key box to be installed in an accessible location
where access to or within a structure or area is difficult because of
security. The key box shall be of a type approved by the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal or their designee. The key box shall contain the keys necessary to
gain access as required by the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or their designee.
The owner or operator shall immediately notify the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal
or his or her designee and provide new keys when a lock is changed or
re-keyed.



   (B)   Key boxes shall be installed within five feet of the main
entrance of the building or structure required to have a key box. Key boxes
shall be mounted not higher than five feet above the finished grade.



   (C)   Key boxes shall be installed within five feet of all exterior
doors providing access to fire protection equipment.



(`83 Code, § 7-212)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12)



§ 91.27  GATE OVERRIDE.



   (A)   Any building or structure equipped with a security gate for
the purpose of preventing unwanted traffic into areas shall be provided with
a Fire Department override feature. This feature shall be in compliance with
new Section 503.6 Security Gates as listed in amendments as exhibit # 16.



   (B)   As a back-up system, the access shall be controlled either by
inserting the Fire Department key and turning or a box equipped with Fire
Department approved padlock that is unlocked and a lever pulled to activate
the gate.



   (C)   There shall not be any siren operated devices placed on gates
for the purpose of avoiding divisions (A) or (B) of this section.



   (D)   Gate width shall be in accordance with Chapter 5 and Appendix
D of the International Fire Code.



(`83 Code, § 7-213)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12)



§ 91.28  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this subchapter or the International Fire Code adopted, fail to comply
herewith, violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or build
in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted
and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and
from which no appeal has been taken or fail to comply with such an order of
competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein. The  application of a
penalty under the general penalty clause for the Town Code shall not be held
to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. The individual,
person or persons, corporation(s), company, LLC; violating an order; may also
be responsible for all reimbursement of town equipment, special equipment, 
manpower, technical assistance, and the like; encumbered to remedy or rectify
the violation.



(`83 Code, § 7-214)  (Ord. 99-12, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed
11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 2-13-12; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed
4-28-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



FIREWORKS



§ 91.40  UNLAWFUL PRACTICES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or
offer for sale any type of fireworks (as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. §
68-104-108) or toy cannons within the corporation except sparklers, toy
pistols or caps or like fireworks that can be fired or used within a room. 
It shall be unlawful to fire or light any fireworks upon the streets of the
corporation or within the open lots near any business, house or residence
within the corporation.



   (A)   All outside public fireworks displays shall be permitted
through the State of Tennessee Fire Marshal’s Office as defined in Tenn.
Code Ann. § 68-104.



   (B)   All indoor and outdoor fireworks displays shall also obtain a
permit from the Collierville Fire Marshal’s office.



(`83 Code, §7-401)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.41  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to be in conflict with
the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 68-104-101 et seq. and the provisions
regarding fireworks shall be binding on the Town of Collierville.



(`83 Code, § 7-402)  (Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-01,
passed 2-13-12)



CHAPTER 92:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   Obstructing streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited



   92.02   Trees projecting overs streets regulated



   92.03   Trees obstructing view at intersection prohibited



   92.04   Projecting signs, awnings and the like restricted



   92.05   Banners and signs across streets and alleys or sidewalks



   92.06   Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys or sidewalks
prohibited



   92.07   Littering streets, alleys or sidewalks



   92.08   Obstruction of drainage ditches



   92.09   Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean



   92.10   Parades regulated



   92.11   Operation of trains at crossings regulated



   92.12   Animals and vehicles on sidewalks



   92.13   Washing or repairing vehicles on streets



   92.14   Fires on streets



   92.15   Playing games on streets



   92.16   Construction debris, dirt, vehicles and materials



   92.17   Department of Public Services



   92.18   Construction and maintenance of grade crossings on railroads



Excavations and Cuts



   92.30   Permit required



   92.31   Applications



   92.32   Fees



   92.33   Deposit or bond



   92.34   Manner of excavation, barricades and lights, temporary
sidewalks



   92.35   Restoration of streets



   92.36   Insurance



   92.37   Time limits



   92.38   Supervision



   92.39   Driveway curb cuts



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  OBSTRUCTING STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall use or occupy any portion of any public street, alley,
sidewalk or right-of-way for the purpose of storing, selling or exhibiting
any goods, wares, merchandise or materials. 



(`83 Code, § 12-201)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.02  TREES PROJECTING OVER STREETS REGULATED.



   It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to allow limbs
of trees on his or her property to project out over any street, alley or
sidewalk at a height of less than 14 feet.



(`83 Code, § 12-202)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.03  TREES OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to have or
maintain on his or her property any tree, hedge, bill board or other
obstruction which prevents persons driving vehicles on public streets or
alleys from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an
intersection. 



(`83 Code, § 12-203)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.04  PROJECTING SIGNS, AWNINGS AND THE LIKE RESTRICTED.



   Signs, awnings or other structures which project over any street or
other public way shall be erected subject to the requirements of the Building
Code.



(`83 Code, § 12-204)



Cross reference:



   Building regulations, see Chapter 150



§ 92.05  BANNERS AND SIGNS ACROSS STREETS AND ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or have placed any banner
or sign across any public street or alley except when expressly authorized by
the Board.



(`83 Code, § 12-205)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.06  GATES OR DOORS OPENING OVER STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property to
allow any gate or door to swing upon or over any street, alley or sidewalk.



(`83 Code, § 12-206)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.07  LITTERING STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to litter, place, throw or allow to
fall on any street, alley or sidewalk any refuse, glass, tacks or other
objects or materials which are unsightly or which obstruct or tend to limit
or interfere with the use of such public ways and places for their intended
purposes.



(`83 Code, § 12-207)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.08  OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE DITCHES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the obstruction
of any drainage ditch in any public right-of-way. When any property owner or
tenant, after notice that he or she is violating this section, fails to
install a culvert or take other appropriate action to keep a drainage ditch
on his or her property open and unobstructed, the Town may take such action
and assess the costs thereof to the property owner and/or tenant. 



(`83 Code, § 12-208)  (Ord. passed 2-5-60)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.09  ABUTTING OCCUPANTS TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN.



   The occupants of property abutting on a sidewalk are required to keep
the sidewalk clean. Also, immediately after a snow or sleet, such occupants
are required to remove all accumulated snow and ice from the abutting
sidewalk. 



(`83 Code, § 12-209)



§ 92.10  PARADES REGULATED.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      APPLICANT.  A person who has filed a written application for a
parade permit.



      CHIEF OF POLICE.  The chief of police for the Town or his or her
designated agent.



      PARADE.  The assembly of three or more persons whose gathering
is for the common design and purpose of traveling or marching in procession
from one location to any other location to express feelings and beliefs on
current political, religious, or social issues, and/or races or walks
involving ten or more persons.



      PARADE PERMIT.  Written approval from the chief of police for a
parade or procession.



      PERMITTEE.  The person to whom a parade permit is granted
pursuant to this subchapter.



      SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street intended for the use of
pedestrians that is located between the curb lines, or lateral lines of a
roadway, and the adjacent property lines.



      STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained, when any part is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.



   (B)   Permit required; exceptions.



      (1)   A person commits an offense if he engages in,
participates in, aids, or commences a pedestrian parade or vehicular parade,
or a combination of both, upon the streets of the Town without making written
application for and receiving a parade permit from the chief of police.



      (2)   (a)   Application for a parade permit for a parade of
more than 25 persons or more than three motor vehicles shall be made not less
than 72 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, prior to the
date and time of the commencement of the parade.  Failure to file an
application 72 hours in advance will not result in automatic denial of the
permit, provided that the applicant shows reasonable grounds why the
application could not be filed 72 hours in advance.



         (b)   Application for a parade permit for a parade of 25
persons or less and three motor vehicles or less shall be made not less than
48 hours prior to the time of the commencement of the parade.



      (3)   No parade permit shall be required under this subchapter
for the following:



         (a)   The armed forces of the United States of America,
the military forces of the state, and the forces of the police and fire
departments acting within the scope of their duties.



         (b)   A funeral procession proceeding by vehicle under
the most reasonable route from a funeral home, church, or residence of a
deceased to the place of service or place of interment.



         (c)   A peaceful demonstration at a fixed location which
is not a street.



         (d)   A sidewalk procession which observes and complies
with traffic regulations and traffic control devices, using that portion of a
sidewalk nearest the street, but at no time using more than one- half of the
sidewalk.



   (C)   Application for parade permit; fee.



      (1)   The application for a parade permit shall contain the
following information and be signed by the applicant and sworn to before an
officer authorized to administer oaths:



         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant and of any other person, organization, firm, or corporation on
whose behalf the application is made.



         (b)   The date and time of day requested for the parade.



         (c)   The parade’s commencement time, the specific
route to be traveled, and the starting and termination points.



         (d)   The estimated number of persons to participate in
the parade and the estimated number of animals that will be used.



         (e)   The estimated number, if any, of animals and
riders, animal-drawn vehicles, floats, motor vehicles, motorized displays,
and marching units or organizations such as bands, color guards, and drill
teams.



      (2)   An application for a parade permit must be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application fee of $25.  The chief of police may waive
the application fee if he finds, in response to an affidavit by the
applicant, that the applicant is unable to pay the application fee because of
indigence.



   (D)   Issuance, denial, and revocation of parade permit.



      (1)   Time requirement.  Upon receipt of an application for a
parade permit, the chief of police shall furnish to the applicant within
three days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, appropriate
approval or denial of the permit.



      (2)   Alternate route.  Should the application for a parade
permit reveal that the parade route requested will interfere with the orderly
flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the chief of police shall have
authority to establish a reasonable alternate route and regulate the width of
the parade.



      (3)   Denial.  The chief of police shall deny a parade permit
when the parade for which the permit is requested would:



         (a)   Begin during or within two hours after the end of
a parade for which a permit has been granted and follow a route that passes
within one-half mile of any point of the route of the parade for which a
permit has been granted; or



         (b)   Unreasonably disrupt the orderly flow of traffic,
and no reasonable means of rerouting traffic or otherwise meeting traffic
needs is available.



      (4)   Revocation.  The chief of police shall revoke a parade
permit if:



         (a)   The parade fails to begin within 30 minutes of the
appointed time of commencement; or



         (b)   The information contained in the application for a
parade permit is found to be false in any material detail.



   (E)   Appeal of denial or revocation of parade permit.  If the
chief of police denies or revokes a parade permit, this action shall be final
unless the applicant or permittee shall, within two days after the receipt of
notice of the denial or revocation, file with the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
a written appeal.  The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall, within 48 hours
after the appeal is filed, consider all the evidence in support of or against
the action appealed and render a decision either sustaining or reversing the
denial or revocation.  The decision of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall
be final.



(`83 Code, § 12-210)  (Ord. passed 7-7-66; Am. Ord. 2003-09, passed 4-14-03)



§ 92.11  OPERATION OF TRAINS AT CROSSINGS REGULATED.



   No person shall operate any railroad train across any street or alley
without giving a warning of its approach as required by state law; nor shall
he or she make such crossing at a speed in excess of 45 miles per hour. It
shall also be unlawful to stop a railroad train so as to block or obstruct
any street or alley for a period of more than five consecutive minutes.



(`83 Code, § 12-211)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.12  ANIMALS AND VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead or tie any animal or
ride, push, pull or place any vehicle across or upon any sidewalk in such
manner as to unreasonably interfere with or inconvenience pedestrians using
the sidewalk. It shall also be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow any
minor under his or her control to violate this section.



(`83 Code, § 12-212)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.13  WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLES ON STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful to wash or, except in an emergency, to repair or
attempt to repair a motor vehicle on any public street.



(`83 Code, § 12-213)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.14  FIRES ON STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, maintain or contribute to
any fire on any public street, sidewalk or alley.



(`83 Code, § 12-214)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.15  PLAYING GAMES ON STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball games or other types
of games upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the Town, when to do so
would endanger the lives of the participants or would interfere with
vehicular or pedestrian traffic on such public way. 



(`83 Code, § 12-215)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.16  CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS, DIRT, VEHICLES AND MATERIALS.



   No debris, dirt, construction vehicles or construction material shall
remain on public rights-of-way for more than 24 hours, and further, that no
debris, dirt or construction materials or scraps shall be allowed to
accumulate on the construction site for more than two weeks. In the event a
contractor is unable to remedy a specific problem as may be cited within five
working days, the Town shall notify in writing the contractor in advance as
to the measures it will take to remedy the problem. When the measures have
been accomplished, the Town shall invoice the contractor for all expenses
incurred as necessary.



(`83 Code, § 12-216)



§ 92.17  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES.



   (A)   There is created a department known as the “Town of
Collierville Public Services Department” which will be responsible for
providing maintenance of the Town’s street and drainage ways, sanitation
collection and disposal and such other duties as may be designated in
accordance with the provisions of the Town code and Directive of the Board.



   (B)   The Public Services Department shall be administered by a
Director of Public Services to be appointed by and to serve at the pleasure
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



(`83 Code, § 12-217) (Ord. 86-07, passed 4-28-86)



§ 92.18  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF GRADE CROSSINGS ON RAILROADS.



   There shall be  erected at all grade crossings on the line of any
railroad in the Town over which trains are operated electric signals,
crossing gates or flagman or some other warning approved by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen for the Town. The warning shall be provided and maintained
by the railroad without expense to the Town, and when warning devices are
used they shall be erected and maintained under the supervision of the Town
Engineer and Director of Public Services. 



(`83 Code, § 12-218)  (Ord. 99-07, passed 5-10-99)



EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS



§ 92.30  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or
others to make any excavation in any street, alley or public place without
having first obtained a permit as herein required and without complying with
the provisions of this subchapter. It shall also be unlawful to violate or
vary from the terms of any such permit; provided, however, any person
maintaining pipes, lines or other underground facilities in or under the
surface of any street may proceed with an opening without permit when
emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately and a permit
cannot reasonably and practically be obtained beforehand. The person shall
thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the
office of the Town Engineer is open for business and the permit shall be
retroactive to the day when work was begun.



(`83 Code, § 12-101)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.31  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Town Engineer or
such person as he or she may designate to receive such applications and shall
state thereon the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size
thereof, the purpose thereof, the person, firm, corporation, association or
others doing the actual excavating, the name of the person, firm,
corporation, association or others for whom the work is being done and shall
contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and
laws relating to the work to be done. The application shall be rejected or
approved by the Town Engineer within 24 hours of its filing.



(`83 Code, § 12-102)



§ 92.32  FEE.



   The fee for such permits shall be $2 for excavations which do not
exceed 25 square feet in area or tunnels not exceeding 25 feet in length; and
$.25 for each additional square foot in the case of excavations, or lineal
foot in the case of tunnels but not to exceed $100 for any permit.



(`83 Code, § 12-103)



§ 92.33  DEPOSIT OR BOND.



   (A)   No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant
therefore has deposited with the Town Engineer a cash deposit in the sum of
$25, if no pavement is involved, and $75 if the excavation is in a paved
area, to ensure the proper restoration of the ground and laying of the
pavement, if any, except that where the amount of the deposit is clearly
inadequate to cover the cost of restoration, the request for excavation shall
be forwarded to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, who shall determine the
amount of the bond at their next scheduled meeting. From this deposit shall
be deducted the expense to the municipality of relaying the surface of the
ground or pavement and of making the refill if this is done by the
municipality or at its expense. The balance shall be returned to the
applicant without interest after the tunnel or excavation is completely
refilled and the surface or pavement is restored.



   (B)   In lieu of a deposit, the applicant may deposit with the Town
Engineer a surety bond in such form and amount as the Town Engineer shall
deem adequate to cover the costs to the municipality if the applicant fails
to make proper restoration.



(`83 Code, § 12-104)



§ 92.34  MANNER OF EXCAVATION, BARRICADES AND LIGHTS, TEMPORARY SIDEWALKS.



   Any person, firm, corporation, association or others making any
excavation or tunnel shall do so according to the terms and conditions of the
application and permit authorizing the work to be done.  Sufficient and
proper barricades and lights shall be maintained to protect persons and
property from injury by or because of the excavation being made. If any
sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed and provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users.



(`83 Code, § 12-105)



§ 92.35  RESTORATION OF STREETS.



   Any person, firm, corporation, association or others making any
excavation or tunnel in or under any street, alley or public place in this
municipality shall restore the street, alley or public place in this
municipality, but shall be paid for by such person, firm, corporation,
association or others promptly upon the completion of the work for which the
excavation or tunnel was made.  In case of unreasonable delay in restoring
the street, alley or public place, the Town Administrator shall give notice
to the person, firm, corporation, association or others that unless the
excavation or tunnel is refilled properly within a specified reasonable
period of time, the municipality will do the work and charge the expense of
doing the same to such person, firm, corporation, association or others.  If
within the specified period of time the conditions of the above notice have
not been complied with, the work shall be done by the municipality with an
accurate account of the expense involved kept, and the total cost shall be
charged to the person, firm, corporation, association or others who have made
the excavation or tunnel.



(`83 Code, § 12-106)



§ 92.36  INSURANCE.



   In addition to making the deposit or giving the bond required to insure
that proper restoration is made, each person applying for an excavation
permit shall file a certificate of insurance indicating that he or she is
insured against claims for property damage as well as claims for personal
injury which may arise out of the performance of the work, whether such
performance be by himself or herself, his or her subcontractor or anyone
directly or indirectly employed by him or her. The insurance shall cover
collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by equipment on the street
and shall include protection against liability arising from completed
operations. The amount of insurance shall be prescribed by the Town Clerk in
accordance with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, that the
liability insurance for bodily injury shall not be less than $100,000 for
each person and $300,000 for each accident and for property damages not less
than $25,000 for any one accident and a $75,000 aggregate.



(`83 Code, § 12-107)



§ 92.37  TIME LIMITS.



   Each application for a permit shall state the length of time it is
estimated will elapse from the commencement of work until the restoration of
the surface of the ground or pavement or until the refill is made ready for
the pavement to be put on by the municipality if the municipality restores
such surface pavement. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this time
limitation unless permission for an extension of time is granted by the Town.



(`83 Code, § 12-108)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.38  SUPERVISION.



   The Town Administrator shall from time to time inspect or have
inspected all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public
street, alley or other public place in the municipality and see to the
enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter. Notice shall be given to
him or her at least ten hours before the work of refilling any such
excavation or tunnel commences.



(`83 Code, § 12-109)



§ 92.39  DRIVEWAY CURB CUTS.



   No one shall cut, build or maintain a driveway across a curb or
sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the Town Engineer. Such a
permit will not be issued when the contemplated driveway is to be so located
or constructed as to create an unreasonable hazard to pedestrian and/or
vehicular traffic. No driveway shall exceed 35 feet in width at its outer or
street edge and when two or more adjoining driveways are provided for the
same property a safety island of not less than ten feet in width at its outer
street edge shall be provided. Driveway aprons shall not extend out into the
street.



(`83 Code, § 12-110)



CHAPTER 93:  ABANDONED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES



Section



General Provisions



   93.01   Short title



   93.02   Definitions



   93.03   Presence of junked motor vehicles a public nuisance



   93.04   Exceptions



Notice; Removal



   93.20   Notice to remove



   93.21   Responsibility for removal



   93.22   Notice procedure



   93.23   Content of notice



   93.24   Request for hearing



   93.25   Procedure for hearing



   93.26   Removal of motor vehicle from property



   93.27   Notice of removal



   93.28   Disposition of vehicles



   93.29   Contents of public sale notice



   93.30   Public sale



   93.31   Redemption of impounded vehicles



   93.32   Liability of owner or occupant



   93.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Abandoned,
Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Motor Vehicle Ordinance.”



(`83 Code, § 9-901)



§ 93.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the Town of Collierville.



   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle as defined by this section
which does not have lawfully affixed thereto a valid license plate or plates
and/or the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, abandoned
or discarded.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designated to
travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to,
automobiles, buses, motor bikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks,
tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the Town which is privately
owned and which is not public property as defined in this section.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street or highway which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the
purposes of vehicular travel and shall also mean any other publicly owned
property or facility.



(`83 Code, § 9-902)  (Ord. 2001-17, passed 7-9-01)



§ 93.03  PRESENCE OF JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   The location or presence of any junked motor vehicle on a lot,
tract or parcel of land or portion thereof occupied or unoccupied, improved
or unimproved within the Town of Collierville, Tennessee shall be deemed a
public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person or other legal
entity to cause, maintain or permit such public nuisance by wrecking,
dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding a motor vehicle
or vehicles on the property of another or to suffer, permit or allow the same
to be placed, located, maintained or to exist upon real property belonging to
such party.



   (B)   However, this section shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Any junked motor vehicle in a completely enclosed
building;



      (2)   Any junked motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place
or depository maintained in an officially designated place and manner by the
Town of Collierville.



(`83 Code, § 9-903)



§ 93.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   Motor vehicles in operable condition and specifically adapted
for racing or operation on privately owned drag strips or raceways;



   (B)   Motor vehicles retained by the owner for bona fide antique
collection purposes rather than for salvage or transportation.



(`83 Code, § 9-918)



NOTICE; REMOVAL



§ 93.20  NOTICE TO REMOVE.



   Whenever it comes to the attention of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
that any nuisance as defined in § 93.03 exists in the Town of Collierville,
a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the
nuisance exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of
the property or his or her agent, notifying them of the existence of the
nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this chapter.



(`83 Code, § 9-904)



§ 93.21  RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL.



   Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the owner or
occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all
of them, shall be responsible for its removal.  In the event of removal and
disposition by the Town, the owner or occupant of the private property where
same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred.



(`83 Code, § 9-905)



§ 93.22  NOTICE PROCEDURE.



   The Chief of Police of the Town shall give notice of removal to the
owner or occupant of the private property where it is located, at least ten
days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice
when a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private
property on which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent
registered mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his or
her last known address.



(`83 Code, § 9-906)



§ 93.23  CONTENT OF NOTICE.



   The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time
specified in this chapter, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to
comply with the notice to remove, the Town or its designee shall undertake
such removal with the cost or removal to be levied against the owner or
occupant of the property.



(`83 Code, § 9-907)



§ 93.24  REQUEST FOR HEARING.



   The persons to whom the notices are directed or their duly authorized
agents may file a written request for hearing before the Town of Collierville
or its designee within the ten day period of compliance prescribed in §
93.22 for the purpose of defending the charges by the Town.



(`83 Code, § 9-908)



§ 93.25  PROCEDURE FOR HEARING.



   The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of
the request and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised
of the time and place of said hearing at least three days in advance
thereof.  At any such hearing, the Town and the persons whom the notices
have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party
deems necessary.



(`83 Code, § 9-909)



§ 93.26  REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLE FROM PROPERTY.



   If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within
the ten day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a
hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had and the existence of the violation
is affirmed by the Town of Collierville, or its designee, the Chief of Police
or his or her designee shall have the right to take possession of the junked
motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such person or persons to
enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the
provisions of this chapter.



(`83 Code, § 9-910)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.27  NOTICE OF REMOVAL.



   Within 48 hours of the removal of such vehicle, the Chief of Police
shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle or vehicles, if
known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which
the vehicle was removed that the vehicle or vehicles has been impounded and
stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the location of
where the vehicle or vehicles is stored and the costs incurred by the Town
for removal.



(`83 Code, § 9-911)



§ 93.28  DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES.



   Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of § 93.26, the Town
shall, after ten days, cause it to be appraised. If the vehicle is appraised
at $75 or less, the Chief of Police shall execute an affidavit so attesting
and describing the vehicle, including the license plate, if any, and stating
the location and appraised value of the vehicle. The Chief of Police, after
complying with the above, may summarily dispose of the vehicle and execute a
certificate of sale. If the vehicle is appraised over $75, the Chief of
Police shall give notice of public sale not less than seven days before the
date of the proposed sale in a newspaper of general circulation.



(`93 Code, § 9-912)



§ 93.29  CONTENTS OF PUBLIC SALE NOTICE.



   The notice of sale shall state:



   (A)   The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the
Town;



   (B)   A description of the vehicle, including make, model, license
number and any other information which will accurately identify the vehicle;



   (C)   The terms of the sale;



   (D)   The date, time and place of the sale.



(`83 Code, § 9-913)



§ 93.30  PUBLIC SALE.



   The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time
of payment of the purchase price, the Chief of Police shall execute a
certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which is to be given to the
purchaser and the copy thereof to be filed with the Town Clerk. Should the
sale for any reason be invalid, the Town’s liability shall be limited to
the return of the purchase price.



(`83 Code, § 9-914)



§ 93.31  REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.



   The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter
may redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale
or destruction thereof upon proof of ownership and payment of any fees
incurred in the expense of removal and/or preliminary sale advertising
expenses or storage of the vehicle.



(`83 Code, § 9-915)



§ 93.32  LIABILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT.



   Upon failure of the owner or occupant of property on which abandoned
vehicles have been removed by the Town to pay the unrecovered expenses
incurred by the Town in such removal, a lien shall be placed upon the
property for the amount of such expenses.



(`83 Code, § 9-916)



§ 93.99  PENALTY. 



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, § 9-917)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03)



CHAPTER 94:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Running at large prohibited



   94.02   Allowing to trespass prohibited



   94.03   Requirements for keeping horses, cows, hogs and the like



   94.04   Fowl running at large; requirements for keeping



   94.05   Cruelty to animals



   94.06   Abandoning of animals



   94.07   Fowl making loud noises



   94.08   Inspections



Dogs



   94.20   Rabies vaccination required



   94.21   Dogs to wear tags



   94.22   Running at large prohibited



   94.23   Dogs in public to be on leash



   94.24   Vicious dogs to be securely restrained



   94.25   Noisy dogs prohibited



   94.26   Impoundment, redemption, and disposition of animals



   94.27   Number of dogs permitted



   94.28   Fees



   94.29   Defecation by dogs or cats



   94.30   Dogs in parks and athletic facilities



   94.31   Failure to maintain control of dog



Vicious Dogs



   94.40   Definitions



   94.41   Confinement



   94.42   Leash and muzzle



   94.43   Signs



   94.44   Dog fighting



   94.45   Insurance



   94.46   Canine Corps



Duties of Animal Control Officers



   94.60   Dogs that attack and/or bite humans



   94.61   Injury investigation



   94.62   Dog declared dangerous/vicious



   94.63   Surrender of dog



   94.64   Unowned or abandoned dog



   94.65   Exemptions



   94.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   No person who owns, harbors, keeps or maintains any horse, cow or other
domestic animal or pet shall permit the same to wander on the public streets,
nor shall such animals be secured, except temporarily, on the public streets
or parkways of the Town and any such horse, cow and other animal or pet found
to be wandering at large or tied or secured on the public streets or parkways
of the Town, except temporarily, shall be impounded.



(`83 Code, § 3-101)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.02  ALLOWING TO TRESPASS PROHIBITED.



   No person while in control of any horse, cow or other domestic animal,
whether by leash or by mere physical presence with such animal, shall allow
such animal to trespass upon the property of another.



(`83 Code, § 3-102)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  REQUIREMENTS FOR KEEPING HORSES, COWS, HOGS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain one or
more horses, mules, cows or hogs in any residential section of the Town
within 300 feet of any residence and without the consent of the owner or
occupant of such residence and permission from the Board.



   (B)   Places where any such animals are kept shall be kept clean and
dry. All manure shall be picked  up daily and kept in a bin or receptacle
that will exclude flies and odors. The bin shall be located at a point most
remote from the dwelling or other structure owned or occupied by other than
the owner of the above premises and shall likewise be placed at a point most
remote on the premises from any street. It shall be unlawful for any person
to hold such manure on any premises in bins after the same shall have become
a nuisance or unsanitary; provided, that any person may use such manure on
their premises for the purpose of enriching their own ground or for any other
use to which manure can properly be put when the same is not offensive or
unsanitary.



(`83 Code, § 3-103)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  FOWL RUNNING AT LARGE; REQUIREMENTS FOR KEEPING.



   Chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese and guinea fowl running at large within
the Town are declared to be nuisances. No person shall be allowed to keep any
such fowl within the Town unless the same are securely fenced and confined to
the premises of the owner. Coops and runways shall be kept clean and free
from offensive odors.



(`83 Code, § 3-104)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of cruelty to animals
by excessive beating, excessive and unnecessary hard driving, by failure to
supply sufficient food and water or of any other cruelty.



(`83 Code, § 3-105)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.06  ABANDONING OF ANIMALS.



   No person shall abandon any dog, cat or other animal within the Town.



(`83 Code, § 3-106)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.07  FOWL MAKING LOUD NOISES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep or possess any
chickens, ducks, geese, fowl or other birds which by loud and frequent
quacking, crowing or cackling or by any other noise disturb the peace or
cause annoyance to any of the citizens of the corporation. 



(`83 Code, § 3-107)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.08  INSPECTIONS.



   For the purpose of making inspections to assure that owners are in
compliance with owner requirements listed in § 94.03, the health officer, or
his or her authorized representative, shall be authorized to enter, at any
reasonable time, any premises. 



(`83 Code, § 3-108)  (Ord. 99-09, passed 5-10-99)



DOGS



§ 94.20  RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.



   Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog or
cat over five months of age within the Town, but not operating a kennel or
animal shelter, must obtain a rabies vaccination in accordance with
applicable provisions of the Tennessee Anti-Rabies Law (Tenn. Code Ann. §§
68-8-101 to 68-8-114) and appropriate registration. Vaccination against
rabies shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian only. Registration
shall be completed by the administering veterinarian and will be issued
annually only after payment of a licensing fee, which fee will be determined
by the Town Board (or its designated agent) and which fee may be different
for spayed or neutered animals. 



(`83 Code, § 3-201)  (Ord. 94-30, passed 1-9-95)



§ 94.21  DOGS TO WEAR TAGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any dog
which does not wear a tag evidencing the vaccination and registration
required by § 94.20.



(`83 Code, § 3-202)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.22  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to permit any dog owned
by him or her or under his or her control to run at large within the
corporate limits.



(`83 Code, § 3-203)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.23  DOGS IN PUBLIC TO BE ON LEASH.



   It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog permitted to be in any
public place to see that such dog is on a leash in the hands of a person
capable of managing such dog so that it will not bite or injure any person or
animal or damage any property.



(`83 Code, § 3-204) 



§ 94.24  VICIOUS DOGS TO BE SECURELY RESTRAINED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep any dog known to be
vicious or dangerous unless such dog is so confined and/or otherwise securely
restrained as to provide reasonable protection of other animals or persons.



(`83 Code, § 3-205)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.25  NOISY DOGS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner to keep, harbor or permit to
remain on or about the premises of such owner any noisy dog.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, a noisy dog is one that, by
continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causes
unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to any neighbor of normal
sensitivity or otherwise disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood.



   (C)   Evidence of violation of this section includes, but is not
limited to, the following:



      (1)   Videotapes, audio tapes, and/or written documentation
(bark logs) of nuisance dog noise; and/or



      (2)   Dates, times and duration of nuisance dog noise as
documented by an Animal Control Officer on the scene.



   (D)   Enforcement of this section shall be in accordance with §
94.99.



(`83 Code, § 3-206) (Am. Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-28-15)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.26  IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION, AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any designated animal services employee or law enforcement
officer of the Town of Collierville shall have the authority to impound any
animal found running at large or abandoned or which is otherwise permitted by
its owners to violate the  provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   All reasonable efforts will be used to locate and notify the
owner of any impounded animal.



   (C)   (1)   Any impounded animal that has a known owner or some
form of identification (i.e., microchip, rabies tag, ID tags, and the like)
shall be held for at least five working days at the Collierville Animal
Services to allow the owner to reclaim his/her animal. Any unlicensed animal,
lacking any form of identification, that is impounded shall be held for at
least three working days beginning with the date of seizure. If the impounded
animal species is one for which Collierville Animal Services is unable to
provide proper housing or environment, all reasonable efforts shall be made
to place such animal with a rescue group partner for the applicable hold
period. At the expiration of the applicable hold period the impounded animal
may be disposed of as follows:



         (a)   The animal may be assessed for adoptability and,
if deemed adoptable, made available for adoption after being properly
vaccinated and surgically spayed or neutered;



         (b)   The animal may be placed with an animal rescue
partner; or



         (c)    If the animal is deemed unadoptable, it will be
humanely euthanized.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prevent Collierville
Animal Services from humanely euthanizing any impounded animal which has not
been reclaimed or redeemed by its owner within the applicable hold period. 



   (D)   The Animal Services Director or Animal Services Shelter
Manager may, upon the advice of a licensed veterinarian, authorize euthanasia
of any impounded animal before completing its hold period if it is determined
that the animal is suffering from infectious or dangerous diseases, or is in
misery, or if the animal’s disposition poses a threat to public safety or
shelter staff members.



   (E)   An owner of an impounded animal shall be entitled to regain
possession of the animal upon compliance with the vaccination and licensing
provisions of this chapter and payment of any applicable fees duly
established by the Town of Collierville for impoundment, boarding,
vaccination, or other fees related to the animal’s impoundment. 



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 5-12-14)



Cross reference:



   Rabies vaccine required,  § 94.20



§ 94.27  NUMBER OF DOGS PERMITTED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor more
than three dogs over three months of age on his or her property or premises
at any one time, unless the person shall hold a valid license issued by the
office of the Shelby County Trustee and the office of the Collierville Town
Clerk to operate an animal kennel in Collierville. No such license shall be
issued by the Town Clerk for a kennel operation in any residential zone as
per the Collierville Zoning Code.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor more
than three cats over three months of age on his or her property or premises
at any one time.



   (C)   Enforcement of this section shall be in accordance with §
94.99.



(`83 Code, § 3-209) (Am. Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-28-15)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.28  FEES.



   (A)   A fee will be collected for the reclamation of lost pets or
the adoption of an animal residing at the shelter. This fee shall be in
accordance with the schedule as established by the governing authority by
resolution, adopted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (B)   During periods of unusual circumstances, special adoption
procedures may be declared by the Town Administrator and the Department
Director. 



(`83 Code, § 3-210)  (Ord. 99-09, passed 5-10-99)



§ 94.29  DEFECATION BY DOGS OR CATS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner or handler of any animal to allow
or permit such animal to defecate on any property, public or private, other
than the premises of the owner, unless such owner or handler immediately
removes and disposes of, in a sanitary manner, such waste.



   (B)   Persons owning pet dogs or service dogs, such as seeing eye
dogs, who are legally blind or confined to a wheelchair or otherwise
physically disabled so that they are incapable of disposing of feces left by
their animal, are exempt from this section.



   (C)   Enforcement of this section shall be in accordance with §
94.99.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 5-12-14)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.30  DOGS IN PARKS AND ATHLETIC FACILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to allow or
permit any dog owned by him or her or under his or her control to run at
large in any park or any public property or to enter any of the lakes, ponds,
fountains or streams therein, excluding any areas expressly demarcated as Off
Leash areas.



   (B)   No dog shall be permitted in any Town-owned athletic facility
except guide dogs and other service animals. 



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog permitted to be
in any public place to see that such dog is on a leash in the hands of a
person capable of man-aging such animal so that it will not bite or injure
any person or animal or damage any property.



   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner or custodian of
any dog to remove feces left by the dog within town parks. Enforcement of
this section shall be in accordance with § 94.99. This subsection shall not
apply to persons owning guide dogs and other service animals, such as seeing
eye dogs, who are legally blind or confined to a wheelchair or otherwise
physically disabled so that they are incapable of disposing of feces left by
their animal.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 5-12-14)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Cross reference:



   Running at large prohibited, § 94.22



   Dogs in public to be on leash, § 94.23



§ 94.31  FAILURE TO MAINTAIN CONTROL OF DOG.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or handler of any dog to
allow or permit such dog to go uncontrolled by the owner upon the premises of
another without the consent of the owner of the premises or other person
authorized to give consent, or go uncontrolled by the owner upon a highway,
public road, street, or any other place open to the public generally.



   (B)   It is not a defense to prosecution for violation of this
section that the dog owner exercised reasonable care in attempting to confine
or control the dog.



   (C)   It is an exception to the application of this section that:



      (1)   The dog was being used by law enforcement officials for
law enforcement work or purposes;



      (2)   The violation occurred while the dog was protecting the
dog’s owner or other innocent party from attack by the injured person or an
animal owned by the injured person;



      (3)   The violation occurred as a result of the injured person
disturbing, harassing, assaulting or otherwise provoking the dog.



      (D)   Enforcement of this section shall be in accordance with
§ 94.99.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-28-15)  Penalty, see § 94.99



VICIOUS DOGS



§ 94.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department
possessing or harboring or having the care or custody of a dog.



   VICIOUS DOG. This term means:



      (1)   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition
to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to or otherwise threaten the safety of
human beings or domestic animals;



      (2)   Any dog which because of its size, physical nature or
vicious propensity is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to
humans and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it
were not kept in the manner required by this chapter;



      (3)   Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or
has attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal;



      (4)   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the
purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting;



      (5)   A VICIOUS DOG is unconfined if the dog is not securely
confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or
structure upon the premises of the owner of the dog. The pen or structure
must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If the pen or
structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into
the ground no less than two feet. All such pens or structures must be
adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



(`83 Code, § 3-301)



§ 94.41  CONFINEMENT.



   (A)   Leash and muzzle. No person shall permit a dangerous/vicious
dog to go outside its kennel or pen unless such dangerous/vicious dog is
outfitted with a choke or pinch collar and securely leashed with a
substantial chain or leash no longer than four feet in length.  No person
shall permit a dangerous/vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other
type of leash outside of its kennel or pen unless a competent person is in
physical control of the leash.  Such dangerous/vicious dogs may not be
leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc.  In
addition, all dangerous/vicious dogs on a leash outside the dog's kennel must
be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dangerous/vicious
dog from biting persons or other animals.  Such muzzle should not cause
injury to any dog or interfere with its vision or breathing, but shall
prevent it from biting any person.



   (B)   Confinement outdoors.  All dangerous/vicious dogs shall be
securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel,
except when leashed and muzzled as provided above.  Such pen, kennel or
structure shall be at least 20 feet from any street or sidewalk, 10 feet from
any property line and must have secure sides and a secure top to the sides. 
Such structures must be locked with a key or combination lock when any
dangerous/vicious dog(s) are within the structure.  Such structure must have
a secure concrete bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the
sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two  feet. 
All structures erected to house dangerous/vicious dogs must be a minimum of
six feet by ten feet enclosure and comply with all zoning and building
regulations of the Town of Collierville.  All such structures must be
adequately ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and must be
inspected and approved by the local Animal Care Services Supervisor or his or
her designee.



   (C)   Confinement indoors.  No dangerous/vicious dog may be kept on
a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the
dangerous animal to exit such building of its own volition. In addition, no
such dangerous/vicious dog may be kept in a house or structure when any
unbarred window is open or when any screen window or screen door is the only
obstacle preventing the dangerous/vicious dog from exiting the structure.



(`83 Code, § 3-302)  (Ord. 2003-17, passed 9-8-03)



§ 94.42  LEASH AND MUZZLE.



   The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go
beyond the premises of the owner unless the dog is securely muzzled and
restrained by a chain or leash and under the physical restraint of a person.
The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting
any human or animal.



(`83 Code, § 3-303)



§ 94.43  SIGNS.



   The owner of a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place on his or
her premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a
vicious dog on the premises.



(`83 Code, § 3-304)



§ 94.44  DOG FIGHTING.



   No person, firm, corporation, organization or department shall possess
or harbor or maintain care or custody of any dog for the purpose of dog
fighting or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of
causing and encouraging the dog to attack human beings or domestic animals.



(`83 Code, § 3-305)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.45  INSURANCE.



   Owners of dogs must, within 60 days after the dog has been deemed to be
vicious, provide proof to the Town Clerk of public liability insurance in the
amount of at least $25,000, insuring the owner for any personal injuries
inflicted by his or her vicious dog.



(`83 Code, § 3-306)



§ 94.46  CANINE CORPS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to the Canine Corps of a local,
state or federal law enforcement agency or a private security agency licensed
in this state.



(`83 Code, § 3-308)



DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS



§ 94.60  DOGS THAT ATTACK AND/OR BITE HUMANS.



   (A)   The owner of any dog that aggressively attacks and causes
severe injury to, or death of, any human being, shall be cited for failing to
properly control the dog and shall be subject to a fine in the amount
established through resolution by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen; for the
purposes of this subchapter, the term OWNER shall be defined as any person in
charge of maintaining an animal, or any person who feeds, shelters or harbors
an animal or permits it to remain on such person's property, or, if the
animal is owned by a person under the age of 18, that person's parent or
guardian.



   (B)   In addition, the dog shall be confiscated by the Town and the
procedures of this subchapter relating to the classification of a dog as a
dangerous/vicious dog shall be implemented.



   (C)   In the event of multiple incidents or violations of this
subchapter, a Court may declare the dangerous/vicious dog to be a public
nuisance and order it euthanized.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 9-8-03)



§ 94.61  INJURY INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   An Animal Control Officer shall investigate incidents or
complaints involving dogs that may be dangerous/vicious.  For the purposes
of this subchapter, a dangerous/vicious dog is one that:



      (1)   Has aggressively bitten, attacked, or has otherwise
inflicted injury on a human being;



      (2)   Has severely injured or killed a human being; or



      (3)   Has been used primarily, or in part, for the purpose of
dog fighting.



   (B)   If the Animal Control Officer makes an initial determination
that a dog should be classified as dangerous/vicious, then:



      (1)   The Animal Control Officer shall take possession of the
dog and transport it to the Collierville Animal Shelter where it shall be
held until a final determination by a Court;



      (2)   The Animal Control Officer shall issue a mandatory
ordinance summons summoning the owner or custodian of the dog to the Town of
Collierville Municipal Court and giving notice of the code section(s)
violated; and



      (3)   The Town shall immediately provide written notification
by registered or certified mail to the owner, authorized handler, or
custodian of the dog of the initial determination that the dog has been
declared dangerous/vicious.  The dog shall remain at the Collierville Animal
Shelter (or authorized veterinary clinic) until judicial ruling is made.



   (C)   Any owner of a dog involved in any bite incident that causes a
physical injury to a human that results in broken bones, punctures, or
laceration wounds shall surrender that animal to the Town of Collierville for
observation for rabies and safe keeping for a period of not less than 10 days
or until final determination of the Court.



   (D)   The decision of the Court regarding whether the dog is
dangerous/vicious shall be final, and may include an order to euthanize the
dog.  While the dog is in the custody of the Town, and at 30-day intervals,
the owner must pay accumulated fees at the then current rate.  Failure to
promptly pay these fees may result in euthanization of the animal.  However,
at the owner's request and expense, the dog may be kept at a licensed
veterinary clinic upon:



      (1)   Written statement to the Animal Care Services Supervisor
that the dog will be boarded in a private, licensed veterinary clinic; and



      (2)   The posting of a bond with the Town of Collierville, in
an amount to be established by resolution by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen,
to insure compliance pending any and all court appearances.



   (E)   A dog shall not be classified as dangerous/vicious if:



      (1)   The person who sustained the threat, injury, or damage
was at the time of the incident committing a crime; or



      (2)   While lawfully on the property, the person who sustained
the threat, injury or damage was tormenting, abusing, provoking, or
assaulting the dog or its owner or handler.



   (F)   Failure of an owner to respond to a summons issued pursuant to
this section shall result in the animal being automatically declared an
abandoned dangerous/vicious dog pursuant to § 94.64 and forfeiture of the
bond established in this section.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 9-8-03)



§ 94.62  DOG DECLARED DANGEROUS/VICIOUS.



   (A)   Within 10 days after a dog has been declared by the Court as
dangerous/vicious, the owner of the dog must obtain a receipt evidencing
registration and a tag for the dog from the Town of Collierville, and the
evidence of registration shall be renewed annually.  The Town, or its
designee, is authorized to issue such evidence of registration, and renewals
thereof, only to persons who are at least 18 years of age and who present
sufficient evidence of:



      (1)   A current evidence of rabies vaccination for the dog;



      (2)   A proper enclosure to confine a dangerous/vicious dog if
kept outside and the posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning
sign at all entry points which informs both children and adults of a
dangerous/vicious dog on the property or premises which reads: "Warning:
Dangerous/Vicious Dog on Premises."  The Town may inspect such enclosures
prior to the issuance of certificate of registration;



      (3)   A method of permanently identifying the dog, such as a
tattoo on the inside thigh, electronic implantation, or such other method
acceptable to the Town's Animal Care Services Supervisor;



      (4)   The owner must purchase a "dangerous/vicious dog" tag
for an amount established through resolution by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen from the Town of Collierville which must be worn by the dog at all
times;



      (5)   The owner of said dangerous/vicious dog must provide
proof to the Town of Collierville of public liability insurance or a bond, in
an amount to be established by resolution by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen,
insuring the owner of the dog for any damages, whether arising from personal
injury or otherwise, which may be caused by the dangerous/vicious dog.  In
the event said liability insurance or bond is canceled, lapses, or for any
other reason becomes unenforceable, said owner must give written notice
within five days of receiving first notice of termination of coverage to the
Animal Care Services Supervisor, and shall be in violation of the provisions
of this subchapter and chapter; and



      (6)   The annual fee for the issuance of certificate of
registration and dangerous/vicious dog tag shall be imposed in the amount
established annually through resolution by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
and must be paid within 30 days after a dog has been classified by the Court
as dangerous/vicious.  Failure to pay this fee on the first offense or
annually renew this registration shall constitute violation of this
subchapter.  For purposes of administering the provisions of this section,
the fees provided herein shall be paid to the Town of Collierville Public
Services Department – Animal Care Division, 603 East South Street,
Collierville, Tennessee, 38017.



   (B)   The owner shall immediately notify the Animal Care Services
Supervisor of the Collierville Animal Shelter when a dog that has been
declared as dangerous/vicious:



      (1)   Is running at large or unconfined;



      (2)   Has bitten a human being;



      (3)   Is sold, given away, or dies;



      (4)   Is moved to another address; or



      (5)   Has attacked another animal.



   (C)   Prior to a dangerous/vicious dog being sold or given away, the
owner shall provide the name, address and telephone number of the new owner
to the Collierville Animal Care Services Supervisor.  Any new owner residing
in the Town of Collierville must comply with all the requirements of this
subchapter and chapter prior to the transfer of custody.



   (D)   It is unlawful for the owner of a dangerous/vicious dog to
permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and
restrained by a substantial chain or leash as required by § 94.41, and under
the control of a competent person.  For the purposes of this subchapter, a
competent person is defined as any person 18 years of age or older who is
able to comprehend and understand the nature of his or her responsibility,
and has sufficient ability, mentally and physically, to handle any particular
animal of which he or she may take charge.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 9-8-03)



§ 94.63  SURRENDER OF DOG.



   Should the owner choose to relinquish ownership rights to the dog, he
or she must sign a statement acknowledging that the dog may be destroyed and,
if so, the remains submitted to the state laboratory for testing for the
rabies virus.  In addition, the owner shall be required to pay the current
boarding costs and any other associated fees.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 9-8-03)



§ 94.64  UNOWNED OR ABANDONED DOG.



   Any unowned or abandoned dog deemed to be dangerous/vicious shall not
be made available for adoption.  Any stray, unowned, or apparently abandoned
dog that bites a human being shall be held for ten days.  At the end of the
ten-day holding period, the dog may be destroyed in an expeditious and humane
manner.  The state laboratory for rabies shall test any dog determined to
have been involved in a bite incident, and held for less than ten days as a
result of death.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 9-8-03)



§ 94.65  EXEMPTIONS.



   Hunting dogs are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter when
engaged in any legal hunt and under the proper control of their owners or
custodians.  However, such dogs at all other times in all other acts shall
be subject to this subchapter.  This subchapter and chapter does not apply
to dogs used by law enforcement officials for law enforcement work or
purposes.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 9-8-03)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal
entity violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more
than $50 or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater,
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day of violation.



   (B)   Each violation of §§ 94.41 or 94.60 through 94.65 shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $50, or the maximum amount allowable by
law.



(Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. 2003-17, passed 9-8-03)



CHAPTER 95:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



   95.01   Health officer



   95.02   Adulterated food, drugs or cosmetics



   95.03   Communicable diseases



   95.04   Stagnated water



   95.05   Weeds



   95.06   Dead animals



   95.07   Sanitary regulations



   95.08   Acts or conditions which create a nuisance on property



   95.09   Junk yards



   95.10   Smoking as a public nuisance



§ 95.01  HEALTH OFFICER.



   The health officer shall be such municipal, county or state officer as
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall appoint or designate to administer
health and sanitary regulations within the Town.



(`83 Code, § 8-301)



§ 95.02  ADULTERATED FOOD, DRUGS OR COSMETICS.



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to
violate any provision of the state food, drug or cosmetic laws.



(`83 Code, § 8-302)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.03  COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.



   When there exists or is suspected to exist in any household a
communicable disease other than venereal disease or a common household
disease, it shall be the duty of the attending physician and the head or
other responsible person in such household possessing knowledge of the facts
to immediately notify the health officer. The health officer thereupon makes
such investigation and issue such quarantine orders as may be necessary to
protect the public health.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate
any such orders of the health officer.



(`83 Code, § 8-303)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.04  STAGNATED WATER.



   The presence of water on the surface of the ground from sinks or other
places whereupon an abundance of water is used or seepage from cesspools is
declared a nuisance against the public health and any and all persons that
fail to remedy any such nuisance within ten days after having been notified
of its existence shall be guilty of an unlawful act. 



(`83 Code, § 8-305)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.05  WEEDS.



   (A)   Every owner or tenant of property shall periodically cause to
be cut the grass or other vegetation commonly recognized as weeds on his or
her property. It shall be unlawful for any such person to fail to comply with
an order by the Town Administrator or his or her designee to cut such
vegetation when it has reached a height of one foot if located in an
undeveloped area, or a height of one-half foot if located within a developed
area, except for those parcels containing five acres or more land area. A
DEVELOPED AREA shall refer to a platted subdivision or lot of record.



   (B)   Parcels containing five acres or more land area that fronts a
public street or roadway or adjoins a developed area shall be cleared of all
weeds, tall grass and other noxious vegetation within 100 feet of the
property line adjoining the developed area and within 100 feet of the
pavement edge of any street or roadway adjoining the subject parcel to and
including the right-of-way to the pavement edge.  Excluded herefrom are
natural wooded areas containing trees four inches in diameter or larger on
the subject property.  The property owner shall be responsible for mowing
grass and noxious vegetation only to the edge of the trees on the property,
including areas along adjoining developed areas or public rights- of-way.



   (C)   If the owner or tenant shall fail to comply with the
provisions of this section following a ten day written notice, the Town
Administrator shall direct appropriate corrective action upon the subject
property, including the removal of vegetation in violation of these
provisions.  Upon completion of such corrective work, the Finance Department
shall determine the reasonable cost and shall bill the owner or tenant for
the amount of such charge.  Failure of the owner to pay the reasonable cost
associated with corrective action will result in the cost and any other
related administrative charges to be placed as a lien against the property to
be paid to the Town of Collierville.



(`83 Code, § 8-306)  (Ord. 99-44, passed 12-13-99)



§ 95.06  DEAD ANIMALS.



   Any person owning or having possession of any dead animals not intended
for use as food shall promptly bury the same or notify the health officer and
dispose of such animal in such manner as the  health officer shall direct.



(`83 Code, § 8-305)



§ 95.07  SANITARY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any place of habitation not to be
provided with sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excreta.



   (B)   No human excreta shall be deposited upon the surface of the
ground where it is exposed to flies, fowls or animals.



   (C)   Every recreation, construction, tourist camp or other camping
place shall be provided with such sanitary methods of excreta disposal and
with a sanitary water supply.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the occupant of every human habitation
and of persons in charge of any public assembly or congregation to maintain
the facilities for the disposal of human excreta in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times.



(`83 Code, § 8-308)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.08  ACTS OR CONDITIONS WHICH CREATE A NUISANCE ON PROPERTY.



   No owner or tenant of property within the Town shall commit an act, or
allow a condition to exist on property within the Town, which act or
condition endangers life or health, violates the laws of decency, obstructs
or interferes with the reasonable and comfortable use of other property in
the vicinity, and/or causes the value of property in the near vicinity to be
diminished in value. Any person or entity who or which violates this section
shall be guilty of committing a nuisance or allowing a nuisance to exist. A
violation of this section shall subject the offender to a fine not to exceed
the maximum permitted by law. Each violation on a separate day shall
constitute a separate offense.



(`83 Code, § 8-309)  (Am. Ord. 2001-26, passed 1-28-02)



§ 95.09  JUNK YARDS.



   All junk yards within the corporate limits shall be operated and
maintained subject to the following regulations:



   (A)   All junk stored or kept in such yards shall be so kept that it
will not catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may breed and so that it
will not constitute a place or places in which rats, mice or other vermin may
be harbored, reared or propagated;



   (B)   All such junk yards shall be enclosed with close fitting plank
or metal solid fences touching the ground on the bottom and being not less
than six feet in height, such fence to be so built as that it will be
impossible for stray cats and/or stray dogs to have access to junk yards;



   (C)   The yards shall be so maintained as to be in a sanitary
condition and so as not be a menace to the public health or safety.



(`83 Code, § 8-310)



§ 95.10  SMOKING AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACCEPTABLE FORM OF IDENTIFICATION.  A state-issued driver’s
license; a state-issued identification card; a valid passport; or a valid
military identification.



      AGE-RESTRICTED VENUE.  A legal establishment that affirmatively
restricts access to its buildings or facilities at all times to persons who
are 21 years of age or older by requiring each person who attempts to gain
entry to such buildings or facilities to submit for inspection an acceptable
form of identification for the express purpose of determining if the person
is 21 years of age or older.



      EMPLOYEE.  A person who is employed in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profit and a person who volunteers such
person’s services for a non-profit entity.



      EMPLOYER.  A person, business, partnership, association,
corporation, including a municipal corporation, educational institution,
trust, or non-profit entity, that employs the services of one or more
individual persons.



      ENCLOSED AREA.  All space between a floor and ceiling that is
enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, which
extend from the floor to ceiling.



      HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Any office or institution providing health
care or treatment of disease, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other
medical, physiological or psychological condition.  This definition shall
include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and
wards within health care facilities.



      PERSON.  An individual, partnership, committee, association,
corporation, or any other organization or group of persons.



      PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.  An enclosed area under the control of a
public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course
of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices,
employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms,
employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles.  A private residence is not a
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or
health care facility.



      PRIVATE CLUB. 



         (a)   Any club or organization that does not permit the
general public access to its facilities or activities.  Access is denied to
anyone who does not agree or adhere to the rules of membership.  In order to
be considered a private club or organization for purposes of this part, the
club or organization shall adhere to all of the following criteria: have a
permanent mechanism to carefully screen applicants for membership on
subjective rather than objective factors; limit access and use of facilities,
services, and activities of the organization to members and guests of the
members; be controlled by its membership and operate solely for the benefit
and pleasure of its members; and advertise exclusively and only to its
members, excluding membership drives.



         (b)   Any institution or organization that has received
a determination of exemption form the Internal Revenue Service under 26
U.S.C. § 501(c)(19).



      PUBLIC PLACE.  An enclosed area to which the public is invited,
including, but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health care
facilities, hotel and motel lobbies, laundromats, public transportation
facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and
marketing establishments, recreational facilities, retail service
establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters,
places of employment, and waiting rooms.



      RESTAURANT.  An eating establishment, including, but not limited
to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school
cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or
employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is
prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere.  RESTAURANT shall also
include a bar area within the restaurant.



      RETAIL TOBACCO STORE.  A retail store that derives its largest
category of sales from tobacco products and accessories.



      SERVICE LINE.  An indoor line in which one or more persons are
waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service
involves the exchange of money.



      SHOPPING MALL.  An enclosed public walkway or hall area that
serves to connect retail or professional establishments.



      SMOKING.  Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted
cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in
any form.



      SPORTS ARENA.  Sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health
spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys,
and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to
engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness
sports or other events.



(`83 Code, § 8-401)



      Other terms used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed
to them, where applicable, in Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-17-1801 et seq., as such
state law definitions may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Smoking shall be unlawful and prohibited in all enclosed
public places in the Town, including, but not limited to, the following
places:



      (1)   Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums;



      (2)   Areas customarily used by the general public in
businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including, but
not limited to, banks, laundromats, factories, professional offices, and
retail service establishments;



      (3)   Child care and adult day care facilities;



      (4)   Convention facilities;



      (5)   Educational facilities, both public and private;



      (6)   Elevators;



      (7)   Health care facilities;



      (8)   Hotels and motels;



      (9)   Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment
buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes,
and other multiple-unit residential facilities;



      (10)   Polling places;



      (11)   Public and private transportation facilities, including
trains, buses, taxicabs, and airports under the authority of state or local
governments, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots;



      (12)   Restaurants;



      (13)   Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and
other common-use areas;



      (14)   Retail stores;



      (15)   Rooms, chambers, places of meeting of public assembly,
including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board,
commission, committee, or council of the State of Tennessee or a political
subdivision of the State of Tennessee, to the extent the place is subject to
the jurisdiction of the State;



      (16)   Service lines;



      (17)   Shopping malls;



      (18)   Sports arenas, including enclosed public places in
outdoor arenas; and



      (19)   Theaters and other facilities primarily used for
exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or
other similar performances.



(`83 Code, § 8-402)



   (C)   This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all
existing employees and to all prospective employees upon their application of
employment.



(`83 Code, § 8-403)



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the
contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of division
(B):



      (1)   Age-restricted venues;



      (2)   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms; provided that no more than 25% of rooms rented
to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated.  All smoking rooms on
the same floor shall be contiguous and smoke from these rooms shall not
infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited pursuant to the provisions
of this section;



      (3)   All premises of any manufacturer, importer, or
wholesaler of tobacco products, all premises of any tobacco leaf dealer or
processor, and all tobacco storage facilities;



      (4)   Non-enclosed areas of public places, including: open air
patios, porches, or decks; any area enclosed by garage type doors on one or
more sides when all such doors are completely open; and any area enclosed by
tents or awnings with removable sides or vents when all such sides or vents
are completely removed or open.  Smoke from such areas shall not infiltrate
into areas where smoking is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of the
section;



      (5)   Nursing homes and long-term care facilities licensed
pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. Title 68, Chapter 11; provided that such
exemption shall only apply to residents of such facilities and that resident
smoking practices shall be governed by the policies and procedures
established by such facilities.  Smoke from such areas shall not infiltrate
into areas where smoking is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of the
section;



      (6)   Private businesses with three or fewer employees where,
in the discretion of the business owner, smoking may be allowed in an
enclosed room not accessible to the general public.  Smoke from such areas
shall not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited pursuant to the
provisions of the section;



      (7)   Private clubs; provided that such exemption shall not
apply to any entity that is established solely for the purposes of avoiding
compliance with this section;



      (8)   Private homes, private residences, and private motor
vehicles, unless such homes, residences, and motor vehicles are being used
for child care or day care or unless the private vehicle is being used for
the public transportation of children or as part of health care or day care
transportation;



      (9)   Retail tobacco stores that prohibit minors on the
premises; and



      (10)   Commercial vehicles when such vehicles are occupied
solely by the operator.



   (E)   “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking”
symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette
enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and
conspicuously posted at every entrance to every public place and place of
employment where smoking is prohibited by this section by the owner,
operator, manager, proprietor, or other person in control of that place. 



   (F)   Any person or entity who fails to post and maintain the signs
required by this section within two business days after first being given a
written warning to comply shall be in violation of this section.  Any person
who smokes or carries a lighted cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, or any
other lighted smoking material and/or equipment in a nonsmoking area shall be
in violation of this ordinance.  Violations of this section shall be
punishable by a fine or monetary penalty not exceeding $50; provided,
however, that the court shall at all times be permitted to assess the maximum
penalty permitted by Tennessee law.  The fines or monetary penalties
prescribed by division (C) are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any civil
penalties that may be imposed pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-17-1801 et
seq.



(Am. Ord. 2007-15, passed 11-26-07)



CHAPTER 96:  AIR POLLUTION CONTROL CODE



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Words and phrases substituted in state regulations adopted
by reference



   96.02   Provisions adopted by reference



   96.03   Open burning



   96.04   Severability



   96.05   Violations of section, notice; citation; injunctive relief



   96.06   Variances



   96.07   Emergency powers of Health Officer



   96.08   Air Pollution Control Hearing Board



   96.09   Nuisance abatement



   96.10   Fugitive dust



Permits and Fees



   96.25   Applicability and enforcement authority



   96.26   Permit fee schedule



   96.27   Emissions fee for stationary sources



   96.28   Payment of fees



   96.29   Allowable uses for emissions fee



   96.30   Reporting requirements



   96.31   Small business waiver



   96.32   Surplus funds carry forward



   96.33   Annual review of fee structure and financial need



 



   96.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  WORDS AND PHRASES SUBSTITUTED IN STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE.



   For the purpose of enforcement of the Town of Collierville, Tennessee -
Air Pollution Control Code, the following shall apply.



   (A)   Wherever the terms Air Pollution Control Board of the State of
Tennessee, Tennessee Air Pollution Control Board or Board appear, they shall
be replaced by Memphis and Shelby County Air Pollution Control with the
following exceptions:



      (1)   Construction and operating permits: Tenn. Comp. R. and
Regs. 1200-3-9-.04;



      (2)   Process emission standards:  Tenn. Comp. R. and Regs.
1200-3-7-.06;



      (3)   Nonprocess emission standards:  Tenn. Comp. R. and
Regs. 1200-3-6-.01;



      (4)   Control of sulfur dioxide emissions:  Tenn. Comp. R.
and Regs. 1200-3-14-.01(1)(a); and



      (5)   Hazardous air contaminants:  Tenn. Comp. R. and Regs.
1200-3-11-.01(1).



   (B)   Wherever the terms Tennessee, State of Tennessee or state
appear, they shall be replaced by Town of Collierville with the following
exceptions:



      (1)   Construction and operating permits:  Tenn. Comp. R. and
Regs. 1200-3-9-.04;



      (2)   Control of sulfur dioxide emissions:  Tenn. Comp. R.
and Regs. 1200-3-14-.01(1)(a);



      (3)   When referring to Tennessee Code Annotated; and



      (4)   When referring to the Tennessee Air Quality Act, Tenn.
Code Ann. §§ 58-201-101 et seq.



   (C)   Wherever the terms Technical Secretary of the Tennessee Air
Pollution Control Board, Technical Secretary or Secretary appear, they shall
be replaced by Health Officer except for the purposes of Tenn. Code Ann. §
68-201-116(b)(1).



   (D)   Wherever the terms Department of Environment and Conservation
of the State of Tennessee, Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation or Department appear, they shall be replaced by Memphis and
Shelby County Health Department.



   (E)   Wherever the terms Tennessee Air Pollution Control Division of
Air Pollution Control or Division appear, they shall be replaced by Memphis
and Shelby County Health Department, Air Pollution Control Section.



   (F)   Wherever the terms Tennessee Air Pollution Control Regulations
or Regulations appear, they shall be replaced by Town of Collierville Air
Pollution Control Code.



   (G)   Wherever the term Nashville Office appears, it shall be
replaced by Memphis and Shelby County Health Department.



   (H)   Wherever the term State Civil Defense appears, it shall be
replaced by Memphis and Shelby County Emergency Management Agency.



   (I)   Whenever the terms Chapter 1200-3-26, Rule 1200-3-26-.02 or
other citations involving 1200-3-26 appear, they shall be replaced by §§
96.25et seq.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.02  PROVISIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The following chapters of the Tennessee Compilation of Rules and
Regulations, as promulgated pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, are
incorporated herein by reference as if set out in their entirety and shall be
adopted and approved as part of the Town of Collierville Air Pollution
Control Code.



   1200-3-2   Definitions



   1200-3-3   Ambient air quality regulations



   1200-3-5   Visible emissions



   1200-3-6   Nonprocess emission standards



   1200-3-7   Process emission standards



   1200-3-9   Construction and operating permits



   1200-3-10   Required sampling, recording and reporting



   1200-3-11   Hazardous air contaminants



   1200-3-12   Methods of sampling and analysis



   1200-3-14   Control of sulfur dioxide emissions



   1200-3-16   New source performance standards



   1200-3-18   Volatile organic compounds



   1200-3-20   Limits on emissions due to malfunctions, startups and
shutdowns



   1200-3-21   General alternate emission standards



   1200-3-22   Lead emission standards



   1200-3-24   Good engineering practice stack height regulations



   1200-3-25   Standards for infectious waste incinerators



   1200-3-30   Acid precipitation standard



   1200-3-31   National emission standards for hazardous air pollutants
for source categories



   1200-3-32   Prevention of accidental releases



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.03  OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of
refuse, garbage, trade waste, trees, limbs, brush or materials from salvage
operations.



   (B)   Open burning as listed below may be conducted without permit
subject to Fire Department approval, and provided further that no public
nuisance is or will be created by the open burning.



      (1)   Fires used for the cooking of food or for ceremonial or
recreational purposes, including barbeques and outdoor fireplaces.



      (2)   Fires set for the training and instruction of
firefighters or for research in fire protection or prevention.



      (3)   Smokeless flares or safety flares for the combustion of
waste gases, provided other applicable subsections of this section are met.



   (C)   Exceptions to division (A) of this section may be permitted if
all of the following conditions are met.



      (1)   A request is filed with the Health Officer giving the
reason why no method except open burning can be employed to dispose of the
material involved, the amount and kind of material to be burned, the exact
location where the burning will take place and the dates when the open
burning will be done.



      (2)   Approval is received from the Health Officer.



      (3)   Permission is secured from the Fire Department in the
jurisdiction involved.



      (4)   The burning will be done between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. or as authorized by the Health Officer.



   (D)   This grant of exemption will not relieve the person
responsible for such burning from the consequences of any damages, injuries
or claims resulting from such burning.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.04  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions of this Air Pollution Control Code are declared to be
severable, and if any subsections, provisions, clauses or parts be held
unconstitutional or void, then the remainder of this Air Pollution Control
Code shall continue in full force and effect, it being the legislative intent
that this Air Pollution Control Code would have been adopted even if such
unconstitutional or void matter had not been included therein.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.05  VIOLATIONS OF SECTION, NOTICE; CITATION; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   (A)   Whenever evidence has been obtained or received establishing
that a violation of this code has been committed, the Health Officer shall
issue a notice to correct the violation or a citation to cease the violation.
The notice or citation shall briefly set forth the general nature of the
violation and specify a reasonable time within which the violation shall be
rectified or stopped. If the violation is not corrected within the time so
specified, the violation stopped or reasonable steps taken to rectify the
violation, the Health Officer shall have the power and authority to issue an
order requiring the violator to cease or suspend operation of the facility
causing the violation until the violation has been corrected or initiate
proceedings to prosecute the violator for violation of this code.



   (B)   In the event any person fails to comply with a cease or
suspend operation order that is not subject to a stay pending administrative
or judicial review, the Health Officer shall institute proceedings in a court
of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to enforce the regulations or
orders pursuant hereto.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.06  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Any person who owns or is in control of any plant, building,
structure, establishment, process or equipment, including a group of persons
who own or control like processes or like equipment, may apply to the Air
Pollution Control Hearing Board, hereinafter referred to as “the Board,”
for a variance from rules or regulations governing the quality, nature,
duration or extent of discharge of air contaminants. The application shall be
accompanied by such information and data as the Board may require. The
hearing held hereunder shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of
evidence as set forth in § 96.07, as now or hereafter amended. The Board may
grant such variance, but only after public hearing on due notice, if it finds
that:



      (1)   The emissions occurring, or proposed to occur, do not
endanger or tend to endanger human health, safety or welfare or do not cause
or tend to cause property damage;



      (2)   Compliance with the rules or regulations from which
variance is sought would produce serious hardship without equal or greater
benefits to the public.



   (B)   No variance shall be granted or denied pursuant to this
section until the Board has considered the relative interests of the
applicant, other owners of property likely to be affected by the discharges
and the general public.



   (C)   Any variance or renewal thereof shall be granted within the
requirements of division (A) of this section for time periods and under
conditions consistent with the reasons therefore, and with the following
limitations.



      (1)   If the variance is granted on the grounds that there is
no practicable means known or available for the adequate prevention,
abatement or control of the air pollution involved, the variance shall be
permitted only until the necessary means for prevention, abatement or control
become known and available, and the variance shall be subject to the taking
of any substitute or alternate measures that the Board may prescribe.



      (2)   If the variance is granted on the ground that compliance
with the particular requirement or requirements from which variance is sought
will necessitate the taking of measures which, because of their extent or
cost, must be spread over a considerable period of time, it shall be for a
period not to exceed such reasonable time as, in view of the Board, is
requisite for the taking of necessary measures. A variance granted on the
ground specified herein shall contain a timetable for the taking of action in
an expeditious manner and shall be conditioned on adherence to such timetable.



      (3)   Any variance or renewal granted shall be for a time
period not to exceed one year.



   (D)   Any variance granted pursuant to this section may be renewed
on terms and conditions and for periods which would be appropriate on initial
granting of the variance. If complaint is made to the Board on account of the
variance, no renewal thereof shall be granted, unless, following public
hearing on the complaint, the Board finds that renewal is justified. No
renewal shall be granted except on application therefore. Any such
application shall be made at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the
variance. Immediately upon a receipt of an application for renewal, the Board
shall give public notice of such application in accordance with rules and
regulations of the Board.



   (E)   A variance of renewal shall not be a right of the applicant or
holder thereof, but shall be in the discretion of the Board. However, any
applicant adversely affected by the denial or the terms and conditions of the
granting of an application for a variance or renewal of a variance by the
Board may obtain judicial review thereof only in a court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (F)   Nothing in this section and no variance or renewal granted
pursuant hereto shall be construed to prevent or limit the application of the
emergency provisions and procedures of § 96.99 to any person or his or her
property.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.07  EMERGENCY POWERS OF HEALTH OFFICER.



   (A)   Any other provisions of the law notwithstanding, if the Health
Officer finds that a generalized condition of air pollution exists and that
it creates an emergency requiring immediate action to protect human health or
safety, the Health Officer shall order persons causing or contributing to the
air pollution to reduce or discontinue immediately the emission of air
contaminants. Upon issuance of any such order, the Health Officer shall fix a
place and time, not later than 24 hours thereafter, for a hearing to be held
before the Air Pollution Control Hearing Board. The hearing shall be held in
conformity with the provisions of § 96.05, insofar as applicable. Not more
than 24 hours after the commencement of such hearing, and without adjournment
thereof, the Air Pollution Control Hearing Board shall affirm, modify or set
aside the order of the Health Officer.



   (B)   In the absence of a generalized condition of air pollution of
the type referred to in division (A) of this section, but if the Health
Officer finds that emissions from the operation of one or more air
contaminant sources is causing imminent danger to human health or safety, he
or she may order the person responsible for the operation in question to
reduce or discontinue operations immediately, without regard to the
provisions of this section. In such event, the requirements for hearing and
affirmance, modification or setting aside of orders set forth in division (A)
of this section shall apply.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.08  AIR POLLUTION CONTROL HEARING BOARD.



   (A)   There is created the Memphis and Shelby County Air Pollution
Control Board, hereinafter referred to as “the Board,” to be composed of
nine members to be appointed as described in subsections (1) and (2) below.
No member of the Board shall hold any elective office or receive any
governmental salary except as a member of the faculty or staff of a school in
the Tennessee education system. Otherwise, all members shall serve without
compensation. Any member of the Board who has any conflict of interest or
potential conflict of interest shall make adequate disclosure of it and
abstain from matters related to it.



      (1)   Eight members of the Board are to be appointed jointly
by the Mayor of the City of Memphis and the Mayor of Shelby County and
confirmed by both the Memphis City Council and the Shelby County Board of
Commissioners. These eight members shall consist of the following: one
professional engineer knowledgeable in the field of air pollution control,
one physician licensed to practice in Tennessee, one attorney licensed to
practice law in Tennessee, one member of academia, a representative of
industry at large and such other citizen members as may be appointed, except
that industry may have no more than two representatives.



      (2)   One member of the Board is to be appointed by the
Executive Committee of the Memphis Area Association of Governments. This
member is to be a representative for the municipalities of Arlington,
Bartlett, Collierville, German Town, Lakeland and Millington and is to be a
citizen of one of these communities.



   (B)   The terms of the members shall be four years, except that of
the initially appointed members, of which three shall serve for four years,
two shall serve for three years, two shall serve for two years and two shall
serve for one year as designated at the time of appointment. Whenever a
vacancy occurs, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as the original appointment. Should the term of any Board member
expire without a replacement member being appointed, the existing member
shall continue to hold the Board membership until such appointment or
reappointment occurs.



   (C)   The Board shall select annually a Chair from among its
members. The Board shall hold at least four regular meetings each year and
such additional meetings as the Chair deems necessary. All hearings conducted
by the Board shall be open to the public. The Health Director shall act as
Secretary to the Board and shall keep records of its hearings and other
official actions. All hearings shall be held before and not less than a
majority of the Board.



   (D)   The Board is vested with the following jurisdiction and
authority:



      (1)   Grant, deny or revoke variance applications;



      (2)   To decide appeals from any decisions, rulings or
determinations of the Health Director or his or her designated representative
under this Air Pollution Control Code;



      (3)   To hear appeals arising from the failure of the Health
Director or his or her designated representative to act within a reasonable
period on complaints under this Air Pollution Control Code.



   (E)   Any person seeking a variance from the provisions of this Air
Pollution Control Code or any person taking exception to and who is uniquely
affected by any decision, ruling, requirement, rule, regulation or order of
the Health Director or by his or her failure to act within a reasonable
amount of time may take an appeal to the Board as established by this
section. Such appeals shall be made within 15 days after receiving notice of
such decision, ruling, requirement, rule, regulation or order or failure to
act by filing a written notice of appeal directly to the Board specifying the
ground thereof and the relief requested. Such an appeal shall act as a stay
of the decision, ruling, requirement, rule, regulation or order in question
until the Board has taken final action on the appeal, except when the Health
Director has acted under § 96.06. The Board, not more than 30 days after the
date of filing an appeal, shall set a date for the hearing not more than 60
days after the date of filing of the appeal and shall give notice thereof by
mail to the interested parties.



   (F)   Hearings before the Board shall be conducted in the following
manner:



      (1)   Notice of any and all hearings shall be given at least
15 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing by public advertisement in
a newspaper of general circulation in Memphis, Tennessee giving the date,
time, place and purpose of the hearing;



      (2)   The Chairperson of the Board shall act as the hearing
examiner to conduct such hearing;



      (3)   Any person seeking a variance or any party who is
uniquely affected by the action of the Health Director or by his or her
failure to act may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present
evidence both written or oral pertinent to the questions and issues involved
and may examine and cross examine witnesses;



      (4)   All testimony shall be under oath and recorded. The
Board is authorized to have all testimony transcribed and a transcript of
such testimony, if transcribed, shall be made available to the respondent or
any party to the hearing upon payment of the normal fee, which shall not
exceed the cost of transcribing such testimony;



      (5)   After due consideration of the written and oral
statements, the testimony and arguments submitted at the hearing upon such
complaint, or, upon default in appearance of the respondent on the return
date specified in the formal notice of complaint, the Board shall issue and
enter such final order or make such final determination as it shall deem
appropriate not later than 60 days after the hearing date and shall
immediately notify the respondent thereof, in writing, by certified mail. The
order or determination shall be approved by at least a majority of members to
which the Board is entitled.



      (6)   Upon failure of the Board to enter a final order or
determination within 60 days after the final argument of such hearing, the
respondent shall be entitled to treat for all purposes such failure to act as
a finding favorable to the respondent.



      (7)   The burden of proof in such hearing shall be on the
Health Director or his or her duly authorized representative.



      (8)   Any person aggrieved by any final order or determination
of the Board hereunder shall have judicial review thereof by common law writ
of certiorari. No judicial review shall be available until and after all
administrative remedies have been exhausted.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.09  NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   (A)   When dust, fumes, gases, mist, vapors or any combination
thereof escape from a building or equipment in such a manner and amount as to
cause a nuisance or to violate any regulation, the Health Officer may order
that the building or equipment in which processing, handling and storage are
done be tightly closed and ventilated in such a way that all air and gases
and air or gas-borne material leaving the building or equipment are treated
by removal or destruction of air contaminants before discharge to the open
air.



   (B)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any air
contaminant source to be operated without employing suitable measures for the
control of the emission of objectionable odors. Suitable measures shall
include permit limitations, wet scrubbers, incinerators or such other devices
as may be approved by the Health Officer.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.10  FUGITIVE DUST.



   (A)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any materials
to be handled, transported or stored; or a building, its appurtenances or a
road to be used, constructed, altered, repaired or demolished without taking
reasonable precautions to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne.



   (B)   Such reasonable precautions shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:



      (1)   Use, where possible, water or chemicals for control of
dust in the demolition of existing buildings or structures, construction
operations, the grading of roads or the clearing of land;



      (2)   Application of asphalt, oil, water or suitable chemicals
on material stockpiles and other surfaces which can create airborne dusts;



      (3)   Installation and use of hoods, fans and fabric filters
to enclose and vent the handling of dusty materials. Adequate containment
methods shall be employed during sandblasting or other similar operations;



      (4)   Covering, at all times when in motion, open bodied
trucks transporting materials likely to become airborne;



      (5)   Conduct of agricultural practices such as tilling of
land, application of fertilizers and the like in such manner as to not create
a nuisance to others residing in the area;



      (6)   The paving of roadways and their maintenance in a clean
condition;



      (7)   The prompt removal of earth or other material from paved
street which earth or other material has been transported thereto by trucking
or earth moving equipment or erosion by water.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



PERMITS AND FEES



§ 96.25  APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to any person
required to make application on or after July 1, 1992 to the Memphis and
Shelby county Health Department for issuance, reissuance or modification of a
permit in accordance with this section and the Air Pollution Control Code and
shall be subject to the fee schedule set out in § 96.09. The provisions of
this section shall apply to any person holding or obtaining a valid air
pollution permit from the Memphis and Shelby County Health Department on or
after July 1, 1992 and shall be subject to the fees set out in § 96.32.



   (B)   The Memphis/Shelby County Health (hereinafter referred to as
the Department) is designated to carry out and enforce the provisions of this
Air Pollution Control Code and to promulgate any regulations consistent with
it as may be required for proper administration of the fee system created
herein.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.26  PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.



   Fees for permits are set out as follows, and shall apply to any PERSON
as defined in this chapter:



   (A)   Construction permits.



      (1)   Any person making application to the  Shelby County
Health Department for a construction permit shall pay an initial filing fee
of $200 per permit unit. This filing fee shall not be refundable if the
permit is denied or if the application is withdrawn, nor shall it be applied
to any subsequent application.



      (2)   In addition to the fees in division (1) above, the
largest of the following fees, if applicable, shall be paid:



 

Prevention of significant deterioration (PSD) review
 

$3,960



Major source of major modification review, except PSD sources review,
requiring modeling
 

$2,640



Minor source or minor modification review, requiring modeling
 

$660



New source performance standard (NSPS) source review, per permit unit
 

$660



National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutant (NESHAP) source
review, per permit unit
 

$660




 



   (B)   Inspection/operating permit.



      (1)   Any person making application to the Shelby County
Health Department for an inspection/ operating permit shall pay the larger of
the applicable fees in accordance with the following schedule:



 



Asbestos demolition/renovation removal, per notice
 

$130



Air curtain destructor, per permit unit
 

$130



NSPS source, per permit unit
 

$130



NESHAP source, per permit unit
 

$130



Any source issued a permit pursuant to local rules implementing Title 40, CFR
§ 70 (major source permits)
 

$2,000



Any permit unit with actual emissions of 50 tons or more a year, but less
than 100 tons per year of any single pollutant
 

$130



Any permit unit with actual emissions of 25 tons or more per year, but less
than 50 tons per year of a single pollutant
 

$100



Any permit unit with actual emissions of less than 25 tons per year of a
single pollutant
 

$65



Any permit issued as the result of a permit by rule or annual notification
and general standards application to a particular business or business group
 

$130



Any source issued an operating permit for which a construction permit was
never obtained (enforcement action may also apply)
 

$265





 



      (2)   No portion of the inspection/operating fee shall be
refundable in the event the source discontinues operation or service during
the permitted period.



   (C)   Modification of a permit. Any person making application to the
Shelby County Health Department for the modification of a permit shall pay a
fee for each permit unit being modified, except that no fee is required for
modification of a permit to correct clerical, typographical, or calculations
errors. This fee shall be set out as follows:



 

If the modification is anticipated to result in an increase in all pollutants
less than 10 tons per year
 

$130



If the modification is anticipated to result in an increase in all pollutants
equal to or greater than 10 tons per year, but less than 50 tons per year
 

$330



If the modification is anticipated to result in an increase in all pollutants
equal to or greater than 50
 

$660



Name change
 

$130



Ownership change- new owner pays inspection and operating fees (based on
tonnage)
 

Varied based on tonnage fees



Address change- new owner pays inspection and operating fees (based on
tonnage) for the new address
 

$265 plus tonnage fee



Permit revision (with no emissions consequences)
 

$130




 



   (D)   Stack sampling.



      (1)   If a source is required to demonstrate compliance by
stack sampling its emissions, it shall pay the following additional fees:



 

Any testing requiring U.S./EPA methods 1 through 4 only, per stack test
 

$130



Particulate emissions testing requiring U.S./EPA method 5, per stack test
 

$400



Any other pollution testing by methods other than U.S./EPA method 5,
(excepting those subject to (D)(1) of this section, per stack test)
 

$660




 



      (2)   Any retest required to demonstrate compliance shall be
subject to the fee schedule as stated in the Table of division (D).



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-13-17)



§ 96.27  EMISSIONS FEE FOR STATIONARY SOURCES.



   (A)   Emissions fee. A fee shall be collected annually from each
stationary air pollution source which emits more than one ton of actual
emissions annually of a regulated pollutant as defined herein, called the
EMISSIONS FEE, which shall equal the amount determined by the requirements
set forth as follows: $48 per ton of actual emissions emitted during calendar
year 2013 to be collected beginning in 2015 and for successive years until
such time as the Aldermen approve a further increase or decrease, not
including fugitive emissions and actual excess emissions that are the result
of process malfunctions and facility start-up and shutdown determined by the
Health Department to be in compliance with the air pollution code sections
that excuse these emissions from enforcement of each regulated pollutant as
defined in § 502(b)(3)(B)(ii) of the Federal Clean Air Amendments of 1990.



   (B)   This is the effective emissions fee rate (after adjustment for
carryover overage) approved by the town:



 

Approved rate ($)
 
Adopted in
 
Effective rate ($)
 
Applicable to




9
 
1992
 
9
 
1991 emissions


18
 
1993
 
18
 
1992 emissions


19
 
1994
 
17.10
 
1993 emissions


29.65
 
1995
 
29.65
 
1994 emissions


-
 
-
 
29.65
 
1995 emissions


-
 
-
 
29.65
 
1996 emissions


29.65
 
1998
 
29.65
 
1997 emissions


29.65
 
1999
 
29.65
 
1998 emissions


29.65
 
2001
 
29.65
 
1999 emissions


29.65
 
2001
 
29.65
 
2000 emissions


29.65
 
2003
 
29.65
 
2002 emissions


29.65
 
2004
 
26.68
 
2003 emissions


30.63
 
2005
 
27.57
 
2004 emissions


31.67
 
2006
 
28.50
 
2005 emissions


30
 
2008
 
27
 
2006 emissions


30
 
2009
 
27
 
2007 emissions


43
 
2012
 
43
 
2011 emissions


48
 
2014
 
48
 
2013 emissions




 



   (C)   Maximum amount subject to emissions fee. Each stationary air
pollution source shall be assessed the emissions fee on no more than 4,000
tons per year of each regulated pollutant it emits.



   (D)   Exemption for units subject to § 404 provisions of the Clean
Air Act amendments of 1990. No fee will be charged until the year 2000 with
respect to emissions from any unit which is classified as "an affected unit"
under § 404 of the Clean Air Act amendments of 1990, entitled "Phase I
Sulfur Dioxide Requirements."



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-13-17)



§ 96.28  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   (A)   Any person acquiring a permit shall be subject to the
following payment of permit fees and the following procedure shall be used in
payment thereof:



      (1)   Initial filing fees for construction permits must be
submitted with the initial permit applications;



      (2)   Additional fees related to construction permits
including those related to public notice are due within 30 days of receipt of
billing by the Department;



      (3)   Fees related to stack testing are due within 30 days of
receipt of billing by the Department;



      (4)   Inspection/operating fees are assessed annually on the
anniversary date of the issuance of the permit, where applicable;



         (a)   Fees for asbestos removal must be submitted with
the written notice of intent to remove;



         (b)   Fees for air curtain destructors must be submitted
within ten days of receipt of  permit;



      (5)   Fees related to modification of a permit shall be
submitted with the permit application;



      (6)   Fees related to public notice necessary for the
regulation of a source shall be due within 30 days of receipt of billing by
the Department.



   (B)   If the emissions fees assessed to a stationary air pollution
source are less than $5,000, the fees owed shall be submitted by September 30
of the year following the year the emissions occurred. If more than $5,000 is
owed, then the amount due shall be submitted by January 31 of the year two
years after the emissions occurred.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.29  ALLOWABLE USES FOR EMISSIONS FEE.



   (A)   The annual emissions fee collected from those entities within
Collierville Town limits shall be used for:



      (1)   Reviewing and acting upon any application for a permit
or permit modification under the Collierville Air Pollution Control Code as
amended;



      (2)   Implementing and enforcing the terms and conditions of
any permit issued under the Collierville Air Pollution Control Code,
provided, however, such cost shall not include any court cost or other costs
associated with any judicial enforcement action;



      (3)   Emissions and ambient monitoring and inspection of
source operated monitoring programs;



      (4)   Preparing generally applicable regulations or guidance;



      (5)   Modeling, analyses and demonstrations;



      (6)   Preparing inventories and tracking emissions;



      (7)   Development of and support for the small business
stationary source technical and environmental compliance assistance program
as it applies to part 70 sources;



      (8)   Information management activities to support and track
permit applications, compliance certifications and related data entry.



   (B)   The emission and annual operating/inspection fees collected
from major stationary air pollution sources shall be used exclusively for and
be sufficient to pay the direct and indirect costs of the major stationary
source operating permit program allowable under the Federal Clean Air Act and
under regulations in support of those federal provisions as adopted locally
in the Town of Collierville Air Pollution Control Code. The owner or operator
of any stationary source shall also pay any cost of expense associated with
public notices or notifications required pursuant to the Collierville Air
Pollution Control Code or the Federal Clean Air Act.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.30  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as provided below, each permitted stationary air
pollution source must submit to the Department an annual report that
establishes the amount of actual emissions of each regulated pollutant,
including carbon monoxide, for that source. This report will be for the
emissions of that source that occurred during the calendar year starting in
1991 and continuing for succeeding years thereafter. The Department may
request, and the air pollution source shall provide, additional information
on the emissions data submitted when the Department determines, the data
previously provided is inadequate to establish the actual type or amount of
emissions from the source subject to fees.



   (B)   Not including air toxics as they are defined in the Clean Air
Act Amendments of 1990 and the amendments thereto, if the source emits fewer
than 25 tons of actual emissions of pollutant during a year, it may at its
option, use as the actual emissions figure, its permitted pollutant levels
where available and known. If the source is a major source under the air
toxics provisions of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 it too must
calculate its actual emission of regulated pollutants. Failure to provide, on
a timely basis, any additional information requested shall be considered
failure to pay the fees.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.31  SMALL BUSINESS WAIVER.



   The Director of the Department, in his or her discretion but consistent
with Section 507(f) of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, may, upon
written petition setting forth in detail the justification therefore, reduce
or waive for up to three years, any emissions fee required under this section
to take into account the financial resources of small business stationary air
pollution sources as defined under the federal act or regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto. A decision to deny the waiver may be appealed to the Local
Air Pollution Control Board by the party requesting the waiver and will be
heard under the same procedures as any other decision that is appealed to
this Board. If a waiver is granted, it will be reviewed by the Board in its
annual review process and is then subject to revocation or modification by
the Board if found to be unwarranted or granted in an arbitrary fashion. Such
action will have no effect on prior years emissions fees and will only apply
to the collection of future emissions fees.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.32  SURPLUS FUNDS CARRY FORWARD.



   Any surplus in emissions fee funds shall be carried forward from year
to year for these stated purposes only. If, however, in any year after 1993,
this carry forward surplus exceeds on February 15 35% of the previous 12
months fee, a 10% per ton credit on the established emissions fee amount
shall be given to all stationary sources in the next emissions fee payment.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.33  ANNUAL REVIEW OF FEE STRUCTURE AND FINANCIAL NEED.



   The Memphis/Shelby County Air Pollution Control Board shall annually
review the fee structure established by this Air Pollution Control Code and
recommend to the Shelby County Commission any change in rate or makeup of the
fee it determines, after public hearing, is necessary to meet the financial
requirements of the Memphis/Shelby County Health Department Air Pollution
Control Program to fulfill the activities allowed to be funded by these fees.
Such review shall include an estimate of other funds available to the
program, including surplus or carry forward funds as well as changes in state
or federal laws that could effect the program. The recommendation shall be
provided to the Commission no later than April 1 of each year. The County
Commission shall not, however, be required to adopt this recommendation, nor
to change fees on any predetermined schedule. If the Shelby County Commission
recommends a change in the rate or makeup of the fee, that recommendation
shall be provided to the Collierville Board of Mayor and Aldermen for
adoption prior to collection of changed emission fees, by the Memphis and
Shelby County Health Department.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-11-02; Am. Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   TEMPORARY SALES, DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATIONS, AND THE
LIKE



      111.   CHARITABLE SOLICITORS



      112.   PAWNBROKERS



      113.   JUNK DEALERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS



      114.   AMUSEMENTS



      115.   TAXICABS



      116.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      117.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS



      118.   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE



CHAPTER 110:  TEMPORARY SALES, DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATIONS, AND THE LIKE



Section




General Business Regulations




   110.01   Going out of business sales



   110.02   Garage, yard or rummage sales



   110.03   Central Business Improvement District I



   110.04   Central Business Improvement District II



   110.05   Sidewalk sales and display events




Transient Vendors




   110.20 to 110.22   Reserved



   110.23   Mobile frozen dessert vehicles




Door-to-Door Solicitation




   110.30   Purpose



   110.31   Definitions



   110.32   Exemptions



   110.33   All solicitation prohibited by posting of “No
Solicitation” or “No Trespassing” sign or town no-solicitation sticker



   110.34   No-solicitation list



   110.35   Permit and identification badge required for all commercial
solicitors



   110.36   Application for permit



   110.37   Investigation of applicant; issuance of permit and
identification badge(s)



   110.38   Duration of permit; renewal



   110.39   Persons prohibited



   110.40   Denial of permit



   110.41   Revocation or suspension of identification badge



   110.42   Nonrenewal or revocation of permit



   110.43   Emergency summary suspension of identification badge or
permit



   110.44   Appeals for denial or revocation of permit; hearings



   110.45   Duty to display identification badge and to exhibit permit



   110.46   Limitations on all solicitation



   110.47   Limitations on commercial solicitation



   110.48   False or deceptive representations prohibited



   110.49   Records



   110.50   Administrative regulations



 



   110.98   Enforcement



   110.99   Penalty



GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS



§ 110.01  GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent a sale as
being a going out of business sale.  A GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE, for the
purposes of this section, shall be a fire sale, bankrupt sale or any other
sale made in anticipation of the termination of a business at its present
location. When any person, after advertising a going out of business sale,
adds to his or her stock or fails to go out of business within 90 days, he or
she shall prima facie be deemed to have violated this section.



(`83 Code, § 5-101)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.02  GARAGE, YARD OR RUMMAGE SALES.



   (A)   Not more than two garage, yard, or rummage sales may be held
at the same location in a residential zoning district during the period of a
calendar year (January through December).



   (B)   (1)   Any person, persons or groups holding a garage, yard,
or rummage sale in violation of the provisions of this section shall
immediately cease and desist from such activity when directed to do so by the
Code Enforcement Officer or Chief of Police.



      (2)   Any person, persons or groups holding a garage, yard, or
rummage sale in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
in violation of a municipal ordinance and shall be subjected to the general
penalty prescribed by law.



(`83 Code, § 5-102)  (Ord. 95-06, passed 5-8-95; Am. Ord. 2005-04, passed
3-28-05; Am. Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.03  CENTRAL BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT I.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Town of Collierville Central
Business Improvement District I in accordance with and pursuant to the
provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 7-84-101 et seq. The boundaries of the
district are particularly described by metes and bounds in Exhibit A, which
is attached to this Ordinance and incorporated herein by reference.



   (B)   Program and service improvements to be provided in the
district are generally described to include:



      (1)   Marketing and promotion of the Town Square as a viable
business district;



      (2)   Attraction of new retail and service oriented businesses
providing a favorable mix of goods and services and an enhanced economic
stability for the area;



      (3)   Encouragement, guidance and assistance for businesses
within the district to make interior and exterior improvements, and expand
services and/or product lines to enhance market appeal and increase sales;



      (4)   Development of a more defined “atmosphere” or theme
to showcase the charm of the Town Square and its designation as a National
Historic District;



      (5)   Increase participation of all businesses in the
Collierville Historic Square Association; and



      (6)   Unity in the promotion of community activities that
occur in the Town Square.



   (C)   The Main Street Collierville organization, a not-for-profit
corporation chartered in the State of Tennessee, is hereby appointed as the
representative of the Town of Collierville for the purpose of implementing
the program and service improvements within the district and is hereby
authorized to adopt the plan of improvement for the Town of Collierville
Central Business Improvement District I, designed and approved by its Board
of Directors, or any other plan of improvement as permitted by applicable
law. Main Street Collierville shall present an annual budget to the Town
Administrator (or his or her designee) that details how funds disbursed to it
shall be used. Thereafter, Main Street Collierville shall report annually to
the Town its expenditure of funds for program and service improvements in the
district. The report of expenditures shall be subject to audit by the Town,
and the Town shall have access to any and all records of Main Street
Collierville as is necessary to complete such audit. Main Street Collierville
shall retain all such auditable records for a minimum of three years from the
date of the submission of the report regarding annual expenditures. Main
Street Collierville shall file its first budget with the Town prior to the
disbursement of any central business improvement district funds. Thereafter,
Main Street Collierville shall file its annual budget for the upcoming year
with the Town by no later than 60 days prior to the end of the year
immediately preceding the upcoming year. Main Street Collierville shall file
an annual financial report with the Town within 120 days after the yearly
anniversary of its first receipt of central business improvement district
funds.



   (D)   The estimated total cost of the program and service
improvements to be provided in the Central Business Improvement District I,
including those to be furnished by the Town of Collierville, is $60,979.



   (E)   Special assessments against the properties directly benefited
by the program and service improvements are hereby authorized; provided,
however, any religious or non-profit institution is exempt from this special
assessment. All municipally owned property within the district, with the
exception of the Confederate Park property and the Town Railroad Depot and
its immediate environs, shall be assessed in the same manner as private
property as authorized by Tenn. Code Ann. § 7-84-208(5) and in the manner
prescribed by Tenn. Code Ann. § 7-84-406.



   (F)   The total cost of the program and service improvements will be
allocated between the special assessments levied against the property owners
and the general revenue of the municipality as follows:



      (1)   The total of assessments levied against the properties
within the district shall not exceed $159,305. The assessment of the total
sum shall be divided into four annual assessments for the calendar years of
2003, 2004, 2005 and 2006, in such a manner and in such an amount that the
total revenues from the district and the Town of Collierville Central
Business Improvement District II shall not exceed $39,826 per year.



      (2)   The remaining costs of the program and service
improvements within the district may be provided by the Town by the
appropriation of its general revenues less any sums received by way of
private contributions and/or monies provided by other governmental entities
or public agencies, but in no event shall the Town’s cost exceed $39,826
per year.



   (G)   The special benefit to all properties located within this
Central Business Improvement District I is uniformly commensurate with the
assessed value of each property in the district and the total cost of such
program and service improvements to be assessed against the property owners
of property in this district shall be assessed against each property in the
same proportions that the assessed value of each such property bears to the
assessed value of all such properties within the district.



   (H)   The special assessments authorized by this section shall be
paid in four equal annual installments and shall be due and payable upon the
property owner’s receipt of notice of the assessed amount. The first of the
four equal installments will be due for calendar year 2003. Notices shall be
sent to all property owners by December 31, 2003. Payment of the assessed
amount shall become delinquent if not paid within the 60 days of the date of
notice to the property owner of the assessed amount. All delinquent
assessments shall accrue interest at the rate of 10% per annum until paid
plus a penalty of .5% per month of the amount of such assessment or
installment.



   (I)   There is hereby created a Board of Assessment Commissioners,
which, in accordance with Tenn. Code Ann. § 7-84-303, shall consist of five
citizens of the Town, none of whom shall be interested in any property
contained within any central business improvement district established by the
Town and who shall serve until completion of their duties, but in no event
longer than four years from the date of their appointment. The board of
assessment commissioners established by this section shall be the same Board
of Assessment Commissioners as established in § 110.04. The members of the
Board of Assessment Commissioners shall be appointed by separate resolution
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen in accordance with the provisions of Tenn.
Code Ann. §§ 7-84-101 et seq.



(Ord. 2003-13, passed 6-9-03)



§ 110.04  CENTRAL BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT II.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Town of Collierville Central
Business Improvement District II in accordance with and pursuant to the
provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 7-84-101 et seq. The boundaries of the
district are particularly described by metes and bounds in Exhibit A of this
Ordinance, attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.



   (B)   Program and service improvements to be provided in the
district are generally described to include:



      (1)   Marketing and promotion of the Town Square as a viable
business district;



      (2)   Attraction of new retail and service oriented businesses
providing a favorable mix of goods and services and an enhanced economic
stability for the area;



      (3)   Encouragement, guidance and assistance for businesses
within the district to make interior and exterior improvements, and expand
services and/or product lines to enhance market appeal and increase sales;



      (4)   Development of a more defined “atmosphere” or theme
to showcase the charm of the Town Square and its designation as a National
Historic District;



      (5)   Increase participation of all businesses in the
Collierville Historic Square Association; and



      (6)   Unity in the promotion of community activities that
occur in the Town Square.



   (C)   The Main Street Collierville organization, a not-for-profit
corporation chartered in the State of Tennessee, is hereby appointed as the
representative of the Town of Collierville for the purpose of implementing
the improvements within the district and is hereby authorized to adopt the
plan of improvement for the Town of Collierville Central Business Improvement
District I, designed and approved by its Board of Directors, or any other
plan of improvement as permitted by applicable law. Main Street Collierville
shall present an annual budget to the Town Administrator (or his or her
designee) that details how funds disbursed to it shall be used. Thereafter,
Main Street Collierville shall report annually to the Town its expenditure of
funds for program and service improvements in the district. The report of
expenditures shall be subject to audit by the Town, and the Town shall have
access to any and all records of Main Street Collierville as is necessary to
complete such audit. Main Street Collierville shall retain all such auditable
records for a minimum of three years from the date of the submission of the
report regarding annual expenditures. Main Street Collierville shall file its
first budget with the Town prior to the disbursement of any central business
improvement district funds. Thereafter, Main Street Collierville shall file
its annual budget for the upcoming year with the Town by no later than 60
days prior to the end of the year immediately preceding the upcoming year.
Main Street Collierville shall file an annual financial report with the Town
within 120 days after the yearly anniversary of its first receipt of central
business improvement district funds.



   (D)   The estimated total cost of the program and service
improvements to be provided in the Central Business Improvement District II,
including those to be furnished by the Town of Collierville, is $98,326.



   (E)   Special assessments against the properties directly benefited
by the program and service improvements are hereby authorized; provided,
however, any religious or non-profit institution is exempt from this special
assessment. All municipally owned property within the district, with the
exception of the Confederate Park property and the Town Railroad Depot and
its immediate environs, shall be assessed in the same manner as private
property as authorized by Tenn. Code Ann. § 7-84-208(5) and in the manner
prescribed by Tenn. Code Ann. § 7-84-406.



   (F)   The total cost of the program and service improvements will be
allocated between the special assessments levied against the property owners
and the general revenue of the municipality as follows:



      (1)   The total of the assessments levied against the
properties within the district shall not exceed $159,305. The assessment of
the total sum shall be divided into four annual assessments for the calendar
years of 2003, 2004, 2005 and 2006, in such a manner and in such an amount
that the total revenues from the district and the Town of Collierville
Central Business Improvement District I shall not exceed $39,826 per year.



      (2)   The remaining costs of the program and service
improvements within the district may be provided by the Town by the
appropriation of its general revenues less any sums received by way of
private contributions and/or monies provided by other governmental entities
or public agencies, but in no event shall the Town’s cost exceed $39,826
per year.



   (G)   The special benefit to all properties located within this
Central Business Improvement District II is uniformly commensurate with the
assessed value of each property in the district and the total cost of such
program and service improvements to be assessed against the property owners
of property in this district shall be assessed against each property in the
same proportions that the assessed value of each such property bears to the
assessed value of all such properties within the district.



   (H)   The special assessments authorized by this section shall be
paid in four equal annual installments and shall be due and payable upon the
property owner’s receipt of notice of the assessed amount. The first of the
four equal installments will be due for calendar year 2003. Notices shall be
sent to all property owners by December 31, 2003. Payment of the assessed
amount shall become delinquent if not paid within the 60 days of the date of
notice to the property owner of the assessed amount. All delinquent
assessments shall accrue interest at the rate of 10% per annum until paid
plus a penalty of .5% per month of the amount of such assessment or
installment.



   (I)   There is hereby created a Board of Assessment Commissioners,
which, in accordance with Tenn. Code Ann. § 7-84-303, shall consist of five
citizens of the Town, none of whom shall be interested in any property
contained within any central business improvement district established by the
Town and who shall serve until completion of their duties, but in no event
longer than four years from the date of their appointment. The Board of
Assessment Commissioners established by this section shall be the same Board
of Assessment Commissioners as established in § 110.03. The members of the
Board of Assessment Commissioners shall be appointed by separate resolution
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen in accordance with the provisions of Tenn.
Code Ann. §§ 7-84-101 et seq.



(Ord. 2003-14, passed 6-9-03)



§ 110.05  SIDEWALK SALES AND DISPLAY EVENTS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other provisions of the code, the Development
Director may approve in writing a period of time during which sidewalk sales
and display of merchandise associated with retail sales and service or
commercial uses on developed commercial properties within all commercial
zoning districts will be permitted. Such designated periods shall not exceed
a maximum of two separate occasions per calendar year, with each separate
occasion not to exceed a period of three consecutive days.



   (B)   Sidewalk sales and display allowed under this section must
comply with the following standards:



      (1)   Sidewalk sales and display may be conducted only by the
business licensed on the property, and may only include merchandise that is
regularly offered for sale inside such business;



      (2)   Sidewalk sales and display may only be located
immediately adjacent to the front building facade. Sidewalk sales and display
must not encroach into a right-of-way (except in the CB Zoning District as
regulated by § 151.025), drive aisle, or off-street parking;



      (3)   Sidewalk sales and display must not encroach into or
otherwise interfere with areas used for ingress and egress into the structure
or otherwise create a public safety hazard or nuisance;



      (4)   A five foot travel width must be maintained on
sidewalks; and



      (5)   Sidewalk sales and display areas must not be located
within 20 feet of any intersection, crosswalk, bus stop, or otherwise create
a public safety hazard or nuisance.



   (C)   For other provisions related to outdoor display or outdoor
dining/seating, see § 151.025.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord.
2011-06, passed 4-25-11)



TRANSIENT VENDORS



§§ 110.20 to 110.22  RESERVED.



§ 110.23  MOBILE FROZEN DESSERT VEHICLES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      MOBILE FROZEN DESSERT VENDOR.  Any person who offers for sale or
sells to another ice cream or other frozen dessert products from motor
vehicles, human-powered vehicles, bicycles, three- wheeled vehicles or any
other form of mobile transportation conveyance on the streets, public or
private property within the Town limits of Collierville.



   (B)   Mobile frozen dessert vehicles (in this section, some are
referred to as vendor or vendors) are allowed to sell ice cream and other
frozen dessert products under the following conditions:



      (1)   Vendors must comply with any license required by the
state, county and town;



      (2)   Vendors must comply with Health Department regulations;



      (3)   Vendors must carry the minimum amount of insurance
required by state and county laws;



      (4)   Vehicles used to transport and dispense frozen desserts
must meet all state and county regulations for such vehicles;



      (5)   Vendors shall not sell/dispense of their products from
stationary locations in the Town, including, but not limited to, streets,
Town owned property, parking lots, private property or vacant lots;



      (6)   Vendors shall not park or stop to sell their products
within the one-quarter mile of any boundary of a school zone area during the
period from one hour before the start of school until one hour after the
school day officially ends;



      (7)   Vendors shall not sell their products after sunset;



      (8)   A vendor shall make no sales until the vehicle is
stopped and lawfully parked;



      (9)   A vendor shall sell only from the side of the vehicle
away from moving vehicles, away from moving traffic and as near as possible
to the curb or side of the street;



      (10)   A vendor shall not sell to a person standing in a
roadway;



      (11)   The driver of a vehicle shall not stop and back the
vehicle to make an attempt to make or attempt a sale;



      (12)   The driver of every mobile frozen dessert vehicle shall
at all times when the vehicle is in motion or at a stop take every precaution
to protect the safety of the customers against traffic and other hazards;



      (13)   Vendors shall not operate in congested areas where the
selling of the product will impede, cause a safety hazard or inconvenience
the public.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the judgement of a police
officer or a code official acting in good faith shall be deemed conclusive to
determine that an area is too congested or unsafe for a mobile frozen dessert
vendor to sell products.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION



§ 110.30  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is as follows:



   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the Town of Collierville;



   (B)   To balance the First Amendment rights of residential
commercial solicitors with the privacy, safety, health and welfare of the
residents within the Town of Collierville;



   (C)   To require all commercial solicitors to conduct any
door-to-door residential solicitation within the Town pursuant to a permit
and identification badge issued by the Town Clerk;



   (D)   To prohibit commercial solicitations at residences where the
owner or occupant has prohibited solicitation in a manner consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a differing meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Any person or entity who has submitted an application for
a permit.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.  A group which is or holds itself out to be a
benevolent, patriotic, philanthropic, political, social service, welfare,
eleemosynary, civic, or fraternal organization who sells goods, wares,
merchandise, or services, or solicits or obtains contributions soliciting
from the public, for charitable purposes.



   CHARITABLE PURPOSE.  Any purpose which is benevolent, patriotic,
political, philanthropic, social service, welfare, eleemosynary, civic,
environmental, or fraternal.



   COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR.  Any person, whether as volunteer, owner, agent,
consignee or employee, who engages in door-to-door commercial solicitation. 
For purposes of this chapter, the term COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR shall include
individuals commonly referred to as “peddlers” and “solicitors”.



   DOOR-TO-DOOR COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION.  Attempting to make personal
contact with a resident at his or her residence, without prior specific
invitation by or appointment with the resident, for the primary purpose of:



      (1)   Attempting to sell, for present or future delivery, any
goods, wares or merchandise, other than newspaper or magazine subscriptions,
or any services to be performed immediately or in the future, whether or not
the person has, carries or exposes a sample of such goods, wares or
merchandise, and whether or not he or she is collecting advance payments for
such sales; or



      (2)   Personally delivering to the resident a handbill or
flyer advertising a commercial event, activity, good or service that is
offered to the resident for purchase at a location away from the residence or
at a future time.



   DOOR-TO-DOOR NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION.  Attempting to make personal
contact with a resident at his or her residence, without prior specific
invitation by or appointment with the resident, for the primary purpose of:



      (1)   Seeking or asking for a gift or donation for a public
entity or nonprofit organization exempt from federal income tax under 26
U.S.C. 501 (c)(3);



      (2)   Soliciting the sale of goods, wares or merchandise for
present or future delivery, or the sale of services to be performed
immediately or in the future, with the entire proceeds of such sale to be
paid directly to, or used exclusively for the benefit of, a public entity or
nonprofit organization exempt from federal income tax under 26 U.S.C.
501(c)(3);



      (3)   Personally delivering to the resident a handbill or
flyer advertising a future, not-for-profit event, activity, good or service;



      (4)   Proselytizing on behalf of a religious organization;



      (5)   Soliciting support for a political candidate or
organization, or ballot measure or ideology; or



      (6)   Soliciting the sale of newspaper or magazine
subscriptions.



   EMPLOYER.  Any person, company, corporation, business, partnership,
organization or any other entity on behalf of whom a person is acting.



   NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITOR.  Any person, whether as volunteer, owner,
agent, consignee or employee, who engages in door-to-door noncommercial
solicitation.  For purposes of this chapter, the term NONCOMMERCIAL
SOLICITOR shall include individuals commonly referred to as “canvassers”
or individuals who solicit for a charitable, religious, political, or
philanthropic purpose, even if, incidental to such purpose, the individual
accepts the donation of money for or against such cause.



   NO-SOLICITATION LIST.  A list of the addresses of town residents who
have requested that their residences be placed on a list maintained and
published by the Town for the purpose of informing the general public and
prospective solicitors that all door-to-door solicitation at such addresses
is prohibited.



   PERMIT.  A document issued by the Town Clerk authorizing a commercial
solicitor to engage in door-to-door commercial solicitation.



   PERMIT HOLDER.  means any person to whom a permit has been issued
under the provisions of this chapter.



   PERSON.  A natural person or business entity, such as, without
limitation, a corporation, association, firm, joint venture, estate, trust,
business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, partnership or any group or combination
thereof.



   RESIDENCE.  A private residence in the Town of Collierville, including
but not limited to, condominium units and apartments, including the yards,
grounds or hallways thereof.



   TOWN CLERK.  The Clerk of the Town of Collierville, or the Clerk’s
designee.



   TOWN NO-SOLICITATION STICKER.  A blue circular sticker, supplied by
the Town of Collierville, bearing the words “No Solicitation” which any
resident may affix to his or her entryway for the purpose of informing the
general public and prospective solicitors that all door-to-door solicitation
at such addresses is prohibited.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.32  EXEMPTIONS.



   The terms of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Bona fide merchants who deliver goods in the regular course of
business; or



   (B)   Sellers responding to a prior invitation by the owner or
occupant of a residence.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.33  ALL SOLICITATION PROHIBITED BY POSTING OF “NO SOLICITATION”
OR “NO TRESPASSING” SIGN OR TOWN NO-SOLICITATION STICKER.



   (A)   No solicitor, whether commercial or noncommercial, shall enter
or remain upon any private premises in the Town where:



      (1)   A “No Solicitation” or “No Trespassing” sign is
clearly posted or placed at or near the entrance(s) to such premises or, in
the case of a multi-family dwelling, at or near the entrance(s) to such
individual dwelling; or



      (2)   A town no-solicitation sticker, supplied by the Town of
Collierville, is placed upon or affixed to the entryway or door of such
premises or individual dwelling.



   (B)   This provision shall apply to all solicitation, including,
without limitation, all activities that are religious, charitable or
political in nature and all solicitation of newspaper or magazine
subscriptions.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 110.34  NO-SOLICITATION LIST.



   (A)   The Town may establish a no-solicitation list allowing any
owner or lawful occupant of any residence within the Town to prohibit
solicitation at said residence by registering the address with the Town. Such
registration shall take effect as soon as it is noted on the Town’s
no-solicitation list.



   (B)   If the Town establishes a no-solicitation list, the Town shall
maintain and publish on the Town’s website and have available at the office
of the Town Clerk such no-solicitation list consisting of all addresses that
have been registered thereon.



      (1)   Such list shall be made available without charge to any
person requesting same. No person shall be required to provide identification
as a condition of obtaining a copy of such list.



      (2)   The Town will make the necessary arrangements to
periodically update the no-solicitation list.



      (3)   Each address appearing on the no-solicitation list will
remain on the list until removed by the occupant.



   (C)   Each permit holder shall be responsible for obtaining and
reviewing a copy of the no-solicitation list immediately upon issuance of a
permit under this chapter and at such intervals thereafter as may be
reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of division
(D) of this section.



   (D)   As of the effective date of the registration of a residential
address under division (A) of this section, door-to-door solicitation at such
address shall be prohibited until such time, if at all, that the address has
been deleted from the no-solicitation list.



   (E)   Neither the Town nor any of its officers, employees, agents or
authorized volunteers shall be liable to any person for any injuries, damages
or liabilities of any kind arising from or relating to any errors or
omissions that may occur in compiling or maintaining the no-solicitation list.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.35  PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE REQUIRED FOR ALL COMMERCIAL
SOLICITORS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in door-to-door commercial solicitation
within the Town without first obtaining a permit and identification badge
from the Town Clerk and paying all applicable fees as provided in this
chapter.



   (B)   It shall be the sole responsibility of the permit holder to:



      (1)   Provide a copy of the permit to each person authorized
to engage in solicitation under the permit;



      (2)   Ensure that each person authorized to solicit under the
permit complies with the terms and conditions of the permit and with the
provisions of this chapter;



      (3)   Notify the clerk in writing of any persons to be added
to or deleted from the list of authorized solicitors or any changes in
employment; and



      (4)   Submit to the Town Clerk, for each person to be added to
such list, the information required under § 110.36(A)(4), together with
payment of the identification badge fee required under § 110.36.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.36  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Each person applying for a door-to-door commercial
solicitation permit shall file with the Town Clerk an affidavit on a form
supplied by the Town Clerk stating the following information, as applicable:



      (1)   The full name, business address, business telephone
number, email address, and website of the applicant;



      (2)   Information regarding the business as required by the
Town Clerk, including, without limitation, its federal tax identification
number, its legal status and proof of registration with, or a certificate of
good standing from, the Tennessee Secretary of State, and, if different from
its business address, the address at which it may be provided notice under
this chapter;



      (3)   A complete list of all persons to be authorized to
solicit under the permit and all supervising staff;



      (4)   For each person authorized to solicit under a permit and
all supervising staff, the following information:



         (a)   Full name, address, telephone number, email
address, date of birth and social security number;



         (b)   A description of the individual including height,
weight, color of eyes and color of hair;



         (c)   The number and state of issuance of the
individual’s driver’s license, state identification card, passport, or
other government-issued identification card;



         (d)   The motor vehicle make, model, year, color, and
state license plate number of any vehicle which will be used by such person;



         (e)   A statement certifying that the person is not
prohibited from commercial solicitation under § 110.40 of this chapter as
determined by a criminal background check or any other information reasonably
available to the employer concerning the criminal record of such individual;
and



         (f)   Any other identifying information as may be
required by the Town Clerk to ensure or verify compliance with this chapter.



      (5)   A statement certifying that the business has not engaged
in unlawful solicitation in the last three cities or towns, if that many,
where the applicant carried on business immediately preceding the date of the
application and, if available, records from such cities or towns
demonstrating the same.



      (6)   A brief explanation of the nature of the solicitation
activity that requires a permit under this Chapter, including the type of the
goods, wares, merchandise, and/or services to be offered to the consumer;



      (7)   The length of time for which the right to do business in
the Town is desired;



      (8)   If the applicant is a foreign corporation or an employee
of such corporation, the name, address and telephone number of an agent for
process residing in the state;



      (9)   Proof that the applicant has obtained a valid business
tax license issued by the Town; and



      (10)   Any other information determined to be relevant by the
Town Clerk.



   (B)   At the time of application, each applicant shall pay a fee in
an amount sufficient to defray the costs incurred by the Town in processing
the application, plus an additional fee to defray the costs of preparing and
issuing an identification badge for each person to be authorized to solicit
under the permit, including the applicant. Such fees shall be established by
the Board of Mayor and Alderman prior to becoming effective.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.37  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION
BADGE(S).



   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete application and all applicable
fees, the Clerk shall immediately refer the application to the Chief of
Police who shall investigate the applicant and return the application along
with a report of such investigation to the Clerk.



   (B)   All applicants shall undergo a criminal background check as
part of the determination of permit eligibility.



   (C)   The Town Clerk shall, following the receipt of a complete
application for a permit under this Chapter, issue such permit, together with
identification badges for all persons authorized to engage in door-to-door
commercial solicitation under the permit, unless the Town Clerk determines
that the permit application is denied under the criteria stated in § 110.41
of this chapter.



   (D)   All permits shall be issued in the name of the applicant. A
permit may be issued to an individual or an employer. Upon issuance of each
permit, the Town Clerk shall create and maintain a list of all persons
authorized to engage in door-to-door commercial solicitation under the permit.



   (E)   The identification badges shall contain a photograph of the
solicitor, bear the words “Permitted Solicitor,” include the names of the
solicitor and the employer the solicitor represents, the name of the permit
holder (if different), the permit number, and the expiration date of the
permit.



   (F)   Subsequent to the issuance of any permit, and upon receipt of
the information and fee required under § 110.36, the Town Clerk shall-issue
an identification badge to any new or additional person to be authorized to
solicit under the permit as long as such person is not prohibited under §
110.40. The Town Clerk shall also issue a replacement identification badge to
any solicitor who, by affidavit, notifies the clerk that his or her
identification badge has been lost or stolen, and who pays an additional
identification badge fee as established under § 110.36.



   (G)   If an employer applies for and is granted a permit under this
chapter, the employer shall be entitled to obtain identification badges from
the Town Clerk for each employee or agent authorized to solicit under the
permit as long as such person is not prohibited under § 110.40.



   (H)   No permit or identification badge issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be transferred to any person.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.38  DURATION OF PERMIT; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Each permit shall be valid for one year, effective from the
date of issuance.



   (B)   Any permittee wishing to renew a permit issued under this
chapter must apply for the renewal of the permit no less than 30 days prior
to the expiration of its term.



   (C)   The renewal application shall be made substantially in the
same form as an original application; however, except for the information
required in § 110.35(A)(3), (4), and (5), only so much of the application
shall be completed as is necessary to reflect conditions which have changed
since the last application was filed.



   (D)   At the time of the renewal application, the permittee shall
pay a fee in an amount determined by the Town Clerk to be sufficient to
defray the costs incurred by the Town in processing the renewal application,
plus an identification badge fee for any new or additional person to be
authorized to solicit under the permit.



   (E)   If a permittee fails to apply for such renewal within said
thirty-day period of time, the permit will expire.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.39  PERSONS PROHIBITED.



   A person shall not be eligible for issuance of a permit or
identification badge under this chapter if:



   (A)   Such person has been convicted, pled guilty, placed on
probation or parole, pleaded nolo contendere, or been released from
incarceration within a period of ten years prior to the date of application
of a felony or Class 1 misdemeanor under the laws of the State of Tennessee
or an equivalent offense under any federal, state, county or municipal law; or



   (B)   A permit or an identification badge previously issued to such
person under this chapter has been revoked by the Town Clerk under §§
110.42 or 110.43 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.40  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Town Clerk shall deny an application for a permit or any
renewal of a permit under this Chapter if the Town Clerk determines that the
applicant has:



      (1)   Made any material misrepresentation or false statement
in the application for the permit, including, without limitation,
representations made as to the criminal history of any person to be
authorized to solicit under the permit; or



      (2)   Failed to obtain a business tax license as required by
law; or



      (3)   Been convicted of a felony or Class 1 misdemeanor under
the laws of the State of Tennessee or an equivalent offense under any
federal, state, county or municipal law.



   (B)   Upon such a determination, the Town Clerk shall notify the
applicant that his or her application is disapproved and that no permit will
be issued.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.41  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF IDENTIFICATION BADGE.



   (A)   The Town Clerk may, after written notice of no less than seven
calendar days, suspend or revoke the identification badge of any solicitor
that has engaged in any unlawful solicitation.



   (B)   The grounds for such suspension or revocation may include, but
shall not be limited to. the following:



      (1)   Failure to solicit in a manner that is in compliance
with the permit and the provisions of this chapter; or



      (2)   Soliciting in such a manner as to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public; or



      (3)   Conviction of a felony or Class 1 misdemeanor under the
laws of the State of Tennessee or an equivalent offense under any federal,
state, county or municipal law.



   (C)   In the event the alleged conduct that is the basis for the
suspension or revocation of the identification badge is the subject of a
pending criminal citation, the Town Clerk may either defer his or her
decision regarding suspension or revocation until such citation has been
resolved or immediately proceed with the foregoing administrative action
prior to the resolution of such citation.



   (D)   The permit holder shall cause the suspended or revoked
identification badge to be delivered to the Town Clerk within five business
days from notification.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.42  NONRENEWAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Town Clerk shall, after written notice of no less than
seven calendar days, revoke and shall not renew any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter if the Town Clerk determines that any of the following have
occurred:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the
application for the permit or any renewal application, including, without
limitation, representations made as to the criminal history of any person to
be authorized to solicit under the permit; or



      (2)   Failure to obtain a business tax license as required by
law; or



      (3)   Failure to supervise solicitation conducted under the
permit so as to reasonably ensure that such solicitation is in compliance
with the terms of the permit and with the provisions of this Chapter; or



      (4)   Authorizing, condoning or knowingly tolerating any
unlawful solicitation or any solicitation conducted in such a manner as to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.



   (B)   In the event the alleged conduct that is the basis for the
revocation or nonrenewal of the permit is the subject of a pending criminal
citation, the Town Clerk may either defer his or her decision regarding
revocation or non-renewal until such citation has been resolved or
immediately proceed with the foregoing administrative action prior to the
resolution of such citation.



   (C)   The permit holder shall cause the suspended or revoked permit
along with all identification badges of persons authorized to solicit under
the permit, to be delivered to the Town Clerk within five business days from
notification.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.43  EMERGENCY SUMMARY SUSPENSION OF IDENTIFICATION BADGE OR PERMIT.



   (A)   If reasonable grounds exist to believe that a permittee and/or
badge holder has engaged in illegal activity such that the public health,
safety or welfare imperatively requires emergency action, the Town Clerk may
summarily suspend the permit and/or badge pending the notice set forth in
§§ 110.42 or 110.43 as applicable.



   (B)   The temporary suspension of a permit or badge shall be for a
period not to exceed 20 days.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.44  APPEALS FOR DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT; HEARINGS.



   (A)   Upon the denial, suspension, or revocation of a commercial
solicitation permit by the Town Clerk, the applicant or permit holder shall
be entitled to a hearing before the Board of Mayor and Alderman in accordance
with the following:



      (1)   A request for a hearing shall be in writing, setting
forth fully the grounds for the appeal, and filed with the Town Administrator
within 20 days of the Town Clerk’s decision to deny an initial application
or renewal, or to suspend or revoke a permit.



      (2)   The Town Clerk shall notify the applicant or permit
holder by United States mail of the hearing date.



      (3)   The hearing date shall fall within 25 days from the date
the Town Clerk receives the request, unless the applicant requests a later
date and the Town Clerk grants the request.



      (4)   The applicant or permit holder is considered notified
upon publication of the hearing date by the Town Clerk.



      (5)   At the hearing, the applicant or permit holder may
present evidence as to why his/her initial application or renewal should not
be denied, or why his/her permit should not be suspended or revoked.



      (6)   The Town Clerk has the authority to subpoena witnesses
to testify at such hearings.



      (7)   Within five days of the hearing, the Board of Mayor and
Alderman shall state in writing the reason for the Board’s decision that
will either affirm or reject the denial of an initial application, renewal,
suspension, or the revocation of a permit and mail it by United States mail
to the address of the applicant as listed on the application.



   (B)   Any denial after a hearing of an initial application for a
permit may be appealed by writ of certiorari to the Circuit or Chancery
Courts of Shelby County within 60 days from the date of the hearing.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.45  DUTY TO DISPLAY IDENTIFICATION BADGE AND TO EXHIBIT PERMIT.



   (A)   Any commercial solicitor engaging in door-to-door commercial
solicitation under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
conspicuously display his or her identification badge on the front of his/her
person at all times so to be reasonably visible to any person who might be
approached by said person while engaged in the act of commercial soliciting.



   (B)   Whenever requested by any police officer or by any customer or
prospective customer, any commercial solicitor engaged in door-to-door
commercial solicitation under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
exhibit his or her permit and identification badge.



   (C)   Whenever requested by any police officer or by any customer or
prospective customer, any commercial solicitor engaged in door-to-door
commercial solicitation under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
present some form of business card or, if the solicitor does not utilize
business cards in the course of his or her business, some form of
informational document, containing information on the solicitor including, at
a minimum, the solicitor’s name, the name of the company, organization, or
entity that the solicitor represents or is employed by, the business address,
telephone number, and, as applicable, email address and website. Further, if
requested at such time as the above request, the solicitor must provide his
or her permit number, the name of an individual at the company, organization
or entity that the solicitor represents that is responsible for the
supervision or management of the solicitor, and such supervisor’s telephone
number.



   (D)   A permit holder shall, without undue delay, report any lost or
stolen identification badge to the Town Clerk.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.46  LIMITATIONS ON ALL SOLICITATION.



   (A)    No solicitor, whether commercial or noncommercial, shall:



      (1)   Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front
or main entrance to the dwelling, or step from the sidewalk or indicated
walkway (where one exists) leading from the right-of-way to the front or main
entrance, except by express invitation of the resident or occupant of the
property; or



      (2)   Remove any “No Solicitation” or “No Trespassing”
sign or town no-solicitation sticker that gives notice to such solicitor that
the resident or occupant does not invite visitors.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, whether commercial or
noncommercial, to remain upon any private premises and refuse to leave such
premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises
or his or her agent to leave the same and not return to such premises.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.47  LIMITATIONS ON COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION.



   (A)   No commercial solicitor shall solicit for a purpose other than
that set out in the application upon which the permit was issued.



   (B)   No commercial solicitor shall conduct any door-to-door
solicitations except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and one-half (1/2) hour
before sunset, it being the intent that door-to-door commercial solicitations
occur during daylight hours and at times when citizens feel secure in their
homes to receive unexpected visitors.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.48  FALSE OR DECEPTIVE REPRESENTATIONS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall attempt to obtain, by telephone or otherwise, an
invitation to visit any private residence for the purpose of soliciting the
purchase or sale of goods, services or any other thing of value, by knowingly
making a false or deceptive representation or statement.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.49  RECORDS.



   The Town Clerk shall maintain records showing each permit issued and
the alleged violations of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.50  ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.



   The Town Clerk is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations as are
necessary to effectuate the implementation, administration and enforcement of
this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.98  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any police officer,
code enforcement official or other duly authorized official of the Town of
Collierville.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating this ordinance of the Town shall be fined not more than $50 or the
maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 8-10-15)



CHAPTER 111:  CHARITABLE SOLICITORS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Requirements for charitable solicitor’s permit



   111.03   Grounds for denial



   111.04   Right of appeal



   111.05   Permit required



   111.06   Special requirements



   111.07   Use of funds



   111.08   Exhibition of permit



   111.09   Exceptions



   111.10   Enforcement



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. The use of money or property for the benefit of:



      (1)   Charity or philanthropy, or poor, impoverished,
destitute, underprivileged, needy, refugee, diseased, injured, crippled,
disabled or handicapped persons or persons in need of rehabilitation;



      (2)   A church, religious society or other religious sect,
group or other;



      (3)   Patriotism that is for the teaching of patriotism or the
relief or assistance of veterans or veterans’ organizations; or



      (4)   Existing educational institutions or for the
establishment or endowment of educational institution or in aid of the
education of any person or group of persons.



   CHARITABLE SOLICITOR. Any direct or indirect request for money,
property, credit, volunteer service or other thing of value to be given now
or on a deferred basis on the representation that it will be used for
charitable, educational, religious, benevolent, patriotic, civic or other
philanthropic purpose.  SOLICITATIONS includes invitations to voting
membership and appeals to voting members when a contribution is a principal
requirement for membership. CHARITABLE SOLICITORS must also meet the
requirements of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to qualify as a
charitable, non-profit or religious organization.



   FUND RAISING. Includes charitable solicitation; the activities,
representations and materials that are an integral part of the planning,
creation, production and communication of the solicitation; and the
collection of money, property or other thing of value requested. FUND RAISING
includes, but is not limited to, donor acquisition and renewal, development,
fund or resource development, member or membership development and contract
or grant procurement.



   FUND RAISING EXPENSES. Those funds expended for informational material
and activities which include an appeal for financial support and
informational material and activities distributed or conducted as part of or
in preparation of an organized fund raising effort or for the recruitment and
training of individuals to solicit financial support for the applicant and
indoctrination of these individuals.  If an informational effort includes an
appeal or plea for financial support, then the entire cost of the
undertaking, including staff time and directly related costs, as well as
direct out-of-pocket expenses, must be included in the FUND RAISING EXPENSES.



   PUBLIC. Includes individuals, groups, associations, corporations,
foundations, institutions and/or government agencies.



   PUBLIC EDUCATION. That activity and material which is problem-oriented
and tells individuals what they can or should do about a problem, as opposed
to a fund raising activity and material which is agency-oriented and tells
what an agency does or, through available services, can do.



   SOLICITING ORGANIZATIONS. Any corporation, trust, group, partnership or
individual engaged in a charitable solicitation; a SOLICITOR is anyone
engaged in a charitable solicitation. 



(`83 Code, § 5-301)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01)



§ 111.02  REQUIREMENTS FOR CHARITABLE SOLICITOR’S PERMIT.



   (A)   An applicant for a permit to conduct a charitable solicitation
in the Town of Collierville shall file an application in writing with the
Code Compliance Officer or a person designated by the Town Administrator not
less than 30 days prior to the proposed date(s) of the charitable
solicitation event.



   (B)   The application must contain the following information:



      (1)   The full name of the person or organization applying for
a permit to solicit and the address of the headquarters in the Town; if the
organization is a chapter or other affiliate of an organization having its
principal office outside the Town, the name and address of the parent
organization;



      (2)   The names and addresses of all officers and directors or
trustees of the organization;



      (3)   The name of the person or persons by whom the receipts
of the solicitation will be disbursed; if the receipts are transmitted to a
parent organization for further disbursement, detailed information of the
methods of handling and disbursement of all funds and a detailed and complete
financial statement of the parent organization for the preceding fiscal year;



      (4)   The name and address of the local person or persons who
will be in charge of conducting the charitable solicitations;



      (5)   A description of the method or methods to be used in
conducting the charitable solicitations;



      (6)   The period of time within which the charitable
solicitation will be conducted, including the proposed dates for the
beginning and the end of the solicitations;



      (7)   The total amount of funds proposed to be raised;



      (8)   The amount of the salaries, wages, fees, compensations,
expenses and costs to be expended or paid to anyone in connection with the
solicitation and the percentage of the funds collected which are to be used
to pay the cost of implementing the solicitation;



      (9)   Any related permits required by the Health Department
for food handling;



      (10)   At the request of the Development Director or his/her
designee, the soliciting organization shall provide the following documents:



         (a)   An annual report presenting the organization’s
purpose, description of overall programs, activities and accomplishments,
eligibility to receive deductible contributions, information on the Board and
structure and information about financial activities and financial position;



         (b)   Complete financial statement presenting the
overall financial activities and financial position of the organization
prepared in accordance with acceptable accounting principles and practices. 
When total annual income exceeds $100,000, the financial statement shall be
audited. Information to be provided should include at a minimum the following
areas:



            1.   Significant categories of contributions and
other income;



            2.   Expenses reported in categories corresponding
to descriptions of major programs and activities contained in the annual
report;



            3.   A detailed schedule of expenses by
classification; and



            4.   An accurate presentation of all fund raising
and administrative costs, including activities that combine fund raising with
one or more organizational purposes.



(`83 Code, § 5-302)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01; Am. Ord. 2011-06, passed 4-25-11)



§ 111.03  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.



   The Code Compliance Officer or a person designated by the Town
Administrator shall have the right to disapprove any application for a
charitable solicitor’s permit for the following reasons:



   (A)   If the applicant does not meet the definition of charitable
solicitor as provided for in these regulations;



   (B)   If the applicant or others named in the application have been
previously convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor;



   (C)   If the Town has not been able to confirm the authenticity of
the organization or the address;



   (D)   If the applicant proposes to sell items or goods for human
consumption and has not received approval from the Shelby County Health
Department;



   (E)   If the applicant has given false information on the
application;



   (F)   If the application has violated the terms of this chapter or
of the Town ordinances regulating peddlers;



   (G)   If the applicant’s site is inadequate to accommodate the
proposed charitable event or activity.



(`83 Code, § 5-303)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01)



§ 111.04  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   An applicant may file a written appeal within ten days of a denial of
approval of the issuance of a charitable solicitor’s permit by the Code
Compliance Officer or a person designated by the Town Administrator, whereby
it is alleged in writing that the Code Compliance Officer or a person
designated by the Town Administrator is in error or has acted in an arbitrary
manner in the enforcement of these standards in the denial of approval of the
application for a charitable solicitor’s permit.



(`83 Code, § 5-304)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01)



§ 111.05  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall solicit contributions or anything else of value for any
real or alleged charitable or religious purpose without approval from the
Code Compliance Officer or a person designated by the Town Administrator, or
in the event of a written appeal, approval from the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen and a permit from the Town Clerk authorizing such solicitation.



(`83 Code, § 5-305)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Am. Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.06  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.



   These are the general requirements for conduct during a charitable
solicitation event:



   (A)   The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under
responsible and reliable persons;



   (B)   The applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or
enterprise;



   (C)   The solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the
charitable cause described by the applicant;



   (D)   A charitable solicitor shall not occupy a fixed location on
any public sidewalk or street. There shall be no interference with or
obstruction of movement of any pedestrian or vehicle by any charitable
solicitor;



   (E)   A charitable solicitor shall not be permitted to make or cause
to be made any loud noise to attract attention or for any other purpose;



   (F)   All charitable events shall abide by the Town sign
regulations, including the size and placement of miscellaneous yard signs and
temporary signs for the event;



   (G)   The area devoted to the charitable event shall be cleaned
completely of trash, rubbish and other related debris and materials within
two days of the conclusion of the charitable event.



(`83 Code, § 5-306)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Am. Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01)



§ 111.07  USE OF FUNDS.



   (A)   A reasonable percentage of total income from all sources shall
be applied to programs and activities directly related to the purposes for
which the organization exists.



   (B)   A reasonable percentage of public contributions shall be
applied to the programs and activities described in solicitations, in
accordance with donor expectations.



   (C)   Fund raising costs shall be reasonable.



   (D)   Total fund raising and administrative costs shall be
reasonable.



   (E)   Soliciting organizations shall substantiate on request their
application of funds, in accordance with donor expectations, to the programs
and activities described in solicitations.



(`83 Code, § 5-307)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Am. Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01)



§ 111.08  EXHIBITION OF PERMIT.



   Any solicitor required by this chapter to have a permit shall exhibit
such permit at the request of any police officer, designee of the Town
Administrator or persons solicited.



(`83 Code, § 5-308)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Am. Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01)



§ 111.09  EXCEPTIONS.



   This section shall not apply to any locally established organization or
church operated exclusively for charitable or religious purposes if the
solicitations are conducted exclusively among the members thereof,
voluntarily and without enumeration for making such solicitations or if the
solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at regular
assemblies of any such organization or church conducted on their own premises.



(`83 Code, § 5-309)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Am. Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01)



§ 111.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Code Compliance Officer or a person
designated by the Town Administrator to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.



(`83 Code, § 4-310)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Am. Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, § 5-311)  (Ord. 96-25, passed 8-26-96; Am. Ord. 2001-07, passed
4-23-01; Am. Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03)



CHAPTER 112:  PAWNBROKERS



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Definition



   112.02   License required by state law



   112.03   Cards for information relative to pawned articles



   112.04   Pawnbroker to fill in proper types and deliver to police



   112.05   Inspection by Police



Regulations



   112.20   Conducting other business in same building prohibited



   112.21   Purchase of property prohibited



   112.22   Business signs



   112.23   Dealing with certain persons prohibited



   112.24   Certain pledges prohibited



   112.25   Return of stolen property to owner



   112.26   Pawn tickets and stub book



   112.27   Memorandum to be given pledger



   112.28   Retention period for pawned articles



   112.29   Forfeiture of pledged property



   112.30   Damage to pledged property



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context otherwise appears,
a PAWNBROKER shall be deemed to be any person, partnership, or corporation
engaged in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods; or
engaged in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on condition
that it may be redeemed and repurchased by the seller for a fixed price
within a fixed period of time; or engaged in the business of advancing money
to a customer in consideration for the customer surrendering possession of
tangible personal property on an agreement by which the property may be
returned to the customer’s possession on repayment of the money advanced;
and engaged in the business of selling new and used tangible personal
property, whether unredeemed tangible personal property resulting from a pawn
transaction, or acquired by a purchase of tangible personal property not
acquired in a pawn transaction or purchased merchandise for resale from
dealers and traders.



(Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-203(5))



(`83 Code, § 5-601)



Statutory reference:



   Similar definition, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-205



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED BY STATE LAW.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a
pawnbroker within the Town, unless he or she first obtains the license
required by Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-205.



(`83 Code, § 5-602)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of Town to regulate pawnbrokers, see Tenn. Code Ann. §
45-6-219;



   Pawnbrokers, generally, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 45-6-201 et seq.



§ 112.03  CARDS FOR INFORMATION RELATIVE TO PAWNED ARTICLES.



   (A)   In addition to the book provided for in § 112.26, every pawn
broker, at the time of receiving any article in the conduct of his or her
business, shall place a description of the article or things pledged upon the
front side of a blank form card, three inches by five inches in size, which
card shall be provided by the pawnbroker. The description to be given of such
article shall be such description as may be called for by the blank form on
such card. The pawnbroker shall fill in such other blank spaces as may appear
on the front side of such blank card with the date as is requested by the
blank space. A separate card shall be provided and used for each article
pledged, received or taken.



   (B)   On the back of each blank form card there shall be written by
the pledger, in his or her own handwriting, his or her name and address and
such pledger shall also reproduce thereon his or her right thumb print at the
place indicated therefore on the back of such card. In the event the right
thumb is amputated, then such other fingerprint as required by the pawnbroker
shall be taken and such fingerprint fully described and designated upon the
card. This thumb print shall be reproduced and taken in the usually approved
manner and shall not be blurred or obliterated. The pawnbroker shall then
fill in a description of the party so pledging or leaving any such article as
the remaining spaces on the back side of such blank form card may be called
for.



(`83 Code, § 5-614)



Statutory reference:



   Type of information and identification to be submitted on pawned goods,
see Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-209



§ 112.04  PAWNBROKER TO FILL IN PROPER TYPES AND DELIVER TO POLICE.



   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall fill in the proper type of card for
each article pledged to or otherwise received by him or her, and he or she
shall deliver to the Chief of Police, every day before the hour of 12:00
noon, all of such cards describing articles, pledged, pawned or received
during the preceding day.



   (B)   The cards may be mailed to the office of the Chief of Police,
or his or her designee, in lieu of personal delivery, if the envelope in
which the same are mailed bears the post date of the day on which such
property was received.



(`83 Code, § 5-618)



§ 112.05  INSPECTION BY POLICE.



   The card records provided for in this chapter shall be at all
reasonable times open to the inspection of the Chief of Police or any of his
or her designees.



(`83 Code, § 5-619)



REGULATIONS



§ 112.20  CONDUCTING OTHER BUSINESS IN SAME BUILDING PROHIBITED.



   No pawnbroker shall carry on any other business or vocation, directly
or indirectly, in the same building or in any building adjoining the place or
building in which he or she is licensed to carry on the business of
pawnbroker, loanbroker or keeper of a loan office. No pawnbroker shall permit
any other business of any character whatsoever to be conducted in the same
building where the business of the pawnbroker is conducted, provided that
nothing in this section shall be taken to preclude a pawnbroker from selling
or disposing of unredeemed and repossessed pledges from his or her place of
business.



(`83 Code, § 5-603)



§ 112.21  PURCHASE OF PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   No pawnbroker, loanbroker or keeper of a loan office shall, in the
conduct of such business, under any pretense whatever, purchase or buy any
personal property whatsoever.



(`83 Code, § 5-604)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-212



§ 112.22  BUSINESS SIGNS.



   Every person licensed under this chapter shall cause his or her name,
with the words “Licensed  Pawnbroker” and no other words or symbols, to
be printed or painted in large, legible characters and placed over the
outside or door or entrance of his or her shop, office or place of business.
No other sign or marker of any description shall be permitted upon the front
of such building.



(`83 Code, § 5-605)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-217



§ 112.23  DEALING WITH CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED.



   No pawnbroker shall take any article in pawn, pledge or as security
from any person under legal age, nor from any person appearing to be
intoxicated, nor from any person known to such pawnbroker to be a thief or to
have been convicted of larceny, burglary, robbery or housebreaking, without
first notifying a police officer.



(`83 Code, § 5-606)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-212



§ 112.24  CERTAIN PLEDGES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No pawnbroker shall take for pledge, pawn or security any
device which may be used in the game of chance or gaming device, nor shall he
or she have any device that is or may be used in the game of craps, equality,
“French pool” or Paris mutual, “keeno,” lottery, lotto, pack of
cards, pisco, punchboard, rondo, shuffleboard, six-wheel, stock table, tables
used for playing pool and billiards, poker chips and poker tables, ten pin
alleys, roulette, wheel of chance, slot machines, faro, grand raffle or any
device used in or for any other game of chance.



   (B)   No pawnbroker shall take as pledge, pawn or security any
razor, except safety razor, or any dirk, bowie knife or other knife of like
size or any other knife with any blade over two and one-half inches long,
sword, cane, slingshot, black jack, brass knucks or Spanish stiletto.



   (C)   No pawnbroker shall take as pledge, pawn or security any
pistol, revolver, automatic pistol, cartridge or shell or any pistol, either
automatic or revolver.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to possess any of the
articles enumerated in this section.



(`83 Code, § 5-607)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.25  RETURN OF STOLEN PROPERTY TO OWNER.



   When any person is found to be the owner of stolen property, which has
been pawned, such property shall be returned to the owner thereof, without
payment of the amount advanced by the pawnbroker thereon, or any costs or
charges of any kind, which the pawnbroker may have placed upon such property.



(`83 Code, § 5-608) 



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-213



§ 112.26  PAWN TICKETS AND STUB BOOK.



   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall keep a book which shall be made with a
stub, which shall be numbered consecutively and shall correspond in all
essential particulars to the detachable pawn ticket thereto. The pawnbroker
shall, at the time of making any loan, enter upon the stub, as well as the
pawn ticket, a clear and accurate description, written in ink in the English
language of the property pawned, the date and amount of money loaned and when
due, the name and residence address of the pawner and, if the article bears a
serial number, the serial number. The pawner shall sign the stub with his or
her residence address and receive the detached pawn ticket which shall be
signed by the pawnbroker.



   (B)   The pawnbroker shall deliver daily, except Sunday, to the
Chief of Police before the hour of 10:00 a.m. a correct copy of all entries
made in the stub book during the preceding business day. This book shall be
carefully preserved without alteration and shall at all times be open to the
inspection of the Chief of Police or any officer of the Town.



(`83 Code, § 5-609) 



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-209



§ 112.27  MEMORANDUM TO BE GIVEN PLEDGER.



   Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of each loan, deliver to the person
pawning or pledging any goods, articles or things a memorandum or note signed
by him or her, containing the substance of the entry required by this section
to be made by him or her in his or her record book and an estimated value of
the goods, articles or things pledged. No charge shall be made or received by
any pawnbroker for any such memorandum or note.



(`83 Code, § 5-610)



§ 112.28  RETENTION PERIOD FOR PAWNED ARTICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for pawnbrokers to sell, exchange, barter or
remove from their place of business or permit to be redeemed any goods
pledged, pawned or deposited by, to or with them for a period of 48 hours
after delivering a copy of the stub book entry covering such articles to the
police as required by § 112.26.



(`83 Code, § 5-611)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-212



§ 112.29  FORFEITURE OF PLEDGED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall retain in his or her possession every
unredeemed pledge or pawn for 50 days after maturity of the loan. If the
pledger shall fail or neglect, for 50 days after maturity of such loan, to
redeem the pawned property, the pawnbroker may at any time thereafter mail a
notice to the pledge owner at the residence address designated by him or her
on the stub of the book required to be kept by § 112.26, which notice shall
give the number of the pawn ticket and a description of the property pledged
and in addition shall notify the pledger that the property must be redeemed
within ten days of the notice and specify the date and that upon his or her
failure to redeem within this time the pledged property will be forfeited to
the pawnbroker and the right of the pledger thereafter to redeem divested. 
This notice shall be in form substantially as follows:



               _____________________, 20________



         ____________________________________________



         ____________________________________________



         City         County                
State



         To______________________________________Name



         ________________________________________Address



         ________________________________________City



         ________________________________________State



You are hereby notified to redeem your pledged property on or before ten days
from date, to wit ________________ (give date) or the same will be forfeited
to the pawnbroker under your agreement; and your right to redeem your pledged
property will thereafter be divested. Your pawn ticket number is
_________________. The property pledged by you as security is described as
follows:
______________________________________________________________(general
description of property).



         (Pawnbroker)_____________________________________



         (Address)________________________________________



   (B)   Upon the date of mailing such notice, it shall also be the
duty of the pawnbroker to publish a notice in a daily newspaper published in
the Town in substance, as follows:



                  (Date)________________________



   To Pledgers and Pawners:



   You and each of you are hereby notified that the owners of pawn ticket
number _____________ to _______________, inclusive, must redeem the pledges
represented by your pawn ticket on or before ________________, 20___, or your
right to redeem will be forfeited.



                  _____________________________



                  Pawnbroker



   (C)   If, notwithstanding such notice, the person obtaining the loan
shall fail to redeem the pawned or pledged property within ten days
designated in the notice, the pledger shall thereby forfeit all right, title
and interest thereof in and to such pawned and pledged property to the
pawnbroker, who shall thereby acquire an absolute title to it and the debt
become satisfied. The pawnbroker shall have authority to sell or dispose of
these unredeemed pledges as his or her own property.



   (D)   This section shall be printed in full on the back of the pawn
ticket required to be given to the pledger.



(`83 Code, § 5-612) 



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-6-211



§ 112.30  DAMAGE TO PLEDGED PROPERTY.



   If any pledger, upon redeeming his or her property, finds that it has
been damaged and rendered less valuable, the amount of damage done to such
property shall be deducted from the amount due the pawnbroker. If the damage
done to the property is greater than the amount due the pawnbroker, the
pawnbroker shall reimburse the owner for the damage done to such property.



(`83 Code, § 5-613)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 45-2215



CHAPTER 113:  JUNK DEALERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS



Section



Junk Dealers



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Business to be conducted in enclosed building



   113.03   Business hours



   113.04   Record of purchases



   113.05   Daily report of purchases



   113.06   Retention period for articles purchased



   113.07   Dealing with minors



   113.08   Dealing with strangers prohibited; duty to give information
relative to sellers



Secondhand Dealers



   113.20   Business hours



   113.21   Retention period for articles purchased



   113.22   Daily report of purchases



   113.23   Dealing with minors



   113.24   Special provisions relative to secondhand book dealers



   113.25   Cards for information relative to purchase



   113.26   Type and colors of cards



   113.27   Forms and required information generally



   113.28   Information to be on back of cards



   113.29   Dealer to fill in proper type and deliver to police



JUNK DEALERS



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUNK DEALER. Any person in any way buying, selling, exchanging, trading
or dealing in scrap iron, brass, empty bottles or secondhand metals of any
sort or kind, including automobile accessories and automobile parts within
the Town.



   JUNK SHOP or JUNK YARD. Any place where odds and ends, old rags, ropes,
cordage, old metals, secondhand machine parts, worn-out motor vehicles and
parts thereof and the like are bought, sold or stored.



(`83 Code, § 5-701)



§ 113.02  BUSINESS TO BE CONDUCTED IN ENCLOSED BUILDING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, operate, maintain or
carry on any business in connection with a junk shop or junk yard in the Town
unless it is conducted in an enclosed building. It shall be unlawful to
conduct or carry on the business of maintaining or operating a junk shop or
junk yard within the Town in any open or enclosed space or lot.



(`83 Code, § 5-702)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.03  BUSINESS HOURS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer to open his or her
place of business for the transaction of business before 6:00 a.m. or to keep
his or her place of business open for the transaction of business after 8:00
p.m. on any weekday, except Saturday, on which day it shall be unlawful for
any such junk dealer to keep his or her place of business open not later than
11:00 p.m.



   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to
make it lawful to conduct the business of a junk dealer on Sunday.



(`83 Code, § 5-703)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.04  RECORD OF PURCHASES.



   Every junk dealer shall keep a book in which he or she shall promptly
enter the names of all persons from whom he or she buys or gets iron, brass
or other metals of any sort, bottles or other articles of any nature
whatsoever, followed by the date of purchase, the amount paid therefore, the
kind of metals purchased or received, the number of pounds of each kind and
description of all other articles purchased.  These entries shall be made in
chronological order from day to day, as business is transacted. This book 
shall at all times be open to the inspection of the police or other officers
who may desire to see it and shall be kept in good faith and preserved by
such dealer for convenient inspection.



(`83 Code, § 5-704)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-14-105



§ 113.05  DAILY REPORT OF PURCHASES.



   Every junk dealer shall prepare and deliver daily to the Chief of
Police, before the hour of 9:00 a.m. each day, a written report of all scrap
iron, brass or other metal or articles of any sort, including automobile
accessories, or any other personality or merchandise purchased, exchanged or
in any way acquired by such dealer on the preceding day, giving the number of
pounds of each kind, the date and hour of purchase, the price paid therefore
and the correct name, address, color and sex of the person from whom such
material was purchased or received.



(`83 Code, § 5-705)



Statutory reference:



   Duty of dealers in secondhand automobile tires and accessories to make
daily reports to Police headquarters, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-14-101



§ 113.06  RETENTION PERIOD FOR ARTICLES PURCHASED.



   (A)   No property purchased by any junk dealer shall be sold,
disposed of or removed from the place of business of such dealer until at
least 48 hours after the required reports have been delivered to the Chief of
Police pursuant to § 113.05.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this
section, junk dealers shall keep on hand and in separate packages and not
allow to be mixed or confused with other purchases in order that
identification may be made of all scrap iron and casings and bottles and
merchandise bought or received from any person. This merchandise shall be
kept separate and subject to easy and convenient inspection of anyone
desiring to investigate for a period of not less than ten days after purchase
or other acquisition. This subsection shall not apply to scrap iron or iron
castings.



(`83 Code, § 5-706) 



Statutory reference:



   Secondhand automobile tires and accessories to be retained three days
prior to sale by dealer, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-14-102



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 62-9-102



§ 113.07  DEALING WITH MINORS.



   No junk dealer shall purchase or otherwise receive from a minor under
the age of 16 years any personal property of any kind. He or she shall not
deal with any minor 16 years of age or over without the written consent of
the parent or guardian of such minor.



(`83 Code, § 5-707)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 62-9-103



§ 113.08  DEALING WITH STRANGERS PROHIBITED; DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION
RELATIVE TO SELLERS.



   Junk dealers shall deal only with persons whom are personally known to
them and of whose identification they are certain. The dealers shall promptly
give to any officer, upon request, information to enable the seller to be
identified. Dealing with strangers or failing to give such information on
demand shall render such dealer guilty of violation of this subchapter.



(`83 Code, § 5-708)



Statutory reference:



   Duty to give information as to identification of sellers, see Tenn.
Code Ann. § 62-9-104



SECONDHAND DEALERS



§ 113.20  BUSINESS HOURS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand merchandise
to open his or her place of business for the transaction of business before
6:00 a.m. or to keep his or her place of business open for the transaction of
business after 8:00 p.m. on any weekday, except Saturday, on which day it
shall be lawful for any dealer in secondhand merchandise to keep his or her
place of business open not later than 11:00 p.m. 



   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to
make it lawful to conduct the business of a dealer in secondhand merchandise
on Sunday.



(`83 Code, § 5-801)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.21  RETENTION PERIOD FOR ARTICLES PURCHASED.



   No property purchased by any dealer in secondhand merchandise shall be
sold, disposed of or  removed from the place of business of such dealer for
at least 48 hours after the required reports have been delivered to the Chief
of Police.



(`83 Code, § 5-802) 



Statutory reference:



   Retention of secondhand automobile tires and accessories, see Tenn.
Code Ann. § 55-14-102



§ 113.22  DAILY REPORT OF PURCHASES.



   Each dealer in secondhand merchandise of every kind and description
shall prepare and deliver to the Chief of Police, before 9:00 a.m. each day,
a report containing a legible and correct description of each and every
article or piece of merchandise purchased during the preceding day, together
with the name, color, sex and address of the person from whom such property
was purchased.



(`83 Code, § 5-803)



Statutory reference:



   Duty of dealers in secondhand automobile tires and accessories to make
daily reports to Police headquarters, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-14-101



§ 113.23  DEALING WITH MINORS.



   No dealer in secondhand merchandise shall purchase or otherwise receive
from any minor under the age of 16 years any property of any kind, nor shall
he or she deal with any minor 16 years of age or over without the written
consent of such minor’s parent or guardian.



(`83 Code, § 5-804)



§ 113.24  SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATIVE TO SECONDHAND BOOK DEALERS.



   Dealers in secondhand books shall deal only with persons known
personally to them and whose identification they are certain. They shall
promptly give to any officer inquiring about it information to enable the
seller to be identified and dealing with strangers or failing to give such
information on demand shall render the dealer guilty of a misdemeanor.



(`83 Code, § 5-805)



§ 113.25  CARDS FOR INFORMATION RELATIVE TO PURCHASE.



   (A)   Every dealer in secondhand merchandise, at the time of buying
or receiving any article in such business, shall write a description of the
article on the front side of a blank form card, three inches by five inches
in size, which card shall be provided by the dealer. The description to be
given of the article shall be such description as may be called for by such
blank form. The secondhand dealer shall fill in such other blank spaces as
may appear on the front side of such blank form card, with certain
information as required in this section. A separate card shall be provided
and used for each such article bought or received.



   (B)   On the back side of each blank card there shall be written by
the person transferring any article to a secondhand dealer, in his or her own
handwriting, his or her name and address and such person shall also reproduce
thereon his or her right thumb print at the place indicated therefore on the
back of such card. In the event the right thumb is amputated, then such other
fingerprint as required by the secondhand dealer shall be taken and such
fingerprint fully described and designated upon the card.  The thumb print
shall be reproduced and taken in the usual approved manner and shall not be
blurred or obliterated. The secondhand dealer shall then fill in a
description of the party so transferring any such article in accordance with
the information requested on the back side of such blank card.



(`83 Code, § 5-806)



Statutory reference:



   Records to be kept of purchase of used automobile parts and
accessories, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-14-105



§ 113.26  TYPE AND COLORS OF CARDS.



   The blank cards provided for in § 113.25 shall be four separate types:
one type for watches only, which card shall be blue in color; one type for
jewelry and diamonds only, which card shall be yellow in color; one type for
clothing, which shall be pink in color; one type for all other secondhand
articles not herein enumerated and shall be denominated miscellaneous
articles, which card shall be white.



(`83 Code, § 5-807)



§ 113.27  FORMS AND REQUIRED INFORMATION GENERALLY.



   The cards provided for by this chapter shall be on such forms as are
prescribed by the Chief of Police and shall contain such information as
required by him or her as to specific items or property purchased or
otherwise received by the secondhand dealer.



(`83 Code, § 5-808)



§ 113.28  INFORMATION TO BE ON BACK OF CARDS.



   The back side of all types of cards required by this subchapter shall
be in the following form and contain the following printed matter thereon:



   Signature                        
   Address                        
   Description of customer (to be filled out by dealer)



                              
   Sex ___ Age____ Height, ft._____ in.____ Weight, lbs.      
   Race or Nationality_______________    Clothing         
                              
   Complexion                        
   Right Thumb



(`83 Code, § 5-809)



§ 113.29  DEALER TO FILL IN PROPER TYPE AND DELIVER TO POLICE.



   Every secondhand dealer shall fill in the proper type of card for each
article bought or transferred to him or her and he or she shall deliver to
the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, every day, before the hour of
12:00 noon, all such cards describing the secondhand goods, articles or
things bought, received or transferred to such secondhand dealer during the
preceding day. The cards may be mailed to the office of the Chief of Police,
or his or her designee, in lieu of personal delivery if the envelope in which
the same are mailed bears the post date of the day in which such property was
received.



(`83 Code, § 5-810)



CHAPTER 114:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



Amusement Devices



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Seal or tag to show serial number



   114.03   Special requirements for electrical devices



   114.04   Location near schools prohibited; exception



   114.05   Machines exempt from provisions



   114.06   Permit



   114.07   Filing and contents of application



   114.08   Permit fee



   114.09   Inspections



   114.10   Town Clerk to issue permit or investigate application;
appeals



   114.11   Numbering



   114.12   Posting



   114.13   Transfer prohibited



   114.14   Permit covers owner of device and owner of premises



   114.15   Renewal



   114.16   Suspension or revocation



Pool Rooms



   114.30   Prohibited in residential areas



   114.31   Hours of operation regulated



   114.32   Minors to be kept out; exception



   114.33   Gambling and the like not to be allowed



   114.99   Penalty



AMUSEMENT DEVICES



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Nothing
in the following definitions shall apply to machines placed in homes for
non-commercial purposes.



   ELECTRICAL MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES. Any mechanical amusement
device as heretofore defined which is fitted for electrical service or with
internal wiring capable of carrying or transmitting current, regardless
whether the current is used to operate mechanical components, power lights or
perform other functions.



   MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any device which, upon insertion of a
coin, slug or token in any slot or receptacle attached to such machine or
connected therewith, operates or which may be operated for use as a game,
contest or amusement or may be used for any such game, contest or amusement
and which does not contain a pay off device for the return of slugs, money,
coins, checks, tokens or merchandise; provided however, machines for the
playing of music are specifically exempted from this definition.



   NON-ELECTRIC MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES. Those mechanical amusement
devices which are not so fitted.



   OPERATOR. The person in whose place of business any such mechanical
amusement device is placed for the use, amusement, patronage or recreation of
the public or of persons in or about such place.



   OWNER. The owner of such mechanical amusement device who operates or
permits the same to be played or operated in his or her place of business or
in any place under his or her control. OWNER shall also include one who
installs or maintains the devices in any place where the same can be played 
or operated by persons or about such place.



(`83 Code, § 5-901)



§ 114.02  SEAL OR TAG TO SHOW SERIAL NUMBER.



   Every mechanical amusement device shall have a serial number. This may
be a seal, a stamped plate, stamped to the cabinet or frame or tag
permanently attached thereto showing the serial number of the device.



(`83 Code, § 5-902)



§ 114.03  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL DEVICES.



   (A)   Every electrical device shall have attached or stamped thereto
a label indicating the name of the manufacturer and the voltage and current
necessary for the proper operation of such device.



   (B)   The owner, as defined in § 114.01, shall maintain a current
listing of all amusement device manufacturers and company addresses for those
machines he or she owns or operates. This listing shall be made available to
the Town upon request.



   (C)   Each portable mechanical amusement device wired for
electricity shall be equipped with an electrical cord of a type approved by
the Town Electrical Inspector and shall be connected to a convenient plug
receptacle adjacent to such mechanical amusement device.



   (D)   Where it is necessary to install electrical wiring to a
mechanical amusement device location, such wiring shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code.



(`83 Code, § 5-903)



§ 114.04  LOCATION NEAR SCHOOLS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a mechanical or
electrical mechanical amusement device to cause, permit within 300 feet of
the nearest street entrance to or exit from any public or private school of
elementary or high school grades, such 300 feet to be measured from the
entrance or exit in the most direct line or route on, along or across such
street adjacent to such public or private school.



(`83 Code, § 5-904)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.05  MACHINES EXEMPT FROM PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any machine which,
in return for the coin deposited in such device, will deliver the equivalent
value of coin in merchandise.



(`83 Code, § 5-905)



§ 114.06  PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mechanical amusement
device in the Town without having first obtained a permit for each device
from the Town Clerk.



(`83 Code, § 5-906)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.07  FILING AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for the permit required by this subchapter shall
be made to the Town Clerk on forms provided, shall be signed by the applicant
and shall contain the following information and such additional information
as is deemed necessary by the Town Clerk:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant;



      (2)   Name and address of the location where the mechanical
amusement device is to be placed for operation;



      (3)   The nature of any business or calling being conducted at
said location, together with the name of the owner and operator of the
business and the owner of said machine, if different;



      (4)   The number of mechanical amusement devices in place or
to be placed by the permit holder at that location.



   (B)   The application may be made for a permit to place more than
one mechanical amusement device at the same location, but no single
application may include more than one location.



(`83 Code, § 5-907)



§ 114.08  PERMIT FEE.



   The original and one copy of each application for a permit under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be submitted to the Town Clerk or
designee for approval; if approval is granted, a fee of $25 for each
electrical mechanical amusement device and each nonelectrical amusement
device shall be paid to the Town Clerk, who shall stamp the approved
application and copy “fee paid” and return the original to the applicant
and maintain the copy in file.



(`83 Code, § 5-908)



§ 114.09  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the application for a permit under this
subchapter, the Town Clerk (or designee) and the electrical inspector shall
conduct an inspection to the proposed location within 24 hours (working day),
the proposed installation and the machine itself to determine if the
mechanical amusement device meets the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   The Town inspectors may, at the time, make additional
inspections of the premises to insure compliance with these regulations. The
inspection of the machine shall not be construed as to require internal
inspection of the machine.



(`83 Code, § 5-909)



§ 114.10  TOWN CLERK TO ISSUE PERMIT OR INVESTIGATE APPLICATION; APPEALS.



   Upon completion of inspection by the Town Clerk and electrical
inspector, the Town Clerk shall cause a permit to issue forthwith, unless:



   (A)   The applicant is not of good moral character. Good moral
character shall be defined, for the purpose herein, as not having been
convicted of a violation of a federal statute, state statute or any local
ordinance involving vice or moral turpitude within the preceding ten years;



   (B)   The location for which the permit is sought is currently
subject to a suspension or revocation of permit issued under this chapter;
and/or



   (C)   The inspection by the Town Clerk and/or electrical inspector
reveals a violation of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the action of
the Town Clerk in denying the permit shall have the right of appeal to the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Collierville, provided such appeal
is perfected within ten days from such denial.



(`83 Code, § 5-910)



§ 114.11  NUMBERING.



   Every permit issued under this subchapter shall be serially numbered.



(`83 Code, § 5-911)



§ 114.12  POSTING.



   A permit or permits issued under this subchapter shall be permanently
and conspicuously posted at the location for which it is issued and where the
machine permitted thereby is located for operation and the permit shall not
be removed from such location except with the written permission of the Town
Clerk.



(`83 Code, § 5-912)



§ 114.13  TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   No permit issued under this provision shall be transferred from one
person to another.



(`83 Code, § 5-913)



§ 114.14  PERMIT COVERS OWNER OF DEVICE AND OWNER OF PREMISES.



   When any one of the persons mentioned in the definition of owner or
operator in § 114.01 obtains a permit for the operation of a mechanical
amusement device, the permit shall cover each of the persons mentioned in
such definition.



(`83 Code, § 5-914)



§ 114.15  RENEWAL.



   Permits issued under this subchapter shall be renewed annually and the
application for renewal shall be accompanied by the payment of the fee of $25
for each electrical mechanical amusement device and $25 for each non-electric
mechanical device, as herein prescribed for each such mechanical amusement
device. Renewal fees shall be paid each year in July. Fees may be prorated
monthly.  Existing machines shall be licensed within 30 days of adoption of
this chapter.



(`83 Code, § 5-915)



§ 114.16  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Whenever the Town Clerk or Chief of Police determines that a
permittee or any of the permittee’s servants, agents or employees in the
use, operation or maintenance of any mechanical amusement device or
electrical mechanical amusement device is violating or attempting to violate
any law of the state or any provisions of this chapter or if, in the opinion
of the Chief of Police, it is deemed necessary for the protection of minors
or any members of the public, the Chief of Police shall issue a written
summons specifying the particular charge to the owner or operator of such
establishment, citing same into Town Court.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall provide written notice to the owner
or operator if found guilty in Town Court on three or more violations in any
one year (12 month period), a hearing shall be conducted before the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen on temporary suspension and permanent revocation of
licenses.  The hearing shall be heard at such time as the Board shall
designate and the Mayor and Town Administrator shall notify the permittee of
the date, time and place of the hearing, in writing. Notice of the meeting
shall be provided at least ten days prior.



   (C)   Prior to such hearing, the Town may conduct an inspection of
the machine placement, external electrical components or such other
components necessary to determine whether or not such safety threat exists.
The owner or operator of such device may agree to remove such machine, in
which case no hearing shall be required.



(`83 Code, § 5-916)



POOL ROOMS



§ 114.30  PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to open, maintain, conduct or
operate any place where pool tables or billiard tables are kept for public
use or hire on any premises located in any block where 50% or more of the
land is used or zoned for residential.



(`83 Code, § 5-501)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.31  HOURS OF OPERATION REGULATED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to open, maintain, conduct or
operate any place where pool tables or billiard tables are kept for public
use or hire at any time on Sunday or between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
p.m. on other days.



(`83 Code, § 5-502)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.32  MINORS TO BE KEPT OUT; EXCEPTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged regularly or otherwise in
keeping billiard, bagatelle or pool rooms or tables, their employees, agents,
servants or other persons for them knowingly to permit any person under the
age of 18 years to play on the tables at any game of billiards, bagatelle,
pool or other games requiring the use of cue and balls, without first having
obtained the written consent of the father and mother of such minor, if
living; if the father is dead then the mother, guardian or other person
having such legal control of such minor; or if the minor be in attendance as
a student at some literary institution, then the written consent of the
principal or person in charge of such school, provided that this section
shall not apply to the use of billiard, bagatelle and pool tables in private
residences. 



(`83 Code, § 5-503)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.33  GAMBLING AND THE LIKE NOT TO BE ALLOWED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person operating, conducting or
maintaining any place where pool tables are kept for public use or hire to
permit any gambling or other unlawful or immoral conduct on such premises.



(`83 Code, § 5-916)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, § 5-917)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03)



CHAPTER 115:  TAXICABS



Section



   115.01   Taxicab franchise and privilege license required



   115.02   Requirements as to application and hearing



   115.03   Liability insurance required



   115.04   Revocation or suspension of franchise



   115.05   Mechanical condition of vehicles



   115.06   Cleanliness of vehicles



   115.07   Inspection of vehicles



   115.08   License and permit required for drivers



   115.09   Qualifications for driver’s permit



   115.10   Revocation or suspension of driver’s license



   115.11   Drivers not to solicit business



   115.12   Parking restricted



   115.13   Drivers to use direct routes



   115.14   Taxicabs not to be used for illegal purposes



   115.15   Prohibited conduct by drivers



   115.16   Transportation of more than one passenger at same time



§ 115.01  TAXICAB FRANCHISE AND PRIVILEGE LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the taxicab
business, unless he or she has first obtained a taxicab franchise from the
municipality and has a currently effective privilege license. Each taxicab
shall be required to have the licensee’s name and the cab number painted on
both sides in letters and numerals readable from a distance of 20 feet.



   (B)   A copy of the privilege tax receipt issued by the Town shall
be conspicuously displayed in each cab at all times. 



(`83 Code, § 5-401)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.02  REQUIREMENTS AS TO APPLICATION AND HEARING.



   No person shall be eligible to apply for a taxicab franchise if he or
she has a bad character or has been convicted of a felony within the last ten
years. Applications for taxicab franchises shall be made under oath and in
writing to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The application shall state the
name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the proposed place
of business, the number of cabs the applicant desires to operate, the makes
and models of the cabs and such other pertinent information as the Town Clerk
may require. The application shall be accompanied by at least two affidavits
of reputable local citizens attesting to the good character and reputation of
the applicant. Within ten days after the receipt of an application the Chief
of Police shall make a thorough investigation of the applicant; determine if
there is a public need for additional taxicab service; present the
application to the Board; and make recommendation to either grant or refuse a
franchise to the applicant. The Board shall thereupon hold a public hearing,
at which time witnesses for and against the granting of the franchise shall
be heard. In deciding whether or not to grant the franchise, the Board shall
consider the public need for additional service, the increased traffic
congestion, parking space requirements and whether or not the safe use of the
streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian will be preserved by the
granting of such an additional taxicab franchise. Those persons already
operating taxicabs when this code is adopted shall not be required to make
applications under this section but shall be required to comply with all of
the other provisions hereof. 



(`83 Code, § 5-402)



§ 115.03  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   No taxicab franchise shall be issued or continued in operation unless
there is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy for each
vehicle authorized in the amount of $250,000 for bodily injury or death to
any one person, $500,000 for bodily injuries or death to more than one person
which are sustained in the same accident and $25,000 for property damage
resulting from any one accident. The insurance policy required by this
section shall contain a provision that it shall not be canceled except after
at least 20 days written notice is given by the insurer to both the insured
and the Town Clerk of the municipality.



(`83 Code, § 5-403)



§ 115.04  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF FRANCHISE.



   The Board, after a public hearing, may revoke or suspend any taxicab
franchise for non-user or for traffic violations or violations of this
chapter by the taxicab owner or any driver. 



(`83 Code, § 5-404)



§ 115.05  MECHANICAL CONDITIONS OF VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to operate in the municipality
unless it has four wheel brakes, front and rear lights, safe tires, horn,
muffler, windshield wipers and rear vision mirror, all of which shall conform
to the requirements of state law. Each taxicab shall be equipped with a
handle or latch or other opening device attached to each door of the
passenger compartment so that such doors may be operated from the inside of
the taxicab without the intervention or assistance of the driver. The motor
and all mechanical parts shall be kept in such condition or repair as may be
reasonably necessary to provide for the safety of the public and the
continuous satisfactory operation of the taxicab.



(`83 Code, § 5-405)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.06  CLEANLINESS OF VEHICLES.



   All taxicabs operated in the municipality shall at all times be kept in
a reasonably clean and sanitary condition. They shall be thoroughly swept and
dusted at least once each day. At least once every week they shall be
thoroughly washed and the interior cleaned with a suitable antiseptic
solution.



(`83 Code, § 5-406)



§ 115.07  INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.



   All taxicabs shall be inspected at least semi-annually by the Chief of
Police to insure that they comply with the requirements of this chapter with
respect to the mechanical condition, cleanliness and the like.



(`83 Code, § 5-407)



§ 115.08  LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DRIVERS.



   No person shall drive a taxicab unless he or she is in possession of a
state special chauffeur’s license and a taxicab driver’s permit issued
annually by the Chief of Police for a fee of $1. 



(`83 Code, § 5-408)



§ 115.09  QUALIFICATIONS FOR DRIVER’S PERMIT.



   No person shall be issued a taxicab driver’s permit unless he or she
complies with the following to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police:



   (A)   Make written application to the Chief of Police;



   (B)   Is at least 18 years of age and holds a state special
chauffeur license;



   (C)   Undergoes an examination by a physician and is found to be of
sound physique, with good eyesight and hearing and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might
render him or her unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle;



   (D)   Is clean in dress and person and is not addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquor or drugs;



   (E)   Produces affidavits of good character from two reputable
citizens of the municipality who have known him or her personally and have
observed his or her conduct for at least two years preceding the date of his
or her application;



   (F)   Has not been convicted of a felony, drunk driving, driving
under the influence of an intoxicant or drug or of frequent minor traffic
offenses;



   (G)   Is familiar with the state and local traffic laws.



(`83 Code, § 5-409)



§ 115.10  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.



   The Board, after a public hearing, may revoke or suspend any taxicab
driver’s permit for traffic violations or violation of this chapter. 



(`83 Code, § 5-410)



§ 115.11  DRIVERS NOT TO SOLICIT BUSINESS.



   All taxicab drivers are expressly prohibited from indiscriminately
soliciting passengers or from cruising upon the streets of the municipality
for the purpose of obtaining patronage for their cabs.



(`83 Code, § 5-411)



§ 115.12  PARKING RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful to park any taxicab on any street except in such
places as have been specifically designated and marked by the municipality
for the use of taxicabs. It is provided for discharging passengers if such
stops are made in such manner as not to unreasonably interfere with or
obstruct other traffic and provide the passenger loading or discharging is
promptly accomplished. 



(`83 Code, § 5-412)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.13  DRIVERS TO USE DIRECT ROUTES.



   Taxicab drivers shall always deliver their passengers to their
destinations by the most direct available route.



(`83 Code, § 5-413)



§ 115.14  TAXICABS NOT TO BE USED FOR ILLEGAL PURPOSES.



   No taxicab shall be used for or in the commission of any illegal act,
business or purpose. 



(`83 Code, § 5-414)



§ 115.15  PROHIBITED CONDUCT BY DRIVERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver while on duty to be under
the influence of or to drink any intoxicating beverage or beer, to use
profane or obscene language, to shout or call to prospective passengers, to
unnecessarily blow the automobile horn or to otherwise disturb the peace,
quiet and tranquility of the municipality in any way. 



(`83 Code, § 5-415)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.16  TRANSPORTATION OF MORE THAN ONE PASSENGER AT SAME TIME.



   No person shall be admitted to a taxicab already occupied by a
passenger without consent of such other passenger.



(`83 Code, § 5-416)



CHAPTER 116:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



Intoxicating Liquors



   116.01   Definition



   116.02   Business permitted



   116.03   Exceptions



   116.04   Reserved



   116.05   Display of license



   116.06   Replacement of license



   116.07   Certificates of good moral character



   116.08   Location near churches



   116.09   Persons not to be served



   116.10   Number of retail businesses limited



   116.11   Time of closing



   116.12   Public consumption



   116.13   Privilege tax



   116.14   Inspection fees



Beer



   116.25   Definitions



   116.26   Beer Board



   116.27   Meetings of the Beer Board



   116.28   Requirements for quorum and action



   116.29   Record of Beer Board proceedings to be kept



   116.30   Powers and duties of the Beer Board



   116.31   Hearings before the Beer Board



   116.32   Permit required for engaging in beer business



   116.33   Privilege tax



   116.34   Beer permits shall be restrictive



   116.35   Permit issuance; validity; sales generally



   116.36   Conditions for receiving permit



   116.37   General conditions



   116.38   Restrictions on the issuance of beer permits



   116.39   Sanitation for the premises



   116.40   Hours of operation



   116.41   Revocation or suspension of beer permits



   116.42   Civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension



   116.43   Loss of certification for sale to minor



   116.44   Additional regulations



   116.45   Display of permit



   116.46   Provisional permit; new facilities



   116.47   Reserved



   116.48   Violations



   116.49   Gender



   116.50   Regulation of brown bagging



 



   116.98   Severability



   116.99   Penalty



INTOXICATING LIQUORS



§ 116.01  DEFINITION.



   (A)   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE or BEVERAGE. Means and includes alcohol,
spirits, liquor, wine and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits or wine
and capable of being consumed by a human being, other than patent medicine or
beer as defined in § 116.25. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary
in this chapter, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE or BEVERAGE also includes any product
containing distilled alcohol capable of being consumed by a human being
manufactured or made with distilled alcohol irrespective of alcoholic
content, including any infused product.



   (B)   Other terms used in this subchapter shall have the meanings
ascribed to them, where applicable, in Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of Title 57 of
Tenn. Code Ann., as such state law definitions may be amended from time to
time.



(`83 Code, § 2-101)  (Ord. 2001-15, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed
2-13-17)



§ 116.02  BUSINESS PERMITTED.



   It shall be lawful to engage in the business of manufacturing, selling,
storing, transporting and distributing alcoholic beverages within the
corporate limits so long as such business is conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the applicable state laws, rules and regulations and this code.



(`83 Code, § 2-102)  (Ord. 2001-15, passed 7-9-01)



§ 116.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter is intended to relate to the manufacture,
transportation, storage, sale, distribution, possession or receipt of or tax
upon beer as defined in § 116.25, and no provision relating thereto shall be
considered or construed as modified by this subchapter.



(`83 Code, § 2-103)  (Ord. 2001-15, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed
2-13-17)



§ 116.04  RESERVED.



§ 116.05  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Any person granted a license to carry on any of the businesses or
undertakings contemplated by this chapter shall, before being qualified to do
business, display and post, and keep displayed and posted, in the most
conspicuous place on the premises, such license, and shall promptly procure
and keep at the place of business a copy of the rules and regulations
promulgated by the commission.



(Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-211)  (`83 Code, § 2-105)  (Ord. 2001-15, passed
7-9-01)



§ 116.06  REPLACEMENT OF LICENSE.



   When a license shall be lost or destroyed without fault of the
licensee, a duplicate therefore shall be issued by the collector of licenses
and privileges only after the collector has been furnished with satisfactory
evidence of such loss without fault of the licensee. Also upon the issuance
of such duplicate license, the licensee shall be required to pay the fee of
fifty cents. 



(`83 Code, § 2-106)  (Ord. 2001-15, passed 7-9-01)



§ 116.07  CERTIFICATES OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER.



   (A)   Each applicant for a certificate of good moral character as
required by Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Chapter 3 shall be required to make
application therefor on forms to be prepared by the Town of Collierville.
Each applicant (including executive officers and/or those in control of the
applicant) must obtain and submit to the Town a local and national criminal
history record obtained from a third party using a multistate criminal
records locator or other similar commercial nationwide database with
validation. A criminal history record must indicate that the applicant
(including executive officers and/or those in control of the applicant) has
not been convicted of a felony within the immediately preceding ten-year
period. The application shall be transmitted to the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen of the Town of Collierville for their approval or disapproval.



   (B)   The Board shall have authority to prepare and have printed a
form of certificate to be issued by the Mayor and/or Board certifying to the
Commissioner of Revenue of the State of Tennessee that the applicant is of
good moral character and the like.



   (C)   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-806, the same procedure
and requirements shall be applicable with respect to certificates of good
moral character required of applicants seeking a license to sell wine at
retail food stores.



(`83 Code, § 2-107)  (Ord. 2001-15, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 2018-17, passed
12-10-18)



§ 116.08  LOCATION NEAR CHURCHES.



   No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured, distilled or rectified,
sold or stored on any premises that shall be located in close proximity to
any school, church or other public institution whatsoever when, in the
discretion of the Board, such location would be inimical to the public
welfare. 



(`83 Code, § 2-108)  (Ord. 2001-15, passed 7-9-01)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.09  PERSONS NOT TO BE SERVED.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, furnish or give away any
beverage to any person visibly intoxicated, to any insane person, to any
minor, to any habitual drunkard or to any other person of known intemperate
habits. 



(`83 Code, § 2-109)  (Ord. 2001-15, passed 7-9-01)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.10  NUMBER OF RETAIL BUSINESSES LIMITED.



   No more than three licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages
within the corporate limits shall be issued and outstanding at any one time. 



(`83 Code, § 2-110)  (Ord. passed 11-11-60; Am. Ord. passed 7-16-73; Am.
Ord. 2001-15, passed 7-9-01)



§ 116.11  TIME OF CLOSING.



   (A)   The following times for opening and closing for all liquor
stores are established: Monday through Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
Liquor stores shall be closed on Sundays, Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day,
Labor Day, New Year’s Day, and July 4.



   (B)   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-811, the same hours of
operation shall be applicable to the sale of wine in grocery stores.



(`83 Code, § 2-111)  (Ord. passed 6-10-65; Am. Ord. passed 4-1-74; Am. Ord.
2001-15, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 2-13-17)



§ 116.12  PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume, or
have an open can, bottle or glass of intoxicating beverage in or on any
public street, alley, avenue, highway, sidewalk, public park, public school
ground or public place unless the place has a beer or liquor permit and
license for on premises consumption.



   (B)   Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $50, or imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both fine and
imprisonment at the discretion of the court. 



(`83 Code, § 2-112)  (Ord. passed 10-13-75; Am. Ord. 2001-15, passed 7-9-01)



§ 116.13  PRIVILEGE TAX.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-4-301,
there is imposed by the Town of Collierville on all persons engaging in the
business of selling at retail alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises a privilege tax. The tax, to be levied annually, shall be as follows:



         Restaurant, according to seating capacity, on licensed
premises:



         75-125 seats               $600;



         126-175 seats            $750;



         176-225 seats            $800;



         226-275 seats            $900;



         276 seats and over            $1,000.



   (B)   The Finance Department is directed to levy and collect the
aforementioned privilege tax from all persons licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages at retail for consumption on premises within the corporate limits
of Collierville.



(`83 Code, § 2-113)  (Ord. 2001-15, passed 7-9-01)



§ 116.14  INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   There is hereby levied against retailers of alcoholic
beverages an inspection fee at the maximum allowable rate set forth in Tenn.
Code Ann. § 57-3-501, as said statute may be amended from time to time, on
all purchases of alcoholic beverages made by such retailers from wholesalers
and upon retail food store wine licensees. Said inspection fee shall be
collected by the wholesaler from the retailer at the time of the sale or at
the time the retailer makes payment for the delivery of the alcoholic
beverages and remitted to the collector of licenses and privileges of the
Town.



   (B)   Each wholesaler making sales to retailers shall furnish to the
Town’s collector of licenses and privileges a report monthly, which report
shall contain a list of the alcoholic beverages sold to each retailer located
within the Town, the wholesale price of the alcoholic beverages sold to each
retailer, the amount of tax due, and such other information as may be
required by the collector of licenses and privileges. The monthly report
shall be furnished to the collector of licenses and privileges not later than
the twentieth day of the month following which the sales were made. The
inspection fees collected by the wholesaler from the retailer shall be paid
to the collector of licenses and privileges at the time the monthly report is
made.



   (C)   Wholesalers collecting and remitting the above inspection fee
to the Town shall be entitled to reimbursement for this collection service in
the sum set forth in Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-503, as said statute may be
amended from time to time, such reimbursement to be deducted and shown on the
monthly report to the Town’s collector of licenses and privileges.



   (D)   A wholesaler’s failure to collect or timely report and/or
pay the inspection fee collected shall result in a penalty in the sum set
forth in Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-503, as said statute may be amended from
time to time. Said penalty shall be paid by the wholesaler to the Town’s
collector of licenses and privileges.



   (E)   The Town shall have authority to audit the records of
wholesalers reporting to it in order to determine the accuracy of such
reports.



(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-18; Am. Ord. 2018-17, passed 12-10-18)



BEER



§ 116.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following words, terms, and
phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   BEER. All beer, ales, and other malt liquors as defined in Tenn. Code
Ann. § 57-5-101(b), as said statute may be amended from time to time.



   BEER BOARD.  The Beer Board created by § 116.26 of this code.



   BEVERAGE or ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. See § 116.01.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person rendering services in the distribution, sale, or
manufacture for sale of beer at the location for which the permit applied for
or issued under this subchapter is applicable.



   GROWLER.  A glass bottle not to exceed 64 ounces that is filled by an
employee of the licensed establishment with beer from a keg.



   PUBLICLY TRADED COMPANY. A corporation which offers registered
securities for sale to the general public that are bought and sold on the
open market in a public exchange such as the New York Stock Exchange.



   RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL. The general manager (or equivalent) of a place
of business located within the town limits of the Town of Collierville, who
shall complete the beer permit application. This person shall be answerable
to the Beer Board when applying for a beer permit on behalf of that business
entity so long as he or she is employed in that capacity by the business
entity.



   Other terms used in this subchapter shall have the meanings ascribed to
them, where applicable, in Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of Title 57 of Tenn. Code
Ann., as such state law definitions may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10; Am. Ord.
2015-06, passed 3-9-15; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 2-13-17)



§ 116.26  BEER BOARD.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Beer Board of the Town of
Collierville to be composed of seven residents of the Town over the age of 21
years.  The members of the Beer Board shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town.  The members of the Beer
Board shall hold office for a term of one year, which shall expire on
December 31 of each year or until their successors are appointed.



   (B)   Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term with
appointment by a majority vote of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (C)   Three absences in a calendar year by a member of the Beer
Board shall result in mandatory resignation.  Any member may be removed at
any time with or without cause by a majority vote of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.



   (D)   Each member of the Beer Board shall receive such compensation
as may be established by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (E)   The Beer Board shall elect from its membership, on an annual
basis, a chairperson to preside at its meetings.  A vice-chairperson shall
also be elected.  The Beer Board shall have the authority to designate any
other officers as it deems necessary.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.27  MEETINGS OF THE BEER BOARD.



   All meetings of the Beer Board shall be open to the public.  The Beer
Board shall hold regular meetings upon the third Tuesday of each month when
there is business to come before the Beer Board.  A special meeting of the
Beer Board may be called by its chairperson, provided reasonable notice
thereof is given to each Beer Board member and public notice given a minimum
of five days in advance of such special meeting.  Such public notice shall,
at a minimum, include posting of same at Town Hall.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.28  REQUIREMENTS FOR QUORUM AND ACTION. 



   The attendance of at least a majority of the members of the Beer Board
shall be required to constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting
business.  Matters before the Beer Board shall be decided by a majority of
the members present, if a quorum is present.  The Beer Board may adjourn a
meeting at any time to another time and place.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.29  RECORD OF BEER BOARD PROCEEDINGS TO BE KEPT.



   The Town Administrator (or his or her designee) shall attend all
meetings of the Beer Board.  A separate record of the proceedings of all
meetings of the Beer Board shall be maintained.  This record shall be a
public record and shall contain at least the following: the date of each
meeting; names of the Beer Board members present and absent and, in cases of
hearings before the Beer Board, a record of evidence introduced and testimony
heard before the Beer Board and the provisions of each permit issued by the
Beer Board as to whether it is a permit for off-premises consumption or
on-premises consumption or a combination thereof.  The Town Administrator or
his or her designee shall also maintain a list of the names and addresses of
all holders of beer permits, which list shall be kept on a current basis.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.30  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BEER BOARD.



   (A)   The Beer Board shall have the power, and it is hereby
directed, to regulate the selling, storing for sale, distributing for sale,
and manufacturing of beer within the Town.  The Beer Board shall also have
the power to enforce the provisions of this subchapter consistent with the
requirements of Tennessee law, including the power to investigate and inspect
at all reasonable hours the premises of any applicant and all permit holders.



   (B)   The chairperson of the Beer Board may call a special session
of the Beer Board upon notification of a violation of this subchapter. The
permit holder in violation shall be summoned to appear at a designated time
and place.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.31  HEARINGS BEFORE THE BEER BOARD.



   (A)   All matters brought before the Beer Board shall be heard in
the following order:



      (1)   Requests for continuances;



      (2)   Rehearings and decisions where no protests have been
received;



      (3)   Special hearings;



      (4)   Applications for issuance of beer permits;



      (5)   Violations in which permit holders are represented by
counsel and/or at the request of the Police; and



      (6)   Rehearings and decisions where protests have been
received.



   (B)   Those permit holders charged with violations shall be given
written notice not less than five days in advance to appear before the Beer
Board to answer charges.



   (C)   All alleged permit violators at the hearing have the right to
plead not guilty to any or all of the charges, to have the assistance of
counsel, to cross-examine witnesses, and to testify and present witness(es)
and evidence on their behalf.



   (D)   All witnesses in a contested matter before the Beer Board
shall first be sworn in by the Town Clerk, or another person authorized to
administer an oath, or by a certified court reporter prior to any testimony
or evidence being given.



   (E)   Hearsay evidence is admissible in hearings before the Beer
Board.



   (F)   The Beer Board has no power to subpoena or require the
presence of any witness.



   (G)   A recording shall be made of all contested Beer Board
proceedings.



   (H)   In assessing a penalty, the Beer Board may consider the past
record of the permit holder and location.



   (I)   Upon receiving an adverse ruling by the Beer Board, an
applicant or permit holder may:



      (1)   Accept the decision and penalty;



      (2)   Request a rehearing (reconsideration); or



      (3)   Seek review by the circuit or chancery court in the
manner authorized by law.



   (J)   Any penalty assessed by the Beer Board shall take effect at
12:01 a.m. on the 15th day after the Beer Board decision and will be
continuously enforced throughout the period of suspension or revocation.  In
the event a permit holder requests a rehearing or seeks review by the circuit
or chancery court in the manner authorized by law, the enforcement period
will become effective upon completion of the rehearing or the disposition of
the review by the circuit or chancery court in the manner authorized by law.



   (K)   An applicant or permit holder may request one rehearing
following the receipt of an adverse ruling by the Beer Board. A prerequisite
to Board acceptance of a request for a rehearing shall be the permit
holder’s discovery of relevant new evidence not previously presented or
available to the Board at the original hearing, and that may allow that body
to render a more fully informed decision. Requests for a rehearing that fail
to meet these conditions shall not be entertained by the Board. Nothing in
this division shall be construed as prohibiting or in any manner limiting the
right of review by the circuit or chancery court in the manner authorized by
law.



   (L)   The Beer Board shall cause the Town Attorney or Town
Administrator to give written notice to the Chief of Police of the suspension
or revocation of any beer permit.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.32  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ENGAGING IN BEER BUSINESS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity to
sell, store for sale, distribute for sale, or manufacture beer without first
making application to and obtaining a permit from the Beer Board.  The
application shall be made on such form as the Beer Board shall prescribe and
furnish, and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee, in the
amount determined by resolution of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, which
shall be paid in advance by the applicant as a prerequisite to further
consideration of the applicant for a beer permit.  Each applicant must be of
good moral character and must certify that it is familiar with the provisions
of this subchapter.



   (B)   Permits shall be issued by class as follows:



      (1)   Class I - “On-premises” permits shall be limited to
on-premises consumption only;



      (2)   Class II - “Off-premises” permits shall be limited
to off-premises consumption only;



      (3)   Class III - Combination of on-premises and off-premises
permit. Where Growlers will be sold for off-premises consumption under a
Class III permit, all restrictions and requirements applicable to Class V
Growler permits shall apply to Class III permits except the prohibition
against consumption of beer on the premises; or



      (4)   Class IV (“Special private club permit”) - An
on-premises consumption permit may be granted for any club or lodge while it
is incorporated and operates under a charter and by-laws in which the
officers are elected by regular membership requiring a substantial membership
or initiation fee of its members and has a purpose of organization and
existence other than the sale of beer.



      (5)   Class V- “Growler” permit. A Class V Growler permit
is a beer permit issued for the retail sale of beer contained in
“Growlers” as defined at § 116.25 of this chapter. To qualify for a
Growler permit, an establishment must meet all of the other applicable
regulations contained within this chapter, including, but not limited to,
distance requirements and hours of operation. Growlers may only be filled
from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. Only
professionally sanitized and sealed Growlers may be filled and made available
for retail sale. Each Growler must be securely sealed and removed from the
premises in its original sealed condition. Consumption of beer on the
premises of any Class V permit is strictly prohibited, except samples of tap
beers offered for sale may be made available, but individual samples shall
not exceed one ounce per sample, nor shall any one individual be offered or
consume more than five one-ounce samples (5 oz.) per business day. Growler
permits shall be solely issued for those businesses whose primary source of
revenue shall be from the sale and refilling of beer Growlers. Such
determination shall be made at the sole discretion of the Collierville Beer
Board.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10; Am. Ord.
2015-06, passed 3-9-15; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 2-13-17)



§ 116.33  PRIVILEGE TAX.



   (A)   There is hereby imposed on the business of selling,
distributing, storing, or manufacturing beer a privilege tax, as authorized
by, and in the amount set forth in, Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-104, as said
statute may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Any person or business entity engaged in selling,
distributing, storing or manufacturing beer shall remit the tax on January 1
to the town. The tax shall be remitted each successive January 1 to the town.



   (C)   The town shall mail written notice to each permit holder of
the payment date of the annual tax at least 30 days prior to January 1.
Notice shall be mailed to the address specified by the permit holder on its
permit application. If a permit holder does not pay the tax by January 31 or
within 30 days after written notice of the tax was mailed, whichever is
later, then the town shall notify the permit holder by certified mail that
the tax payment is past due. If a permit holder does not pay the tax within
ten days after receiving notice of its delinquency by certified mail, then
the town may either suspend or revoke the permit or impose a civil penalty
pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-108.



   (D)   The town may utilize these tax funds for any public purpose.



   (E)   At the time a new permit is issued to any business subject to
this tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the privilege tax on a
prorated basis for each month or portion thereof remaining until the next tax
payment date.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 2-3-17)



§ 116.34  BEER PERMITS SHALL BE RESTRICTIVE.



   All beer permits shall be restrictive as to the type of beer
establishment authorized under them. Separate permits shall be required for
selling at retail, storing, distributing, and manufacturing.  Beer permits
for retail sale of beer may be further restricted so as to authorize sales
only for off-premises consumption or on-premises consumption. It shall be
unlawful for any beer permit holder to engage in any type or phase of the
beer business not expressly authorized by its permit.  It shall likewise be
unlawful for any beer permit holder not to comply with any and all express
restrictions or conditions in its permit.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.35  PERMIT ISSUANCE; VALIDITY; SALES GENERALLY.



   (A)   Permits shall be issued to the applicant, whether a person or
business entity.  Subject to the provisions of division (H) herein, permits
shall be valid only for a business operating under the name identified in the
permit application.



   (B)   If the permit is issued in the name of a business entity that
is a publicly traded company as defined by this subchapter, a responsible
individual as defined by this subchapter who is currently employed by that
entity must complete and sign the beer permit application, and physically
appear before the Beer Board at that body’s request.



   (C)   A permit cannot be transferred to another person or business
entity.  The transfer of 50% or more of the beneficial interests in any
business entity which is the holder of the permit shall constitute a change
of control and render the permit invalid.



   (D)   A permit shall be valid only for a single location, except as
provided in division (E) of this section, and cannot be transferred to
another location.  A permit shall be valid for all decks, patios, and other
outdoor serving areas that are contiguous to the exterior of the building in
which the business is located and that are operated by the business.



   (E)   Every application for a beer permit shall state the class or
classes of permits requested.  The number of businesses for which permits
may be issued is unlimited; provided, however, a permit holder who operates
two or more restaurants or other businesses within the same building may, in
his or her sole discretion, operate all or some of the businesses pursuant to
the same permit.  Such multiple use permits must be issued for the classes
applicable to the conduct of the restaurants or businesses.



   (F)   A permit shall become invalid upon cessation of operation of
the business to which it was issued, or change of control, or relocation of
the business, or change of the name of the business; provided, however, that
if the holder of the permit advises the Town Clerk of the anticipated new
name of the business before the name of the business is changed, the Town
Clerk shall change the records to reflect that the subject beer permit is
then issued in the name of the new business.  This provision shall have no
application to the temporary closing of a business for the purpose of
constructing improvements, provided the business reopens under the same name
and ownership.



   (G)   If the responsible individual who completed and signed the
beer permit application ceases to serve as the general manager (or
equivalent) of the business entity that is the permit holder, his or her
replacement must notify the Town Clerk and complete all required paperwork,
and submit to a background check within 30 days. Failure to satisfactorily
comply with this section shall render the beer permit void.



   (H)   Any person or business entity engaged in the sale,
distribution, or manufacture for sale of beer without the permit required by
this subchapter commits a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable under the
general clause for this Code.



   (I)   The town shall not issue a permit unless the applicant has
been a citizen or lawful resident of the United States for not less than one
year immediately preceding the date upon which the application is made to the
town.



   (J)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, or
manufacture beer without having a valid certificate indicating that purchases
of beer by that person are “for resale” as that term is used in Tenn.
Code Ann. § 67-6-102(75)(A).



   (K)   Within ten days after being issued a permit to sell,
distribute, or manufacture beer, a person shall file with the town and with
each person from whom the person buys beer a copy of a valid certificate
indicating that the purchases of beer are “for resale” as that term is
used in Tenn. Code Ann. § 67-6-102(75)(A), and shall subsequently maintain
at all times a valid resale certificate on file with the town and with each
person from whom the person buys beer.



   (L)   The town is authorized to seek criminal history background or
fingerprint checks on applicants. Criminal background checks may include
fingerprint checks against state and federal criminal records maintained by
the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation and the FBI.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 2-13-17)



§ 116.36  CONDITIONS FOR RECEIVING PERMIT.



   The following procedures must be followed by all applicants in seeking
a hearing for a beer permit before the Beer Board:



   (A)   The applicant must complete an official application form and
return the form to the Town Clerk at least 15 days prior to the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Beer Board.



   (B)   The applicant must secure a telephone number for the proposed
business location.



   (C)   In order to receive a permit, an applicant must establish with
respect to its business that:



      (1)   No beer will be sold, stored, distributed, or
manufactured except at places where such activity will not cause congestion
of traffic or interference with schools, churches, or other places of public
gathering, or otherwise interfere with public health, safety, and morals, the
Beer Board having the right to forbid such sale, storage, distribution, or
manufacture for sale at places on the foregoing grounds;



      (2)   No sales shall be made to minors;



      (3)   No person or business entity having at least a 5%
ownership interest in the applicant, and if a business entity owns at least a
5% ownership interest in the applicant, no owner of at least a 5% ownership
interest in such business entity, nor any person to be employed in the
distribution, sale, or manufacture or sale of beer, shall have been convicted
within the past ten years of any violation of the laws against possession,
sale, manufacture, or transportation of beer or other alcoholic beverages,
and/or any crime involving the manufacture, delivery, sale, or distribution
of any controlled substance that is listed in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 39,
Chapter 17, Part 2, Schedules I through V, and/or any crime involving moral
turpitude; and



      (4)   No sales shall be made for on-premises consumption
unless the application so states.



   (D)   An applicant shall disclose the following information in its
application for a beer permit:



      (1)   Name of the applicant;



      (2)   Name of the applicant's business;



      (3)   If applying as a business entity that is a publicly
traded company, the name and signature of the responsible individual who is
completing the beer permit application on the business entity's behalf;



      (4)   Location of the business by street address or other
geographical description sufficient to permit an accurate determination of
conformity with the requirements of Tennessee law and this subchapter;



      (5)   If beer will be sold at two or more restaurants or other
businesses within the same building pursuant to the same permit as provided
by Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-103(a)(4), a description of all such businesses or
restaurants;



      (6)   Persons or business entities having at least a 5%
ownership interest in the applicant, and if a business entity owns at least a
5% ownership interest in the applicant, the owners of at least a 5% ownership
interest in such business entity shall also be disclosed. This division shall
not apply to publicly traded corporations as defined in this subchapter; such
entities shall list the name and address of the corporation's headquarters,
and shall be completed and signed by the responsible individual as defined in
this subchapter;



      (7)   Identity and address of a representative to receive
annual tax notices and any other communication from the Beer Board;



      (8)   That no person or business entity having at least a 5%
ownership interest in the applicant, and if a business entity owns at least a
5% ownership interest in the applicant, no owner of at least a 5% ownership
interest in such business entity, nor any person to be employed in the
distribution, sale, or manufacture or sale of beer shall have been convicted
within the past ten years of any violation of the laws against possession,
sale, manufacture, or transportation of beer or other alcoholic beverages,
and/or any crime involving the manufacture, delivery, sale, or distribution
of any controlled substance that is listed in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 39,
Chapter 17, Part 2, Schedules I through V, and/or any crime involving moral
turpitude;



      (9)   The class of permit being requested and an
acknowledgment that if the applicant desires to change the method of sale or
operation in the future that a new application shall be submitted to the Beer
Board requesting a new permit;



      (10)   Such other relevant information as may be required from
time to time by the Beer Board. An applicant or permit holder shall be
required to amend or supplement its application promptly if a change in
circumstances affects the responses provided in its application; and



      (11)   The applicant's certification that it has read and is
familiar with all provisions of this subchapter.



   (E)   Any applicant making a false statement in the application
shall forfeit such applicant's permit and shall not be eligible to receive
any type beer permit for a period of ten years.



   (F)   Each applicant shall be entitled to a hearing upon its
application before the Beer Board. In no event shall a permit be issued
without a full and proper hearing before the Beer Board and a majority vote
thereon in favor of such issuance.



   (G)   Before the Beer Board shall issue a permit under this
subchapter, it shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town, at the applicant's expense, a notice stating the
name of the applicant and the address of the location for such permit,
whether the application is for the sale of beer for on-premises consumption
or off-premises consumption (or both of the foregoing), or for the sale,
storage, distribution, or manufacture of beer, and the date and time of its
meeting at which such application shall be considered. Such meeting shall be
a public hearing for the purpose of hearing the statement of any person or
such person's attorney on any application for a license or permit.



   (H)   Where a beer permit has been refused by the Beer Board, the
applicant shall not be allowed to apply again for a permit on the same
premises until after the expiration of one year from the date of the refusal.
Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting or in any manner
limiting the right to one rehearing before the Beer Board in the manner
discussed in § 116.31(K), above, or of review by the circuit or chancery
court in the manner authorized by law.



   (I)   Following filing of an application, the Beer Board may direct
such investigation of the contents of the application as it deems proper.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 2-13-17)



§ 116.37  GENERAL CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Neither the permit holder nor any person employed by the
permit holder shall drink beer or other alcoholic beverages or illegally use
drugs while performing his or her employment duties. An owner is always
assumed to be on duty while in his or her establishment and in the public
part of the business.



   (B)   No beer shall be sold to persons who are intoxicated as
defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-17-310.



   (C)   In all locations where beer is sold, there must be sufficient
lighting for employees to properly inspect the age and identification cards
of customers.



   (D)   The permit holder shall maintain an orderly establishment and
not be in violation of any health, building, or fire department regulations
or ordinances of the town, county, or state. Permit holders shall cooperate
fully with the Police Department in any necessary and normal investigation.



   (E)   No person or business entity having at least a 5% ownership
interest in the applicant, and if a business entity owns at least a 5%
ownership interest in the applicant, no owner of at least a 5% ownership
interest in such business entity, nor any person to be employed in the
distribution, sale, or manufacture or sale of beer shall have been convicted
within the past ten years of any violation of the laws against possession,
sale, manufacture, or transportation of beer or other alcoholic beverages,
and/or any crime involving the manufacture, delivery, sale, or distribution
of any controlled substance that is listed in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 39,
Chapter 17, Part 2, Schedules I through V, and/or any crime involving moral
turpitude.



   (F)   The Beer Board has the full power and authority to enter,
inspect, and investigate any business operated pursuant to any beer permits
issued by it and has full authority to call upon any members of the police
and health departments for assistance in the enforcement of the state laws,
town ordinances, and the rules and regulations of the Beer Board pertaining
to the sale of beer.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder, employee, or
person engaged in the sale of beer to employ any minor under 18 years of age
in the sale, storage, distribution, or manufacture of beer.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder, employee, or
person engaged in the sale of beer to make or allow any sale of beer to any
mentally incapacitated person.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder, employee, or
person engaged in the sale of beer to allow intoxicated persons to loiter on
the premises for which a permit has been issued.



   (J)   It shall be unlawful to fail to prominently display a current
beer permit.



   (K)   It shall be unlawful for a permit holder to have a manager
and/or employee fail to call the police promptly to report any fight or
disturbance.



   (L)   It shall be unlawful to sell or allow the sale to or
consumption of beer by any person under 21 years of age.



   (M)   It shall be unlawful to sell, serve, or allow to be sold on
its premises any alcoholic beverage, as defined in § 116.01 of this chapter,
unless such location holds a valid, current mixed drink license issued by the
Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission.



   (N)   It shall be unlawful to permit customers or employees to be
nude, topless, or bottomless at any time.



   (O)   It shall be unlawful to allow the sale or consumption of beer
from any location under suspension by the Beer Board.



   (P)   It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with the laws regarding
hours of operation as outlined in this subchapter.



   (Q)   Violations of divisions (A) through (P) above shall be
considered prima facie evidence that the violation is allowed by the permit
holder and the burden of proof to prove otherwise shall be shifted to the
permit holder.



   (R)   It shall be unlawful to allow any loud, unusual, or obnoxious
noises to emanate from the premises.



   (S)   It shall be unlawful to allow consumption of beer in an
establishment restricted to off-premises consumption.



   (T)   It shall be unlawful to fail to provide at least one working
telephone for incoming and outgoing calls at all times.



   (U)   It shall be unlawful for a permit holder to allow dancing on
its premises by employees or agents of the business.



   (V)   It shall be unlawful to allow pool or billiard playing in the
same room where beer is consumed.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 2-13-17)



§ 116.38  RESTRICTIONS ON THE ISSUANCE OF BEER PERMITS.



   The Beer Board shall be guided by the following restrictions and
limitations in the deliberation and issuance of beer permits within the
corporate limits of the Town of Collierville:



   (A)   Applicants must be citizens or resident aliens lawfully
admitted into the United States, or, if a business entity, all owners thereof
possessing at least a 5% ownership interest in such business entity must be
citizens or resident aliens lawfully admitted into the United States.  If a
business entity owns at least a 5% ownership interest in the applicant, each
owner of at least a 5% ownership interest in such business entity must be a
citizen or resident alien lawfully admitted into the United States.



   (B)   No permit to engage in the beer business shall be granted by
the Beer Board to an individual applicant who is under 21 years of age.



   (C)   Any individual may be employed where beer is sold, whether
such individual is a citizen or alien resident of the United States, provided
other requirements regulating the sale of beer are met.



   (D)   The Beer Board may restrict beer permits to off-premises
consumption only, on-premises consumption only, or both.



   (E)   For Class I and III permits, the applicant must serve at least
one hot meal a day at tables provided for that purpose with a menu available
during regular business hours. It is further required that a minimum of 50%
of the gross revenues of the establishment be from the sale of prepared food,
snack items, such as chips, popcorn, pretzels, and peanuts, are not included.
Reporting procedures for establishments holding Class I or III permits are
herewith established. The permit holder shall submit a sworn affidavit on a
form provided by the town (“Food Affidavit”) detailing food sale and
alcoholic beverage sale percentages on an annual basis and shall be due on or
before January 31. A permit holder’s food affidavit shall be subject to
audit by the town. Reporting year shall be January 1 through December 31. The
town’s Finance Department shall send the Town Clerk an annual list of
businesses that have complied with this requirement, and the Town Clerk shall
keep a record of such compliance.



   (F)   For all Class I and Class III permit holders, a minimum
seating capacity of 40 individuals shall be required.



   (G)   Notwithstanding the language contained at § 116.32(B)(5), the
holders of Class II and Class V permits shall not allow consumption of beer
on the premises, adjoining sidewalks or streets or within 200 feet of the
immediate premises, including the building and parking lot. No alcoholic
beverages shall be kept for sale on the premises of a Class II permit holder
except in the original containers or packages.



   (H)   For Class I, III, and IV permits, the areas serving beer or
other alcoholic beverages must be clearly defined and appropriately
designated that all patrons shall be 21 years of age and above.



   (I)   No permit shall be issued in violation of any Tennessee law or
the Zoning Code of the Town of Collierville.



   (J)   The Beer Board, in its discretion, may refuse to issue a
permit for any place of business where, in the period immediately preceding
the application for a permit, a business was operated in such a manner as to
create a public nuisance or was operated in such a manner as to materially
contribute, with places of like character in its vicinity, to the creation or
maintaining of a public nuisance.  In determining whether a permit shall be
issued, the Beer Board shall consider the character of the neighborhood, the
space available for the building, the space available for off-street parking,
and the effect of the business on its neighbors.



   (K)   Each applicant for a beer permit shall pay to the Town of
Collierville a minimum business license fee and gross receipts tax annually.
The Town of Collierville shall notify businesses which fail to pay the
minimum business license fee and gross receipts tax by certified mail not
later than February 28 and such failure to file and pay the tax shall result
in presentation to the Beer Board for possible revocation.



   (L)   No beer shall be sold, stored, distributed, or manufactured
except at places where such activity will not cause congestion of traffic or
interference with schools, churches, or other places of public gathering, or
otherwise interfere with public health, safety, and morals, the Beer Board
having the right to forbid such sale, storage, distribution, or manufacture
for sale at places on the foregoing grounds.



   (M)   In no event shall a Class II, III, IV, or V permit be issued
authorizing the sale, storage, distribution, or manufacture of beer at places
within 500 feet of any school, church, or other place of public gathering.
Said distance shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point on
the principal building of the school, church, or other place of public
gathering, or the nearest point on the space leased by such school, church,
or other place of public gathering in a multi-tenant building, to the nearest
point on the building, or the nearest point on the space leased by the
applicant in a multi-tenant building, in which beer is to be sold, stored,
distributed, or manufactured.



   (N)   In no event shall a Class I permit be issued authorizing the
sale, storage, distribution, or manufacture of beer at places within 250 feet
of any school, church, or other place of public gathering.  Said distance
shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point on the principal
building of the school, church, or other place of public gathering, or the
nearest point on the space leased by such school, church, or other place of
public gathering in a multi-tenant building, to the nearest point on the
building, or the nearest point on the space leased by the applicant in a
multi-tenant building, in which beer is to be sold, stored, distributed, or
manufactured.



   (O)   Within the Town’s Historic District, no Class I permit shall
be issued authorizing the sale, storage, distribution, or manufacture of beer
at places within 100 feet of any school or church.  Said distance shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest point on the principal building
of the school or church, or the nearest point on the space leased by such
school or church in a multi-tenant building, to the nearest point on the
building, or the nearest point on the space leased by the applicant in a
multi-tenant building, in which beer is to be sold, stored, distributed, or
manufactured.



   (P)   If a school, church, or other place of public gathering
locates within the applicable distance limitation of a location for which a
valid beer permit exists, such valid, existing beer permit for the same
location shall not be affected by the proximity of such location to the
school, church, or other place of public gathering.  If a beer permit issued
for such location becomes invalid for any reason, another person or business
entity may apply for a new beer permit for such location within one year of
the date of such invalidity, and, if a new beer permit is issued by the Beer
Board for the same location, the location shall continue to be subject to the
protections of this subsection; otherwise, the location shall not be subject
to the protections of this subsection.



   (Q)   The distance limitations contained in this section shall have
no effect on a valid permit issued prior to the adoption of this subchapter.



   (R)   If a location for which a beer permit has been issued is not
subject to the distance limitations contained in this section at the time
when the beer permit for such location either expires, is surrendered, or is
revoked, and if no new application for a beer permit at the same location is
filed within one year of the date of such expiration, surrender, or
revocation, then such location shall become subject to the distance
limitations contained in this section.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10; Am. Ord.
2015-06, passed 3-9-15; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 2-13-17)



§ 116.39  SANITATION FOR THE PREMISES.



   The premises of the permit holder shall be defined as the lot or
property under control of the permit holder, both inside the building and
outside the building. The permit holder shall be responsible for the
sanitation of the premises, including refuse storage, both inside and outside
the building, lavatory facilities, and general cleanliness of the grounds and
structure. The permit holder shall provide and maintain separate sanitary
toilet facilities for men and women. The Town Administrator or his or her
designee, the county health officer, or any properly authorized person is
authorized to enter the premises at all reasonable hours for the making of
such inspections as may be necessary. The determination of the sanitary
conditions is solely a question for the Town of Collierville.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.40  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   For Class I, II, III, IV, and V permits, the hours within which the
sale of beer shall be permitted shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m. Monday
through Saturday, and from noon Sunday to 3:00 a.m. Monday. No beer or other
alcoholic beverage shall be consumed or open for consumption on or about any
premises licensed by this subchapter in any glass, bottle, can, or other
container after 3:15 a.m.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10; Am. Ord.
2015-06, passed 3-9-15; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 2-13-17)



§ 116.41  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF BEER PERMITS.



   (A)   The Beer Board shall have the power to revoke or suspend any
beer permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter when the holder
thereof is guilty of making a false statement or misrepresentation in the
application or of violating any of the provisions of this subchapter. 
However, no beer permit shall be revoked or suspended until a public hearing
is held by the Beer Board after reasonable notice to all known parties in
interest. 



   (B)   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-608, the Beer Board shall
not revoke or suspend the permit of a “responsible vendor” qualified
under the requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-606 for a clerk’s illegal
sale of beer to a minor if the clerk is properly certified and has attended
annual meetings since the clerk’s original certification, unless the
vendor’s status as a certified responsible vendor has been revoked by the
Alcoholic Beverage Commission.  If the responsible vendor’s certification
has been revoked, the vendor shall be punished by the board as if the vendor
were not certified as a responsible vendor. "Clerk" means any person working
in a capacity to sell beer directly to consumers for off-premises
consumption. Under Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-608, the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission shall revoke a vendor’s status as a responsible vendor upon
notification by the Beer Board that it has made a final determination that
the vendor has sold beer to a minor for the second time in a consecutive 12
month period. The revocation shall be for three years.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.42  CIVIL PENALTY IN LIEU OF REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Definition.  “Responsible vendor” means a person or
business entity that has been issued a permit to sell beer for off-premises
consumption and has received certification by the Tennessee Alcoholic
Beverage Commission under the “Tennessee Responsible Vendor Act of 2006",
Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-601 et seq.



   (B)   Penalty, revocation, or suspension.  The Beer Board may, at
the time it imposes a revocation or suspension, offer a permit holder that is
not a responsible vendor the alternative of paying a civil penalty not to
exceed $2,500 for each offense of making or permitting to be made any sales
to minors, or a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for any other offense.



   (C)   The Beer Board may impose on a responsible vendor a civil
penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each offense of making or permitting to be
made any sales to minors or for any other offense.



   (D)   If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative to revocation
or suspension, the holder shall have seven days within which to pay the civil
penalty before the revocation or suspension shall be imposed.  If the civil
penalty is paid within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be
deemed withdrawn.  Payment of the civil penalty in lieu of revocation or
suspension by a permit holder shall be an admission by the holder of the
violation so charged and shall be paid to the exclusion of any other penalty
that the Town may impose.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.43  LOSS OF CERTIFICATION FOR SALE TO MINOR.



   If the Beer Board determines that a clerk of an off-premises beer
permit holder certified under Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-606 sold beer to a
minor, the Beer Board shall report the name of the clerk to the Alcoholic
Beverage Commission within 15 days of determination of the sale.  The
certification of the clerk shall be invalid and the clerk may not reapply for
a new certificate for a period of one year from the date of the Beer
Board’s determination.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.44  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Locations with Class III beer permits for both on-premises and
off-premises consumption shall be allowed to sell beer to go, provided that
it is unopened and is in its original container, or that it is in a securely
sealed Growler.



   (B)   Each permit holder shall be required to complete and sign an
affidavit certifying that it has read the ordinance governing the sale and
consumption of beer and acknowledges responsibility to strictly enforce the
beer ordinance in its establishment.  Such affidavits shall be signed
annually and kept on file in the Town Clerk’s office with the beer
permit.  Failure to complete the required affidavit shall be considered
basis for permit revocation.



   (C)   Each permit holder shall notify the Beer Board of any change
in address within ten days thereof.



   (D)   No beer permit shall be issued to a business location with
pinball or video game machines exceeding four in number.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10; Am. Ord.
2017-03, passed 2-13-17)



§ 116.45  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   The permit required by this subchapter shall be posted in a conspicuous
space on the premises of the permit holder, together with all other permits,
licenses, and stamps as required by law.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.46  PROVISIONAL PERMIT; NEW FACILITIES.



   The Beer Board, in its discretion, may issue a permit to a new business
prior to its construction and operation.  The permit shall be provisional in
nature, pending final inspection of the facility.  The Beer Board shall
consider the type of permit requested and the nature of the business in its
deliberations.  If any permit granted under this section is not utilized
within six months of its issuance, the Beer Board may hold a hearing and the
Beer Board, in its discretion, may grant an extension.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.47  RESERVED.



§ 116.48  VIOLATIONS.



   Except as provided in § 116.43, any violation of this subchapter or
any provision of Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-101 et seq. shall constitute a civil
offense and shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a penalty under the
general penalty provisions of this Code.  Each day a violation shall be
allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.49  GENDER.



   Words importing the neuter in this subchapter shall include the
feminine and the masculine unless the gender is clearly indicated or unless
the context in which it is used would not otherwise permit such meaning.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.50  REGULATION OF BROWN BAGGING.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:



      BROWN BAGGING. The practice of patrons, customers, or guests
bringing beer, alcoholic beverages and/or wine upon the premises of a food
service establishment.



      FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any public place kept, used,
maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a place where a menu of
prepared food is made available to patrons.



   (B)   Except as provided herein, no owner, operator, or employee of
any food service establishment shall permit or allow its patrons, customers,
or guests to bring onto the premises any beer, as defined in § 116.25, or
alcoholic beverage, as defined in § 116.01, or wine, as defined in Tenn.
Code Ann. § 57-3-101, as such statute may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   The foregoing notwithstanding, a food service establishment
may permit or allow its patrons, customers, or guests to bring beer onto its
premises for consumption by themselves or their personal guests, under the
following circumstances:



      (1)   The food service establishment possesses a valid Class I
or III on-premises beer permit pursuant to the requirements of this chapter;
and



      (2)   The owner of the food service establishment consents to
the practice of brown bagging beer on its premises.



   (D)   A food service establishment allowing the practice of brown
bagging on its premises may not, in connection therewith:



      (1)   Charge its patrons, customers, or guests any fees in
connection with brown bagging in its premises; or



      (2)   Take possession of or otherwise control any beer that
its customers, patrons, and/or guests bring into the premises for personal
consumption, nor store any such beer.



   (E)   In addition to the conditions and restrictions generally
applicable to all holders of or applicants for Class I and III beer permits
set forth in this chapter, the conditions and/or restrictions set forth in
§§ 116.36, 116.37, 116.38, and 116.40 and otherwise applicable to the sale
of beer for on-premises consumption shall also apply to the brown bagging of
beer for on-premises consumption.



   (F)   Any food service establishment allowing brown bagging without
complying with the requirements of this section commits a misdemeanor, which
shall be punishable under the general clause for this code.



   (G)   This section shall not apply to establishments possessing a
valid license for the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages issued by the
Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission, and nothing herein shall be
interpreted to provide additional allowances or restrictions on such
state-licensed establishments.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 5-8-17)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.98  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this subchapter or the application therefore to any
circumstance or person or any other entity subject to the provisions hereof
is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this subchapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to that end the Beer Board declares the
provisions of this subchapter to be so severable.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or business entity violating any of the ordinances of the
Town shall be fined not more than $50 or the maximum amount permitted by
Tennessee law, whichever is greater, for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each day of violation.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 12-13-10)



CHAPTER 117:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   117.001   Purpose



   117.002   Definitions



   117.003   Telecommunications franchise



   117.004   Rights reserved to Town



   117.005   Compliance with provisions



   117.006   Compliance with construction codes



   117.007   Exceptions



   117.008   Responsibility of owner



Franchise



   117.020   Registration



   117.021   Franchise application



   117.022   Determination by Town



   117.023   Agreement



   117.024   Nonexclusive grant



   117.025   Term of grant



   117.026   Rights granted



   117.027   Franchise territory



   117.028   Nondiscrimination



   117.029   Service to Town



   117.030   Amendment of franchise



   117.031   Franchise renewal



   117.032   Revocation or termination of franchise



   117.033   Notice and duty to cure



   117.034   Hearing



   117.035   Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions



Fees and Costs



   117.045   Application and review fee



   117.046   Additional Town costs



   117.047   Construction permit fee



   117.048   Franchise fees



   117.049   Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax



Regulations and Requirements



   117.060   Location of facilities



   117.061   Compliance with joint trenching rules



   117.062   Construction permits



   117.063   Interference with streets



   117.064   Damage to property



   117.065   Notice of work



   117.066   Repair and emergency work



   117.067   Maintenance of facilities



   117.068   Relocation or removal of facilities



   117.069   Removal of unauthorized telecommunications facilities



   117.070   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities



   117.071   Damage to franchisee’s facilities



   117.072   Restoration of streets and Town property



   117.073   Facilities maps



   117.074   Duty to provide information



   117.075   Leased capacity



   117.076   Franchisee insurance



   117.077   General indemnification



   117.078   Performance and construction surety



   117.079   Security fund



   117.080   Construction and completion bond



   117.081   Coordination of construction activities



   117.082   Transfer of ownership or control



   117.083   Transactions affecting control of franchise



Construction



   117.095   Permits



   117.096   Applications



   117.097   Engineer’s certification



   117.098   Traffic control plan



   117.099   Issuance of permit



   117.100   Construction schedule



   117.101   Compliance with permit



   117.102   Display of permit



   117.103   Survey of underground facilities



   117.104   Noncomplying work



   117.105   Completion of construction



   117.106   As-built drawings



   117.107   Construction surety



   117.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 117.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:



   (A)   Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications
carriers and services and establish clear local guidelines, standards and
time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the
regulation of telecommunications carriers and services;



   (B)   Promote competition in telecommunications;



   (C)   Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications
carriers and services;



   (D)   Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive
telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the businesses,
institutions and residents of the Town;



   (E)   Permit and manage reasonable access to the streets of the Town
for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;



   (F)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the streets held in
public trust by the Town;



   (G)   Ensure that the Town’s current and ongoing costs of granting
and regulating private access to and use of the streets are fully paid by the
persons seeking such access and causing such costs;



   (H)   Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Town and the
residents of the Town for permitting private use of the streets;



   (I)   Ensure that telecommunications carriers providing or leasing
facilities or services within the Town comply with the ordinances, rules and
regulations of the Town; ensure that the Town can continue to fairly and
responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare; and



   (J)   Enable the Town to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition
and technological development.



(`83 Code, § 13-701)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AFFILIATE. A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is
owned or controlled by or is under common ownership or control with another
person.



   ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE. All revenue, as determined by generally accepted
accounting principles, that is received directly or indirectly by a
franchisee from the operation of a telecommunication system in the Town,
including, without limitation, all revenue received for the provision of
services, installation, reconnection, sale of products, not including
customer premises equipment and the imputed value of bartered service and the
value of all goods and services received by the telecommunication carrier in
exchange for telecommunications service, including all payments received for
the lease, rental or sale of time, band width or capacity on a
telecommunications carriers system; provided, however, that no billings shall
be imputed related to any services provided to the Town or for services
governed as interstate commerce.



   EXCESS CAPACITY. The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct,
conduit, manhole, handhold or other utility facility within the public way
that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications
facilities.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.



   FORCE MAJEURE. A strike, acts of nature, acts of public enemies, orders
of any kind of a government of the United States of America, riots,
epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, tornadoes, storms,
floods, civil disturbances, explosions, partial or entire failure of
utilities or any other cause or event not reasonably within the control of
the disabled party, but only to the extent the disabled party notifies the
other party as soon as practicable regarding such force majeure.



   FRANCHISE. The right of a telecommunications carrier to operate or
lease a telecommunications system in the Town for a limited term and in a
manner in agreement with this chapter.



   FRANCHISEE. A grantee of rights under this chapter by means of an award
or franchise or its permitted successor, transferee or an applicant thereof.



   OVERHEAD FACILITIES. Utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.



   PERSON. Includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock
companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies
and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.



   STREET. The surface of all rights-of-way and the space, above and
below, of any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way
or place, sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement now
or hereafter held by the Town for the purpose of public travel and shall also
mean other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held
by the Town which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle a
telecommunications carrier to the use thereof for the purposes of installing
plant facilities and equipment as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent
to a telecommunications system.



   SURPLUS SPACE. That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which
has the necessary clearance from other pole users to allow its use by a
telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Every person that directly or indirectly
owns, controls, operates, manages or leases telecommunications facilities
within the Town, used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES or FACILITY. The plant, equipment and
property, including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts,
pedestals, antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used
to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications
services.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE or SERVICE. The providing or offering for
rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the
transmittal of voice or data information between or among points by wire,
cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or SYSTEM. See TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   TOWN PROPERTY. All real property owned by the Town, other than public
streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined in this section,
and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the Town, which are not
subject to right-of-way franchising as provided in this chapter.



   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. Utility and telecommunications facilities
located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for overhead facilities.



   USABLE SPACE. The total distance between the top of a utility pole and
the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable
vertical clearance.



   UTILITY EASEMENT. Any easement owned by the Town and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.



   UTILITY FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property, including, but
not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires,
plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground
within the streets of the Town and used or to be used for the purpose of
providing utility or telecommunications services.



(`83 Code, § 13-702)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.003  TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE.



   Any telecommunications carrier who desires to continue to or begin to
construct, install, operate, use, maintain or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any street of the
Town for the providing of a telecommunications service to persons or areas in
the Town or leasing such telecommunication facilities shall obtain a
franchise from the Town.



(`83 Code, § 13-704)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.004  RIGHTS RESERVED TO TOWN.



   The Town expressly reserves the following rights which shall not be
deemed to be waived or abrogated by any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter:



   (A)   Exercise its governmental powers, now or hereafter, to the
full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the Town;



   (B)   Adopt, in addition to the provisions contained in this chapter
and in a franchise or license and in any existing applicable ordinance, such
additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its
police power;



   (C)   Amend this chapter or any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter to require reasonable and appropriate modifications in a franchise of
a nature that would not result in effectively terminating such franchise;



   (D)   Renegotiate any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter
should substantial sections of this chapter be rendered void by subsequent
changes in applicable federal or state laws;



   (E)   Waive portions of this chapter, if the Town determines such
waiver is in the public interest.



(`83 Code, § 13-707)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.005  COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS.



   No person shall commence or continue with the construction,
installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the Town,
except as provided in this chapter.



(`83 Code, § 13-759)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)  Penalty, see § 117.999



§ 117.006  COMPLIANCE WITH CONSTRUCTION CODES.



   Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated
and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local
codes, rules and regulations, including the National Electrical Safety Code.



(`83 Code, § 13-760)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.007  EXCEPTIONS.



   Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, all
telecommunications carriers are subject to the requirements of this chapter.



(`83 Code, § 13-774)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.008  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the
franchisee, are responsible for performance of and compliance with all
provisions of this chapter.



(`83 Code, § 13-775)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



FRANCHISE



§ 117.020  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   General.  All telecommunications carriers who would by this
chapter require a franchise shall register with the Town on forms to be
provided by the Town Clerk, which shall include the following:



      (1)   The identity and legal status of the registrant,
including any affiliates;



      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer,
agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement;



      (3)   A description of registrant’s existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the Town;



      (4)   A description of the telecommunications service that the
registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or
providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the Town;



      (5)   Information sufficient to determine whether the
registrant is subject to telecommunications franchising under this chapter;



      (6)   Information sufficient to determine whether the
transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services
provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or
privilege subject to any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message
tax or other occupation tax imposed by the Town;



      (7)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant
has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or
other approvals required by the Tennessee Regulatory Authority and/or the
Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications services or
facilities within the Town;



      (8)   Such other information as the Town may reasonably
require.



(`83 Code, § 13-708)



   (B)   Fee.  Each application for registration as a
telecommunications carrier shall be accompanied by a fee of $25. 



(`83 Code, § 13-709)



   (C)   Purpose.  The purpose of registration is to:



      (1)   Provide the Town with accurate and current information
concerning the telecommunications carriers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the Town or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the Town;



      (2)   Assist the Town in enforcement of this chapter;



      (3)   Assist the Town in the collection and enforcement of any
municipal taxes, franchise fees or charges that may be due the Town;



      (4)   Assist the Town in monitoring compliance with local,
state and federal laws.



(`83 Code, § 13-711)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.021  FRANCHISE APPLICATION.



   Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this
chapter shall file an application with the office of Town Administrator which
shall include the following information:



   (A)   The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant;



   (B)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or
will be offered or provided by the applicant over its existing or proposed
facilities;



   (C)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by
the applicant to offer or provide such telecommunications services;



   (D)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network
map of the facilities to be located within the Town, all in sufficient detail
to identify:



      (1)   The location and route requested for the applicant’s
proposed telecommunications facilities;



      (2)   The location of all overhead and underground public
utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities
in the public way along the proposed route;



      (3)   The locations, if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers;



      (4)   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities
and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or
permanently remove or relocate;



   (E)   If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities,
evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications
facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route;



   (F)   If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in
existing ducts or conduits within the streets, information in sufficient
detail to identify:



      (1)   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or
conduits before installation of the applicant’s telecommunications
facilities; and



      (2)   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such
ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant’s telecommunications
facilities;



   (G)   If the applicant is proposing an underground installation
within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the streets:



      (1)   The location proposed for the new ducts of conduits; and



      (2)   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of the applicant’s telecommunications
facilities;



   (H)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates;



   (I)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial
ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities;



   (J)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the
applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding
the telecommunications facilities and services described in the application;



   (K)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all
other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the
facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services;



   (L)   Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video
dialtone service or other video programming service and sufficient
information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising;



   (M)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the Town that the applicant intends to use
or lease;



   (N)   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant
will offer or make available to the Town and other public, educational and
governmental institutions;



   (O)   A description of the applicant’s access and line extension
policies;



   (P)   The areas of the Town the applicant desires to serve and a
schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area;



   (Q)   All fees, deposits or charges required in this chapter;



   (R)   Such other and further information as may be requested by the
Town.



(`83 Code, § 13-713)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.022  DETERMINATION BY TOWN.



   (A)   Within 150 days after receiving a complete application under
§ 117.021, the Town shall issue a written determination granting or denying
the application, in whole or in part, applying the standards set forth in
division (B) of this section. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.



   (B)   Reasons for denial will include all those allowed under
applicable law, which may include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant;



      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant;



      (3)   The capacity of the streets to accommodate the
applicant’s proposed facilities;



      (4)   The capacity of the streets to accommodate additional
utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted;



      (5)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private
facilities, improvements, services, travel or landscaping if the franchise is
granted;



      (6)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and
disruption of construction within the streets;



      (7)   The service that the applicant will provide to the
community and region;



      (8)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare
if the franchise requested is granted;



      (9)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations
for the proposed facilities;



      (10)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws,
regulations and policies;



      (11)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the
franchise to use the streets will not serve the community interest.



(`83 Code, § 13-714)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.023  AGREEMENT.



   No franchise shall be granted unless the applicant and the Town have
executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use the streets will be
granted.



(`83 Code, § 13-715)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.024  NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT.



   No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive
right, privilege, franchise to occupy or use the streets of the Town for
delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.



(`83 Code, § 13-716)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.025  TERM OF GRANT.



   Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a
telecommunications franchise granted under this chapter shall be valid for a
term of ten years.



(`83 Code, § 13-717)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.026  RIGHTS GRANTED.



   No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey any right,
ordinance or interest in the streets, but shall be deemed a grant only to use
and occupy the streets for the limited purposes and term stated in the
franchise agreement. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty
of ordinance.



(`83 Code, § 13-718)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.027  FRANCHISE TERRITORY.



   A telecommunications franchise granted under this chapter shall be
limited to the specific geographic area of the Town to be served by the
franchisee and the specific streets necessary to serve such areas.



(`83 Code, § 13-719)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.028  NONDISCRIMINATION.



   A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to
any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service,
without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for
franchisee’s services and in accordance with applicable law; provided,
however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a franchisee from making
any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers.



(`83 Code, § 13-720)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.029  SERVICE TO TOWN.



   A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to
the Town at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless
otherwise directed by a state or federal regulatory agency having
jurisdiction over telecommunication rates.



(`83 Code, § 13-721)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.030  AMENDMENT OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   A new franchise application shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or
to locate its telecommunications facilities in streets of the Town which are
not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.



   (B)   If ordered by the Town to locate or relocate its
telecommunications facilities in streets not included in a previously granted
franchise under this chapter, the Town shall grant a franchise amendment
without further application.



(`83 Code, § 13-722)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.031  FRANCHISE RENEWAL.



   (A)   Renewal applications.  A franchisee that desires to renew its
franchise under this chapter shall, not more than 240 days, nor less than 150
days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the
Town for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following
information:



      (1)   The information required pursuant to § 117.021;



      (2)   Any information required pursuant to the franchise
agreement between the Town and the franchisee.



(`83 Code, § 13-723)



   (B)   Renewal determinations.  Within 150 days after receiving a
complete renewal application under § 117.021, the Town shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the renewal application, in whole or in
part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied,
the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. Reasons
for nonrenewal will include all those allowed under applicable law, but are
not limited to:



      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant;



      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant;



      (3)   The continuing capacity of the streets to accommodate
the applicant’s existing facilities;



      (4)   The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of
this chapter and the franchise agreement;



      (5)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications
laws, rules and policies;



      (6)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued
grant to use the streets will serve the community interest.



(`83 Code, § 13-724)



   (C)   Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.  No franchise
shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the
franchisee’s performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements
of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action
to be taken by the franchisee has been approved by the Town. 



(`83 Code, § 13-725)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.032  REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.



   A franchise granted by the Town to use or occupy streets of the Town
may be revoked for the following reasons:



   (A)   Construction or operation in the Town or in the streets of the
Town without a franchise;



   (B)   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location;



   (C)   Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the franchisee;



   (D)   Unauthorized assignment of a franchise;



   (E)   Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of franchise or
assets or a substantial interest therein;



   (F)   Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a
franchisee in any application to the Town;



   (G)   Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the streets;



   (H)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this
chapter;



   (I)   Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as
due the Town;



   (J)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the franchisee;



   (K)   Violation of material provisions of this chapter;



   (L)   Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement.



(`83 Code, § 13-755)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.033  NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE.



   If the Town Administrator or his or her designee believes that grounds
exist for revocation of a franchise, he or she or his or her designee shall
give the franchisee written notice of the apparent violation or
noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and
general facts of the violation or noncompliance and providing the franchisee
a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence that:



   (A)   Corrective action has been, or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;



   (B)   Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance;



   (C)   It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.



(`83 Code, § 13-756)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.034  HEARING.



   If a franchisee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to
the Town Administrator, as provided in § 117.033, the Town Administrator
shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall provide the franchisee with
notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.



(`83 Code, § 13-757)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.035  STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS.



   If persuaded that the franchisee has violated or failed to comply with
material provisions of this chapter or of a franchise, the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen shall determine whether to revoke the franchise or to establish some
lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and
gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:



   (A)   The misconduct was egregious;



   (B)   Substantial harm resulted;



   (C)   The violation was intentional;



   (D)   There is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements;



   (E)   There is a history of overall compliance;



   (F)   The violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.



(`83 Code, § 13-758)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



FEES AND COSTS



§ 117.045  APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE.



   (A)   Any applicant for a franchise shall pay a fee of $1,500.



   (B)   The application and review fee of $1,500 shall be deposited
with the office of Town Administrator as part of the application filed.



   (C)   An applicant whose franchise application has been withdrawn,
abandoned or denied shall, within 60 days of such event, be refunded, within
60 days of such written request, the balance of its deposit under this
section, less all ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the Town in
connection with the application.



(`83 Code, § 13-726)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.046  ADDITIONAL TOWN COSTS.



   All franchisees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor,
reimburse the Town for all reasonable direct and indirect costs and expenses
incurred by the Town in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal
or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement.



(`83 Code, § 13-727)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.047  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.



   Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the franchisee shall pay a
permit fee equal to 1% of the estimated cost of constructing the
telecommunication facilities, as certified by the franchisee’s engineer and
approved by the Town Engineer, to cover the Town costs for inspections,
survey and mapping.



(`83 Code, § 13-728)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.048  FRANCHISE FEES.



   (A)   Each franchisee shall pay an annual franchise fee to the Town
for reimbursement for use of the street and for costs associated with
procurement, maintenance and oversight of the street for the public, current
and future users. The Town expressly reserves the right to review and/or
modify any telecommunications franchise compensation agreement every third
year of the franchise.



   (B)   The payment of a franchise fee shall be in addition to any tax
or payment owed to the Town by a telecommunications carrier.



   (C)   The franchise fee and any other costs or penalties assessed
shall be payable on a quarterly basis to the Town and a telecommunications
carrier shall pay the same and file a complete and accurate verified
statement of all gross revenue, as defined in this section, within 45 days
after each calendar quarter.



   (D)   The Town shall have the right to inspect a telecommunications
carrier’s income records and the right to audit and to recompute any
amounts determined to be payable under this chapter; provided, however, that
such audit shall take place within 36 months following the close of each of a
telecommunications carriers fiscal years. Any additional amount due to the
Town as a result of the audit (together with the cost of the audit unless the
shortage is a de minimus amount) shall be paid within 30 days following
written notice to a telecommunications carrier by the Town, which notice
shall include a copy of the audit report. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an
amount shall be deemed de minimus if such amount is equal to 1% or less of
the amount paid by a telecommunications carrier during the audited period.



   (E)   If any franchise fee or recomputed amount, cost or penalty is
not paid on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest
shall be charged daily from such date at the then legal maximum rate in the
state and a telecommunications carrier shall reimburse the Town for any
additional expenses and costs incurred by the Town by reason of the
delinquent payments.



   (F)   The franchise fee does not include any tax, fee or assessment
of general applicability.



(`83 Code, § 13-729)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.049  REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX.



   The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any
compensation charged and paid for the streets provided for in §§ 117.047
and 117.048 are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state,
local and Town taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a
telecommunications carrier, its customers or subscribers or on account of the
lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications services.



(`83 Code, § 13-730)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS



§ 117.060  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in
accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise
specified in a franchise agreement:



   (A)   A franchisee shall install its telecommunications facilities
within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity
exists;



   (B)   A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities
shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to
existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available. The
Town Engineer must review and approve the use of overhead facilities;



   (C)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable system or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a street of the
Town, a franchisee with permission to occupy the same street must also locate
its telecommunications facilities underground;



   (D)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable system
or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within
a street of the Town, a franchisee that currently occupies the same street
shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not be later than the end of the franchise term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Town
Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the
disruption of the streets;



   (E)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the franchisee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for
nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers.



(`83 Code, § 13-731)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.061  COMPLIANCE WITH JOINT TRENCHING RULES.



   All franchisees shall, before commencing any construction in the
streets, comply with all regulations of utility joint trenching rules.



(`83 Code, § 13-732)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.062  CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.



   All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities. However, nothing shall prohibit the Town and a
franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures
provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction
practices.



(`83 Code, § 13-733)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.063  INTERFERENCE WITH STREETS.



   No franchisee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities
so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the streets by the Town, by
the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or
upon the streets. All such facilities shall be moved by the franchisee,
temporarily or permanently, as determined by the Town Engineer.



(`83 Code, § 13-734)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.064  DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   No franchisee nor any person acting on a franchisee’s behalf shall
take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage
any Town property, streets of the Town or other permanent property located
in, on or adjacent thereto.



(`83 Code, § 13-735)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.065  NOTICE OF WORK.



   Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, no franchisee, nor
any person acting on the franchisee’s behalf, shall commence any
nonemergency work in or about the streets of the Town without ten working
days advance notice to the Town.



(`83 Code, § 13-736)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.066  REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK.



   In the event of an unscheduled repair or emergency, a franchisee may
commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the
circumstances, provided that the franchisee shall notify the Town as promptly
as possible before such repair or emergency work is commenced or as soon
thereafter as possible if advance notice is not practical.



(`83 Code, § 13-737)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.067  MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.



   Each franchisee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe
condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state
and local requirements.



(`83 Code, § 13-738)



§ 117.068  RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.



   Within 30 days following written notice from the Town, a franchisee
shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the
streets whenever the Town shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:



   (A)   The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Town or other public improvement in or upon the streets;



   (B)   The operations of the Town or other governmental entity in or
upon the streets.



(`83 Code, § 13-739)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.069  REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   (A)   Within 30 days following written notice from the Town, any
telecommunications carrier that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized
telecommunications system, telecommunications facility or related
appurtenances within the streets of the Town shall, at its own expense,
remove such telecommunications facilities or appurtenances from the streets
of the Town.



   (B)   A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the franchisee’s
telecommunications franchise;



      (2)   Upon abandonment of a facility within the streets of the
Town;



      (3)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed
without the prior grant of a telecommunications franchise;



      (4)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed
without the prior issuance of a required construction permit;



      (5)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed
at a location not permitted by the telecommunications franchise.



(`83 Code, § 13-740)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.070  EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   The Town retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
telecommunications facilities located within the streets of the Town as the
Town may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any
public health or safety emergency. The Town, where feasible, shall attempt to
contact franchisee prior to cutting or removing facilities from the streets.



(`83 Code, § 13-741)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.071  DAMAGE TO FRANCHISEE’S FACILITIES.



   Unless directly and proximately caused by the willful, intentional or
malicious acts by the Town, the Town shall not be liable for any damage to or
loss of any telecommunications facility within the streets of the Town as a
result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements,
construction, excavation, grading, filling or work of any kind in the streets
by or on behalf of the Town.



(`83 Code, § 13-742)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.072  RESTORATION OF STREETS AND TOWN PROPERTY.



   (A)   When a franchisee, or any person acting on its behalf, does
any work in or affecting any streets or Town property it shall, at its own
expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such streets
or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken,
unless otherwise directed by the Town.



   (B)   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete
restoration required by this section, the franchisee shall temporarily
restore the affected ways or property. The temporary restoration shall be at
the franchisee’s sole expense, and the franchisee shall promptly undertake
and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other
conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.



   (C)   A franchisee or other person acting in its behalf shall use
suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as
required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent
injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in
or affecting such ways or property.



(`83 Code, § 13-743)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.073  FACILITIES MAPS.



   Each franchisee shall provide the Town with an accurate map certifying
the location of all telecommunications facilities within the streets. Each
franchisee shall provide updated maps annually.



(`83 Code, § 13-744)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.074  DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.



   Within ten days of a written request from the Town, each franchisee
shall furnish the Town with information sufficient to demonstrate that:



   (A)   The franchisee has complied with all requirements of this
chapter;



   (B)   All municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes
due the Town in connection with the telecommunications services and
facilities provided by the franchisee have been properly collected and paid
by the franchisee;



   (C)   All books, records, maps and other documents maintained by the
franchisee with respect to its facilities within the streets shall be made
available for inspection by the Town at reasonable times and intervals.



(`83 Code, § 13-745)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.075  LEASED CAPACITY.



   A franchisee shall have the right, without prior Town approval, to
offer or provide capacity or band width to other providers of
telecommunications service, provided that:



   (A)   The franchisee shall furnish the Town with a copy of any such
lease or agreement with other telecommunication service;



   (B)   The telecommunications service provider has complied, to the
extent applicable, with the requirements of this chapter or other applicable
Town ordinances.



(`83 Code, § 13-746)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.076  FRANCHISEE INSURANCE.



   Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, each franchisee
shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring the franchisee and the Town and its
elected and appointed officers, officials agents and employees as coinsureds:



   (A)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less
than:



      (1)   Two million dollars for bodily injury or death to each
person;



      (2)   Two million dollars for property damage resulting from
any one accident; and



      (3)   Two million dollars for all other types of liability;



   (B)   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles
with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident;



   (C)   Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and
employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000;



   (D)   Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and
collapse hazard, underground hazard and products complete hazard with limits
of not less than $3,000,000;



   (E)   Umbrella liability with limits of not less than $5,000,000;



   (F)   The liability insurance policies required by this section
shall be maintained by the franchisee throughout the term of the
telecommunications franchise and such other period of time during which the
franchisee is operating without a franchise hereunder or is engaged in the
removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy
shall contain the following endorsement:



   “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt
by the Town, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Town
Administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”



   (G)   Within 60 days after receipt by the Town of the notice, and in
no event later than 30 days prior to the cancellation, the franchisee shall
obtain and furnish to the Town replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.



(`83 Code, § 13-747)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.077  GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION.



   Each franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law,
the franchisee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the Town
and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and
against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense arising out of, resulting from
or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the franchisee or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its
telecommunications facilities and in providing or offering telecommunications
services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise agreement
made or entered into pursuant to this chapter.



(`83 Code, § 13-748)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.078  PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SURETY.



   Before a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and
as necessary thereafter, the franchisee shall provide and deposit such
monies, bonds, letters of credit or other instruments in form and substance
acceptable to the Town as may be required by this chapter or by an applicable
franchise agreement.



(`83 Code, § 13-749)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.079  SECURITY FUND.



   (A)   Each franchisee shall establish a permanent security fund with
the Town by depositing the amount of $50,000 with the Town in cash, an
unconditional letter of credit or other instrument acceptable to the Town,
which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of the franchisee so long
as any of the franchisee’s telecommunications facilities are located within
the streets of the Town.



   (B)   The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete
performance of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss
the Town pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the franchisee
to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the
Town.



   (C)   Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the Town
shall give written notice to the franchisee:



      (1)   Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied or
the damages, cost or expenses which the Town has incurred by reason of the
franchisee’s act or default;



      (2)   Providing a reasonable opportunity for the franchisee to
first remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;



      (3)   Providing a reasonable opportunity for franchisee to pay
any monies due the Town before the Town withdraws the amount thereof from the
security fund, if applicable;



      (4)   That the franchisee will be given an opportunity to
review the act, default or failure described in the notice with the Town
Administrator or his or her designee.



   (D)   A franchisee shall replenish the security fund within 14 days
after written notice from the Town that there is a deficiency in the amount
of the fund.



(`83 Code, § 13-750)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.080  CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a
performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the Town equal
to at least 50% of the estimated cost of constructing the franchisee’s
telecommunications facilities within the streets of the Town shall be
deposited before construction is commenced.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this
section, if a franchisee makes application to the Town to be relieved from
furnishing a performance and payment bond relative to construction of a
system or improvements thereto, the Town may waive the requirement for such
bond or reduce the required amount thereof if the Town determines that:



      (1)   Such franchisee has a net worth of not less than
$50,000,000 as reflected by its most current financial statement; and



      (2)   The performance of such franchisee of its obligations
generally, whether financial or otherwise, has been satisfactory with respect
to the Town and with respect to other parties with which such company has had
obligations of construction or improvements to telecommunication systems.



   (C)   The construction bond shall remain in force until 60 days
after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the Town Engineer,
including restoration of streets and other property affected by the
construction.



   (D)   The construction bond shall guarantee to the satisfaction of
the Town:



      (1)   Timely completion of construction;



      (2)   Construction in compliance with applicable plans,
permits, technical codes and standards;



      (3)   Proper location of the facilities as specified by the
Town;



      (4)   Restoration of the streets and other property affected
by the construction;



      (5)   The submission of as-built drawings after completion of
the work as required by this chapter; and



      (6)   Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands
or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work.



(`83 Code, § 13-751)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.081  COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Any and all franchisees are required to cooperate with the
Town and with each other.



   (B)   Each franchisee shall meet with the Town, other franchisees
and users of the streets annually or periodically, as determined by the Town,
to schedule and coordinate construction in the streets.



   (C)   All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be
coordinated, as ordered by the Town Engineer, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.



(`83 Code, § 13-752)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.082  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.



   (A)   A franchise shall not be sold, assigned or transferred
(including through inheritance), either in whole or in part, nor shall title
thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein, pass to
or vest in any person or entity without full compliance with the procedure
set forth in this section.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the sale or
transfer of all or a share of a telecommunications carrier’s assets or
shares of stock and to a merger (including any parent and its subsidiary
corporation), consolidation, creation of a subsidiary corporation of the
parent company or sale or transfer of stock in a company so as to create a
new controlling interest. The term CONTROLLING INTEREST as used in this
section is not limited to majority stock ownership, but includes actual
working control in whatever manner exercised, including the creation or
transfer of decision-making authority to a new or different board of
directors.



      (1)   The parties to the sale or transfer shall make a written
request to the Town for its approval of a sale or transfer. The written
request shall be accompanied by all information required by FCC rules and
shall be presented on a form as prescribed by FCC rules. Thereafter, the Town
shall have 120 days to act on the request or it shall be deemed granted
subject to the provisions following. If the Town finds that the application
is not complete, as required by FCC rules, it shall notify the parties within
60 days of the initial filing. The notice shall stay the running of the 120
days until such time as the parties file a complete application in accordance
with FCC rules. If the Town does not so notify the parties within the 60 days
following the filing of an application, the application shall be deemed
complete and the 120 days shall run from the date such application was filed.
The Town may request such additional information as it might reasonably
determine to be necessary to act on the request. The request shall not,
however, extend the 120-day period unless mutually agreed to by all parties
or such extension is expressly permitted by the FCC rules.



      (2)   The Town shall signify in writing within the time
aforesaid its approval of the request or its determination that a public
hearing is necessary due to potential adverse effect on a company’s
subscribers.



      (3)   If a public hearing is deemed necessary pursuant to
subsection (B)(2) of this section, such hearing shall be commenced within 30
days of such determination, and notice of any such hearing shall be given 14
days prior to the hearing by publishing a notice. The notice shall contain
the date, time and place of the hearing and shall briefly state the substance
of the action to be considered by the Town.



      (4)   Within 30 days after the closing of the public hearing,
the Town shall approve or deny in writing the sale or transfer request.



      (5)   Within 30 days of any transfer, a company shall file
with the Town a copy of the deed, agreement, mortgage, lease or other written
instrument evidencing such sale, transfer of ownership or control or lease,
certified and sworn to as correct by such company.



   (C)   In reviewing a request for sale or transfer pursuant to
division (A) of this section, the Town may inquire into the legal, technical
and financial qualifications of the prospective controlling party and a
franchisee shall assist the Town in so inquiring. The Town may condition such
transfer upon such terms and conditions as it deems reasonably appropriate to
satisfy such qualifications; provided, however, that the Town shall not
unreasonably withhold its approval. As a condition of approval of a transfer
or assignment of ownership or control, the Town may require that the
transferee become a signatory to the franchise agreement entered into by the
Town and the predecessor of the transferee.



   (D)   A franchisee shall notify the Town in writing of any change in
administrative officials regarding its telecommunications system within 14
days of the change.



   (E)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter or a
franchise agreement, no prior consent by the Town shall be required for any
transfer or assignment to any entity controlling, controlled by or under the
same common control of the transferring party. However, in such a transfer or
assignment, such transferring party shall remain liable for all financial
obligations as required pursuant to its franchise and this chapter, unless
otherwise agreed to by the Town. The agreement to release the transferring
company shall not be withheld unreasonably and shall further be provided in
all transfers or assignments where the transferee party has a net worth of
not less than $25,000,000 as reflected by its most current audited financial
statement.



(`83 Code, § 13-753)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.083  TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF FRANCHISE.



   Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of
10% or more of the ownership or working control of the franchisee, of the
ownership or working control of a telecommunications franchise, of the
ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or
working control of the franchisee or of a telecommunications system or of
control of the capacity or band width of franchisee’s telecommunication
system, facilities or substantial parts thereof shall be considered an
assignment or transfer requiring Town approval pursuant to § 117.082.



(`83 Code, § 13-754)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



CONSTRUCTION



§ 117.095  PERMITS.



   No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities
within the Town without first obtaining a construction permit therefor;
provided, however, that:



   (A)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation
of telecommunications facilities within the Town unless the
telecommunications carrier has filed a registration statement with the Town
pursuant to this chapter;



   (B)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation
of telecommunications facilities in the streets unless the telecommunications
carrier has applied for and received a franchise pursuant to this chapter;



   (C)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation
of telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction permit
fee established in § 117.047.



(`83 Code, § 13-761)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.096  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities
shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient
detail to demonstrate:



   (A)   That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations;



   (B)   The location and route of all facilities to be installed on
existing utility poles;



   (C)   The location and route of all facilities to be located under
the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the
burial at all points along the route which are within the streets;



   (D)   The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits,
ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the streets along the
underground route proposed by the applicant;



   (E)   The location of all other facilities to be constructed within
the Town, but not within the streets;



   (F)   The construction methods to be employed for protection of
existing structures, fixtures and facilities within or adjacent to the
streets;



   (G)   The location, dimension and types of all trees within or
adjacent to the streets along the route proposed by the applicant, together
with a landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and
restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction.



(`83 Code, § 13-762)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.097  ENGINEER’S CERTIFICATION.



   All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a
registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications
submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules
and regulations.



(`83 Code, § 13-763)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.098  TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN.



   All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or
along any streets shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan
demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed,
consistent with Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury
or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



(`83 Code, § 13-764)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.099  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   Within 45 days after submission of all plans and documents required of
the applicant and payment of the permit fees required by this chapter, the
Town Engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and document comply
with all requirements of this chapter, shall issue a permit authorizing
construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions,
restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of
performing the work as he or she may deem necessary or appropriate.



(`83 Code, § 13-765)



§ 117.100  CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.



   The franchisee shall submit a written construction schedule to the Town
Engineer ten working days before commencing any work in or about the streets.
The franchisee shall further notify the Town Engineer not less than two
working days in advance of any excavation or work in the streets.



(`83 Code, § 13-766)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.101  COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.



   All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with
the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities.
The Town Engineer and his or her representatives shall be provided access to
the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure
compliance with such requirements.



(`83 Code, § 13-767)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.102  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   The franchisee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and
approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made
available for inspection by the Town Engineer or his or her representatives
at all times when construction work is occurring.



(`83 Code, § 13-768)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.103  SURVEY OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES.



   If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by
depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the
franchisee shall cause the location of such facilities to be verified by a
registered state land surveyor. The franchisee shall relocate any facilities
which are not located in compliance with permit requirements.



(`83 Code, § 13-769)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.104  NONCOMPLYING WORK.



   Upon order of the Town Engineer, all work which does not comply with
the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work or the
requirements of this chapter shall be removed.



(`83 Code, § 13-770)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.105  COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The franchisee shall promptly complete all construction activities so
as to minimize disruption of the streets and other public and private
property. All construction work authorized by a permit within the streets,
including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of
issuance.



(`83 Code, § 13-771)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.106  AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.



   Within 60 days after completion of construction, the franchisee shall
furnish the Town with two complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and
certified to the Town as accurately depicting the location of all
telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit.



(`83 Code, § 13-772)  (Ord. 00-20, passed 9-11-00)



§ 117.107  CONSTRUCTION SURETY.



   Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the franchisee shall
provide a construction and completion bond.



(`83 Code, § 13-773)



§ 117.999  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, §§ 13-705 and 13-706)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03)



CHAPTER 118:  CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE



Section



General Provisions



   118.01   Short title



   118.02   Definitions



   118.03   Rights and privileges of company



   118.04   Binding effect



Franchise



   118.20   Territory



   118.21   Duration and acceptance



   118.22   Renewal



   118.23   Police powers



   118.24   Franchise required



   118.25   Use of company facilities



   118.26   Costs



   118.27   Notices



   118.28   Letter of credit/security deposit



   118.29   Performance bond



   118.30   Liability and insurance



   118.31   Indemnification



   118.32   Rights of individuals



   118.33   Public notice



   118.34   Service availability and record request



   118.35   Franchise fee



   118.36   Initial applications



   118.37   Financial, contractual, shareholder and system disclosure
in initial application



Standards, Requirements and Regulations



   118.50   System construction, improvements or extensions requirements



   118.51   Construction and technical standards



   118.52   Use of streets



   118.53   Operational standards



   118.54   Continuity of service mandatory



   118.55   Complaint procedure



   118.56   Company rules and regulations



   118.57   Franchise fee



   118.58   Capital contribution



   118.59   Transfer of ownership or control



   118.60   Availability of books and records



   118.61   Petitions and applications



   118.62   Fiscal reports



   118.63   Removal of cable system



   118.64   Required services and facilities



   118.65   Rules and regulations



   118.66   Performance evaluation sessions



   118.67   Rate change procedures



   118.68   Forfeiture and termination



   118.69   Foreclosure



   118.70   Approval of transfer and right of acquisition by Town



   118.71   Receivership



   118.72   Compliance with state and federal laws



   118.73   Landlord/tenant



   118.74   Theft of services and tampering



   118.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 118.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Collierville
Cable Ordinance.”



(`83 Code, § 13-501)



§ 118.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASIC SERVICE. That service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals and any community, educational and
government access channel requirements hereunder.  The term BASIC SERVICE
does not include optional program and satellite service tiers, a la carte
services, per channel, per program or auxiliary services for which a separate
charge is made. However, a company may include other satellite signals on the
BASIC SERVICE.



   CABLE SERVICE. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other
programming service.



   CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the Town,
but such term does not include:



      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers, unless such facility
or facilities uses any public right-of- way;



      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (“the Act”), except that
such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for the purposes
of section 621(c) of the Act) to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or



      (4)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility systems.



   CLASS IV CHANNEL. A signaling path provided by a cable system to
transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in
the cable system.



   COMPANY. A grantee of rights under this chapter by means of an award of
franchise, or its permitted successor, transferee or assignee or an applicant
therefor.



   CONVERTER. An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a
subscriber and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber
to view more than 12 channels delivered by the system at designated converter
dial locations.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.



   FORCE MAJEURE. A strike, acts of nature, acts of public enemies, orders
of any kind of a government of the United States of America, riots,
epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, tornadoes, storms,
floods, civil disturbances, explosions, partial or entire failure of
utilities or any other cause or event not reasonably within the control of
the disabled party, but only to the extent the disabled party notifies the
other party as soon as practicable regarding such FORCE MAJEURE.



   FRANCHISE. The right of a company to operate a cable system within the
Town for a limited term  and in a manner in agreement with this chapter.



   GROSS REVENUES. All revenue received directly or indirectly by a
company from cable system operations within the Town, including, but not
limited to, subscriber service monthly fees, pay cable fees, installation and
reconnection fees, leased channel fees, converter rentals, studio rental,
production equipment, personnel fees, late fees, downgrade fees, home
shopping service commissions and advertising commissions; provided, however,
that such shall not include any taxes on services furnished by a company
imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, local or other
governmental unit and collected by the company on behalf of the governmental
unit.



   INITIAL APPLICATION. The document setting forth the proposed terms for
a franchise to be awarded by the Town to a company for a new franchise as
opposed to the renewal of a franchise.



   INSTALLATION. The connection of the system from the feeder cable to
subscribers’ terminals. The term shall include all procedures required to
complete service standards, including underground installation of service
lines and restoration of lawn areas.



   MONITORING. Observing a communications signal, or the absence of a
signal, where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer,
whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose
whatsoever, provided monitoring shall not include system-wide,
nonindividually addressed sweeps of the system for purposes of verifying
system integrity, controlling return paths transmissions or billing for pay
services.



   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. As applied to the company shall mean those hours
during which similar businesses in the Town are open to serve customers. In
all cases, normal business hours means that a company will be open for
subscriber transactions Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00  p.m.,
unless there is a need to modify those hours to fit more appropriately the
needs of the Town or the subscribers.  A company will establish supplemental
hours on weekdays and weekends if it would fit the needs of the Town or the
subscribers.



   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS. Those service conditions which are within
the control of the company. Those conditions which are not within the control
of the company include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control
of the company include, but are not limited to, special promotions,
pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods
and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.



   RENEWAL PROPOSAL. A document setting forth the proposed terms for the
renewal of an existing franchise to a company already functioning as an
operator of a cable system for the Town.



   SERVICE INTERRUPTION. The loss of picture or sound on one or more
channels.



   STREET. The surface and all rights-of-way, and the space above and
below, of any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way
or place, sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement now
or hereafter held by the Town for the purpose of public travel and shall also
mean other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held
by the Town which shall entitle a company to the use thereof for the purposes
of installing poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be
ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a cable system.



   SUBSCRIBER. Any person, firm, company, corporation or association
lawfully receiving basic service and/or additional service from company.



   TOWN. The Town of Collierville, Tennessee, the grantor of rights under
this chapter.



   USER. A party utilizing a cable system channel for purposes of
production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with
receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.



(`83 Code, § 13-502)



§ 118.03  RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF COMPANY.



   (A)   A franchise granted by the Town pursuant to this chapter shall
grant to a company the nonexclusive right and privilege to erect, construct,
operate and maintain in, upon and along, across, above, over and under the
streets now in existence and as may be created or established during the term
hereof, any poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes and other
television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and
operation of a system for the interception, sale, transmission and
distribution of cable service and other audio-visual and data signals and the
right to transmit the same to the inhabitants of the Town on the terms and
conditions hereinafter set forth.



   (B)    It is understood that there may be from time to time within
the Town various streets which the Town does not have the unqualified right
to authorize a company to use because of reservations in favor of the
dedicators or because of other legal impediments; therefore, in making this
grant, the Town does not warrant or represent as to any particular street or
portion of a street that it has the right to authorize a company to install
or maintain portions of its system therein, and in each case the burden and
responsibility for making such determination in advance of the installation
shall be upon a company.



   (C)   The right to use the streets, easements and rights-of-way
herein granted is subject to the terms of all rights or franchises heretofore
granted by the Town and to the terms of all rights or franchises hereafter
granted by the Town to companies with a franchise granted pursuant hereto
and/or other companies primarily engaged in the rendering of public utilities
service.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall vest in a company any property
rights in the Town-owned property, nor shall the Town be compelled to
maintain any of its property any longer than or in any fashion other than in
the Town’s judgment its own business or needs may require.



(`83 Code, § 13-503)



§ 118.04  BINDING EFFECT.



   (A)    Upon grant of a franchise pursuant hereto and acceptance
thereof by a company, a company will be bound by all the terms and conditions
contained herein.



   (B)   Upon grant and acceptance of a franchise, a company and the
Town shall agree, either in the franchise agreement itself or in a separate
document, as to all financial obligations of the company to the Town
associated with the franchise.



(`83 Code, § 13-504)



FRANCHISE



§ 118.20  TERRITORY.



   The franchise is for the present territorial limits of the Town and for
any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise.



(`83 Code, § 13-505)



§ 118.21  DURATION AND ACCEPTANCE.



   (A)   A franchise and the rights, privileges and authority granted
shall take effect and be in force from and after final grant and acceptance
thereof by a company for the term specified in an initial proposal or renewal
proposal as the case may be, which term may be for not more than 20 years;
provided, however, that by appropriate agreement certain obligations may be
deemed to commence from a date prior to the final grant and acceptance of a
franchise.



   (B)   Acceptance by a company of a franchise shall constitute a
representation or warranty that it  accepts the franchise willingly and
without coercion, undue influence and duress, that it has not misrepresented
or omitted material facts, has not accepted the franchise with intent to act
contrary to the provisions of this chapter and that, so long as it operates
the cable system, it will be bound by the terms and conditions of this
franchise, subject to applicable state and federal law.



(`83 Code, § 13-506)



§ 118.22  RENEWAL.



   (A)   A franchise may be renewed by the Town in accordance with the
procedures delineated in 47 USC 546 or other applicable statutory
requirements.



   (B)   In the absence of statutory requirements:



      (1)   At least 24 months prior to the expiration of its
franchise, a company shall inform the Town in writing of its intent to seek
renewal of the franchise;



      (2)   Such company shall submit a renewal proposal which
demonstrates:



         (a)   That it has been and continues to be in
substantial compliance with the terms, conditions and limitations of this
chapter and its franchise;



         (b)   That its system has been installed, constructed,
maintained and operated in accordance with the accepted standards of the
industry and this chapter and its franchise;



         (c)   That it has the legal, technical, financial and
other qualifications to continue to maintain and operate its system and to
improve the same as the state of art progresses so as to assure its
subscribers high quality service; and



         (d)   That has made a good faith effort to provide
services and facilities which accommodate and will accommodate the
demonstrated needs of the Town and its residents as may be reasonably
ascertained by the Town.



      (3)   After giving public notice, as defined in § 118.33, the
Town shall proceed to determine whether the company has met the requirements
of the foregoing section of this chapter.  In making this determination, the
Town shall consider technical developments and performance of the system,
programming and other services offered, cost of services and any other
particular requirements set out in this chapter. Also, the Town shall
consider a company’s reports made to the Town and the FCC, may require a
company to make available specified records, documents and information for
this purpose and may inquire specifically whether a company will supply
services sufficient to meet community needs and interests. Industry
performance on a national basis shall also be considered. Provision shall be
made for public comment.



      (4)   The Town shall then adopt any amendments to this chapter
that it considers necessary.



      (5)   If  the Town finds the company’s performance
satisfies the renewal requirements as set out in statutory requirements or,
in lieu thereof, satisfies the four criteria outlined above in division (B),
a new franchise shall be granted pursuant to this chapter, as amended.



      (6)   If a company is determined by the Town not to have
satisfied the criteria described in division (B), new applicants shall be
sought and evaluated and a franchise award shall be granted by the Town
according to this chapter.



(`83 Code, § 13-507)



§ 118.23  POLICE POWERS.



   (A)   In accepting a franchise, a company acknowledges that its
rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the Town to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public,
and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the Town pursuant to such power.



   (B)    Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and/or a
franchise and any other present or future lawful exercise of the Town’s
police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such
exercise that is not of general application in the Town or which applies
exclusively to a company or cable systems and which contains provisions
inconsistent with this chapter and/or a franchise shall prevail only if upon
such exercise the Town finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to
health, safety, property or such exercise is mandated by law.



   (C)   The right is reserved to the Town to adopt, in addition to the
provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such
additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the
police power. Nothing in this chapter or in any agreement under this chapter
awarding a franchise shall be construed as an abrogation by the Town of its
police power.



(`83 Code, § 13-508)



§ 118.24  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   No cable system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets for
system installation and  maintenance purposes or be allowed to operate
without a franchise. All franchises shall be granted in accordance with the
terms of this chapter.



(`83 Code, § 13-507)



§ 118.25  USE OF COMPANY FACILITIES.



   The Town shall have the right, during the term of any franchise, to
install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of a company any wire or
pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable system
operations of such company. The Town shall indemnify and hold harmless,
subject to the Tennessee Governmental Tort Liability Act and other applicable
law, such company from any claim that might arise due to or as a result of
the Town’s use.



(`83 Code, § 13-508)



§ 118.26  COSTS.



   A company shall bear the following costs:  all reasonable and
justifiable charges or costs incidental to the awarding, renewal or
enforcement of a franchise, including, but not limited to, payments for
bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification,
penalties or liquidated damages.



(`83 Code, § 13-509)



§ 118.27  NOTICES.



   All notices from a company to the Town pursuant to a franchise shall be
addressed to the Town Administrator. A company shall maintain with the Town,
throughout the term of a franchise, an address for service of notices by mail.



(`83 Code, § 13-510)



§ 118.28  LETTER OF CREDIT/SECURITY DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Within 15 days after the award of a franchise, a company shall
deposit with the Town either a letter of credit from a federally insured
financial institution or a security deposit in such an institution in
immediately available funds in the amount of $50,000. The sole condition of
the letter of credit shall be written notice by the Town to the issuer that a
company is in default under the franchise. The security deposit must be
available for draw by the Town without condition. The form, issuer and
content of such letter of credit or security deposit shall be approved by the
Town. These instruments shall be used to assure the faithful performance of a
company of all provisions of its franchise, compliance with all orders,
permits and directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division
or office of the Town having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under its
franchise and the payment by a company of any claims, liens and taxes due the
Town which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of
the system.



   (B)    The letter of credit or security deposit shall be maintained
at the amount of $50,000 for the entire term of a franchise even if sums are
withdrawn therefrom pursuant to divisions (A) or (C) of this section.



   (C)   If a company fails to pay to the Town any sum due under its
franchise within the time required; or fails after 15 days notice to pay to
the Town any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay the Town within 15 days,
any damages, costs or expenses which the Town is compelled to pay by reason
of any act or default of a company in connection with its franchise; or
fails, after ten days notice of such default to comply with any provision of
its franchise which the Town reasonably determines can be remedied, the Town
may immediately demand payment of the amount thereof, with interest and any
penalties, from the issuer of the letter of credit or the holder of the
security deposit. Upon such demand for payment, the Town shall notify the
company of the amount and date thereof.



   (D)   The rights reserved to the Town with respect to the letter of
credit and security deposit are in addition to all other rights of the Town,
and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such letter
of credit or security deposit shall affect any other right the Town may have.



   (E)    The letter of credit shall contain the following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this letter of credit may not be
canceled or not renewed until 30 days after receipt by the Town, by certified
mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew.”



   (F)    Upon receipt of the 30 day notice, such shall be construed as
a default granting the Town the right to call for payment of either the
security deposit or letter of credit.



(`83 Code, § 13-513)



§ 118.29  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   (A)   Thirty days prior to commencing any construction, whether such
construction consists of  improvements to the existing system or
construction of a new system, a company shall file with the Town a
performance bond and payment bond in the amount of not less than 50% of the
costs necessary to perform such construction. This bond(s) shall be
maintained throughout the construction period and thereafter until such time
as determined by the Town. The form and content of such bond(s) shall be
approved by the Town.



   (B)   If a company fails to comply with any law, ordinance or
resolution governing its franchise or fails to well and truly observe,
fulfill and perform each term and condition of its franchise, as it relates
to the conditions relative the construction of the system, there shall be
recoverable jointly and severally, from the principal and surety of the bond,
any damages or loss suffered by the Town as a result, including the full
amount of any compensation, indemnification or costs of removal or
abandonment of any property of the company, plus a reasonable allowance for
attorney’s fees, including the Town’s legal staff and costs up to the
full amount of the bond. This section shall be an additional remedy for any
and all violations outlined in § 118.28.



   (C)   The Town will, upon completion of construction, waive further
maintenance of the bond(s).  However, the Town may require a like bond to be
posted by a company for any construction subsequent to the completion of any
improvements or construction of a new system.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, in
the event a company makes application to the Town to be relieved from
furnishing a performance and payment bond relative to construction of a
system or improvements thereto, the Town Administrator may waive the
requirement for such bond or reduce the required amount thereof if the Town
Administrator determines:



      (1)   That such company has a net worth of not less than $50
million as reflected by its most current audited financial statement; and



      (2)   That the performance of such company of its obligations
generally, whether financial or otherwise, has been satisfactory with respect
to the Town and with respect to other parties with which such company has had
obligations of construction or improvements to cable systems.



(`83 Code, § 13-514)



§ 118.30  LIABILITY AND INSURANCE.



   (A)   A company shall maintain and by its acceptance of a franchise
specifically agrees that it will maintain, throughout the term of its
franchise, liability insurance insuring the Town and the company in the
minimum amount of:



      (1)   One million dollars for property damage due to any one
person;



      (2)   One million dollars for property damage due to any one
accident;



      (3)   One million dollars for personal injury due to any one
person; and



      (4)   One million dollars for personal injury due to any one
accident.



   (B)   In order to comply with this section, the insurance policy
must be obtained by a company from an insurance company licensed to do
business in Tennessee and rated not less than AA by Best or a comparable
insurance rating service. Certificates of insurance along with written
evidence of payment of required premiums shall be filed and maintained with
the Town during the term of a franchise and may be changed from time to time
to reflect changing liability limits. The company shall immediately advise
the Town of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance.



   (C)   Nothing contained herein or in any franchise document shall
limit the liability of a company to the Town.



   (D)   All insurance policies maintained pursuant to a franchise
shall contain the following endorsement:  “It is hereby understood and
agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled or not renewed until 30
days after receipt by the Town, by certified mail, of a written notice of
such intention to cancel or not to renew.”



(`83 Code, § 13-515)



§ 118.31  INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   A company shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Town, its officers, boards,
commissions and employees against any and all claims, defense of suits,
actions and any liability and judgments for damages (including, but not
limited to expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements and
liabilities assumed by the Town in connection therewith):



      (1)   To persons or property, in any way arising out of or
through the acts or omissions of a company, its servants, agents or employees
or to which a company’s negligence shall in any way contribute;



      (2)   Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of
privacy, for defamation of any person, firm or corporation or the violation
or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or
patent or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation (excluding
claims arising out of or relating to Town programming); and



      (3)   Arising out of a company’s failure to comply with the
provisions of any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation
applicable to a company in its business hereunder.



   (B)    The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following:
the Town shall give a company prompt notice of the making of any claim or the
commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the
provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the
Town from cooperating with a company and participating in the defense of 
any litigation by its own counsel at its sole cost and expense. The company
shall fully control the defense to any claim or action and any settlement or
compromise thereof. No recovery by the Town of any sum by reason of the
letter of credit or security deposit required in § 118.28 hereof shall be
any limitation upon the liability of a company to the Town under the terms of
this section, except that any sum so received by the Town shall be deducted
from any recovery which the Town might have against the company under the
terms of this section.



(`83 Code, § 13-516)



§ 118.32  RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.



   (A)   A company shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users or other citizens on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, income or sex. A company
shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination which are incorporated and made part of this chapter by
reference.



   (B)   A company shall strictly adhere to the equal employment
opportunity requirements of the FCC and similar state and local laws,
ordinances and regulations, as amended from time to time.



   (C)   A company shall at all times comply with applicable state and
federal law with respect to privacy rights of subscribers, as such laws may
change from time to time.



   (D)   A company, or any of its agents or employees, shall not,
without specifically providing notice to subscribers, such notice allowing
each subscriber to prohibit the inclusion of his or her name, sell or
otherwise make available to any party:



      (1)   Lists of the names and addresses of such subscribers; or



      (2)   Any list which identifies the viewing habits of
subscribers.



(`83 Code, § 13-517)



§ 118.33  PUBLIC NOTICE.



   Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to a franchise
shall be by publication at least once in a local newspaper of general
circulation at least ten days prior to the meeting, posting at the Town
Municipal Center and by announcement on at least one channel designated
pursuant to § 118.64 hereof between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for
five consecutive days prior to the meeting.



(`83 Code, § 13-518)



§ 118.34  SERVICE AVAILABILITY AND RECORD REQUEST.



   A company shall provide cable service throughout the Town pursuant to
the provisions of its franchise and shall keep a record for at least three
years of all requests for service received by such company. This record shall
be available for public inspection at the local office of such company during
normal business hours.



(`83 Code, § 13-519)



§ 118.35  FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)   For the reason that the streets of the Town to be used by a
company in the operation of its system within the boundaries of the Town are
valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the Town at great
expense to its taxpayers and that the grant to a company to use the streets
for the purpose of furnishing cable service is a valuable property right
without which a company would be required to invest substantial capital in
right-of-way costs and acquisitions, a company shall pay to the Town an
amount equal to 5% of the company’s gross revenue as defined herein (the
“franchise fee”).



   (B)   Such payment of a franchise fee shall be in addition to any
other tax or payment owed to the Town by a company.



   (C)   The franchise fee and any other costs or penalties assessed
shall be payable on a quarterly basis to the Town, and a company shall pay
same and file a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross
revenue, as defined herein, within 45 days after each calendar quarter.



   (D)   The Town shall have the right to inspect a company’s income
records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be
payable under this chapter; provided, however, that such audit shall take
place within 36 months following the close of each of a company’s fiscal
years. Any additional amount due to the Town as a result of the audit
(together with the cost of the audit unless the shortage is of a de minimus
amount) shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to a company by
the Town, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an amount shall be deemed de minimus if such
amount is equal to 1% or less of the amount paid by a company during the
audited period.



   (E)   If any franchise fee or recomputed amount, cost or penalty is
not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest
shall be charged daily from such date at the then legal maximum rate in
Tennessee, and a company shall reimburse the Town for any additional expenses
and costs incurred by the Town by reason of the delinquent payment(s).



   (F)   Franchise fee does not include any tax, fee or assessment of
general applicability.



(`83 Code, § 13-527)



§ 118.36  INITIAL APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   All initial applications received by the Town from any
applicants for a franchise to be granted to provide cable service will become
the property of the Town.



   (B)   The Town reserves the right to reject any and all initial
applications and waive informalities and/or technicalities where the best
interest of the Town may be served.



   (C)   Before submitting an initial application, each and every
applicant must:



      (1)   Examine this chapter and any required application
documents thoroughly;



      (2)   Familiarize itself with local conditions that may in any
manner affect its performance under a franchise;



      (3)   Familiarize itself with federal, state and local laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations affecting its performance under a
franchise; and



      (4)   Carefully correlate its observations with the
requirements of this chapter and any and all application documents.



   (D)   The Town may make such investigations as it deems necessary to
determine the ability of the applicant to provide cable service and to fully
perform under a franchise, and the applicant shall furnish to the Town all
such information and data for this purpose as the Town may request. The Town
reserves the right to reject any initial application if the evidence
submitted by, or investigation of, such applicant fails to satisfy the Town
that such applicant is properly qualified to carry out the obligations of
this ordinance or a franchise or if the plans of the applicant for
construction of this cable system and/or its operation fails to satisfy the
Town that it is in the best interests of its citizens to grant a franchise to
the applicant.



(`83 Code, § 13-544)



§ 118.37  FINANCIAL, CONTRACTUAL, SHAREHOLDER AND SYSTEM DISCLOSURE IN
INITIAL APPLICATION.



   (A)   No franchise will be granted pursuant to an initial
application unless all requirements and demands of the Town regarding
financial, contractual, shareholder and system disclosure have been met.



   (B)   Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with an
interest equal to or greater than 10% of the shares of stock of an applicant,
shall fully disclose all agreements and undertakings, whether written or
oral, or implied with any person, firm, group, association or corporation
with respect to a franchise and the proposed cable system. This section shall
include, but not be limited to, any agreements between local applicants and
national companies.



   (C)   Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with an
interest equal to or greater than 10% of the shares of stock of an applicant,
shall submit all requested information as provided by the terms of this
chapter. The requested information must be complete and verified as true by
the applicant.



   (D)   Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with an
interest equal to or greater than 10% of the shares of stock of an applicant,
shall disclose the numbers of shares of stock and the holders thereof and
shall include the amount of consideration for each share of stock and the
nature of the  consideration.



   (E)   Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with an
interest equal to or greater than 10% of the shares of stock of an applicant,
shall disclose any information required by the Town regarding other cable
systems in which they hold an interest of any nature, including, but not
limited to, the following:



      (1)   Locations of all other franchises and the dates of award
for each location;



      (2)   Estimated construction costs and estimated completion
dates for each cable system;



      (3)   Estimated number of miles of construction and number of
miles completed in each cable system as of the date of any initial
application; and



      (4)   Date for completion of construction as promised in any
initial application for each system.



   (F)   Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with an
interest equal to or greater than 10% of the shares of stock of an applicant,
shall disclose any information required by the Town regarding pending
applications for other cable systems, including, but not limited to, the
following:



      (1)   Location of other franchise applications and date of any
application;



      (2)   Estimated dates of franchise awards;



      (3)   Estimated number of miles of construction; and



      (4)   Estimated construction costs.



(`83 Code, § 13-545)



STANDARDS, REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS



§ 118.50  SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION, IMPROVEMENTS OR EXTENSIONS REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The specifics for a timetable for system construction,
extensions or improvements (“construction”) shall be agreed to by the
Town and a company in the franchise agreement between such company and the
Town. When determining the specifics of a timetable, the following shall be
considered:



      (1)   What areas of the Town are currently being served with
cable service;



      (2)   The need to provide cable service to residents in new
developments in the Town in a timely and feasible manner;



      (3)   The equitable treatment of all of the Town’s residents;



      (4)   The need to foster competition between all companies
providing cable service to the Town to ensure the highest quality cable
service to the Town; and



      (5)   Such other matters presented due to the then existing
circumstances.



   (B)   In addition to the specifics of any construction timetable
agreed to by the Town and a company, the following requirements shall apply:



      (1)   No subscriber shall be refused cable service arbitrarily;



      (2)   Any construction delay beyond any terms of an agreed
construction timetable, unless specifically approved by the Town, will be
considered a violation of this chapter and the applicable franchise;



      (3)   In isolated areas of the Town not being provided cable
service pursuant to the terms of an agreement for a franchise, a company
shall provide, upon the request of a resident desiring cable service, an
estimate of the costs required to extend cable service to the potential
subscriber. A company shall then extend cable service upon request of the
resident and such resident’s agreement to pay such costs. A company may
require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to such company.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a resident will not be required to contribute
toward the costs required to extend cable service to such resident if the
connection to the isolated resident would require no more than a standard 150
foot aerial drop line;



      (4)   In cases of new construction or property development
where utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner
shall give a company reasonable notice of such construction or development
and of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for a
company’s installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults and laterals to
be provided at the company’s expense. A company shall also provide
specifications as needed for trenching. Costs of trenching and easements
required to bring cable service to the development shall be borne by the
developer or property owner; except that if the company fails to install its
conduit, pedestals and/or vaults and laterals within five working days of the
date the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the
developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the
five day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by the company.
Except for the notice of the particular date on which trenching will be
available to a company, any notice provided to a company by the Town of a
preliminary plat request shall satisfy the requirement of reasonable notice
if sent to the local general manager or system engineer of a company prior to
approval of the preliminary plat request.



(`83 Code, § 13-520)



§ 118.51  CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   A company shall construct, install, operate and maintain its
system in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction
standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards and detailed
standards submitted by a company as part of its initial application or
renewal proposal, which standards are incorporated by reference herein. In
addition, a company shall provide the Town, upon request, with a written
report of the results of a company’s annual proof of performance tests
conducted pursuant to FCC standards and requirements.



   (B)   Additional specifications:



      (1)   Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable
system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables
and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and
telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel
and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations;



      (2)   A company shall at all times comply with:



         (a)   National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau
of Standards);



         (b)   National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire
Underwriters);



         (c)   Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction; and



         (d)   Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local
regulations;



      (3)   In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere
with the safety of persons or property in the Town or other areas where a
company may have equipment located;



      (4)   Any antenna structure used in the system shall comply
with construction, marking and lighting of antenna structure required by the
United States Department of Transportation;



      (5)   All working facilities and conditions used during
construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall comply
with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
and/or any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor;



      (6)   RF leakage shall be checked at reception locations for
emergency radio services to prove no interference signal combinations are
possible. Stray radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed
aeronautical navigation radio sites to prove no interference to airborne
navigational reception in the normal flight patterns. FCC rules and
regulations shall govern.



      (7)   A company shall maintain equipment capable of providing
standby power for head end, transportation and trunk amplifiers for a minimum
of two hours or equivalent standby power to maintain an acceptable signal;



      (8)   In all areas of the Town where the cables, wires and
other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, a company
shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground. When
public utilities relocate their facilities from pole to underground, a
company must concurrently do so. In the event any public utility is
compensated for relocation of their facilities from pole to underground, then
a company shall be similarly compensated.



(`83 Code, § 13-521)



§ 118.52  USE OF STREETS.



   (A)   A company’s system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be
located, erected and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger
or interfere with the lives of persons or interfere with the rights or
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets or
interfere with any improvements the Town may deem proper to make or
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets.



   (B)   In case of any disturbance of any street, pavement, sidewalk,
driveway or other surfacing, grass or landscaping, a company shall, at its
own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the Town, replace and
restore such places so disturbed in as good condition as before the work was
commenced and in accordance with standards for such work set by the Town.



   (C)   Erection, removal and common uses of poles:



      (1)   No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be
erected by a company without prior approval of the Town with regard to
location, height, types and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location
of any pole or wire-holding structure of a company shall be a vested interest
and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by a company at its
own expense whenever the Town determines that the public convenience would be
enhanced thereby;



      (2)   Where poles or other wire-holding structures already
existing for use in serving the Town are available for use by a company, but
it does not make arrangements for such use, the Town may require a company to
use such poles and structures if it determines that the public convenience
would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to a company are
just and reasonable;



      (3)   Where the Town or a public utility serving the Town
desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of a
company, but agreement thereof with a company cannot be reached, the Town may
require a company to permit such use for such consideration and upon such
terms as the Town shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the Town
determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not
unduly interfere with a company’s operations;



      (4)   No aerial cable shall be installed so that it interferes
with the view of traffic control devices, including traffic signal heads or
similar apparatus. If, in the opinion of the Town, a cable is installed in
such a manner so as to interfere with the unobstructed view of a traffic
control device, then in the interest of public safety the installer shall
relocate or adjust the cable immediately upon receipt of notice from the Town
of such interference at such company’s expense.



   (D)   If, at any time during the period of a franchise, the Town
shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, a company,
upon reasonable notice by the Town shall remove or relocate as necessary its
poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at
its own expense.  No location of any underground or aboveground facility or
structure of any company shall be a vested interest, and such poles or
structures shall be removed or modified by a company at its own expense
whenever the Town determines that the public convenience would be enhanced
thereby. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary foregoing in this section,
in the event any utility is compensated for removing or relocating its
facilities, then a company shall be similarly compensated.



   (E)   A company shall, on the request of any person holding a
building moving permit issued by the Town or another governmental entity,
temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The
expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid
by the person requesting the same and a company shall have the authority to
require such payment in advance. A company shall be given not less than 48
hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.



   (F)   A company shall not remove any tree or trim any portion,
either above, at or below ground level, of any tree within any public place
without the prior consent of the Town. The Town shall have the right to do
the trimming requested by a company at the cost of a company. Regardless of
who performs the work requested by a company, a company shall be responsible,
shall defend and hold the Town harmless for any and all damages to any tree
as a result of trimming or to the land surrounding any tree, whether such
tree is trimmed or removed, as well as for any and all injuries to persons.



   (G)   A company shall comply with Tennessee law (Tenn. Code Ann.
§§ 65-31-101 through 65-31-112) regarding utility location requests.
Service interruptions occurring as a result of failure to comply with locator
requests shall be cause for a penalty in accordance with § 118.99.



(`83 Code, § 13-522)



§ 118.53  OPERATIONAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   A company shall put, keep and maintain all parts of the system
in good condition throughout its entire franchise.



   (B)   Temporary service drops: 



      (1)   A company will put forth every effort to bury temporary
drops within ten working days after placement. Any delays for any other
reason than listed will be communicated to the Town. These delays will be
found understandable and within the course of doing business by the Town:
weather, ground conditions, street bores, system redesign requirements and
any other unusual obstacle such as obstructive landscaping that is created by
the customer;



      (2)   The company will provide monthly reports to the Town, in
care of the cable advisory commission, or its successor, on the number of
drops pending.



   (C)   A company shall render efficient service, make repairs
promptly and interrupt cable service only for good cause and for the shortest
time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by
notice and shall occur during periods of minimum system use.



   (D)   A company shall not allow its cable system or other operations
to interfere with television reception of persons not served by a company,
nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the
operation of the various utilities serving the residents within the confines
of the Town.



   (E)   A company shall have knowledgeable, qualified company
representatives available to respond to subscriber telephone inquiries Monday
through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and on Saturday
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.



   (F)   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time,
including wait time and the time required to transfer the call, shall not
exceed 30 seconds. This standard shall be met no less than 90% of the time as
measured on an annual basis.



   (G)   Under normal operating conditions, the subscriber will receive
a busy signal less than 3% of the total time that the office is open for
business as measured on an annual basis.



   (H)   A customer service center in the Town will be open for
subscriber transactions Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
unless there is a need to modify those hours to more appropriately fit the
needs of the Town or the subscribers. A company will seek other locations to
arrange for one or more payment agents within the Town where subscribers can
pay bills.



   (I)   Under normal operating conditions, each of the following
standards will be met no less than 95% of the time as measured on an annual
basis.



      (1)   Standard installations will be performed within seven
business days after an order has been placed. A standard installation is one
that is within 150 feet of the existing cable system.



      (2)   Excluding those situations which are beyond the control
of the cable system, a company will respond to any cable service interruption
(area or neighborhood outage affecting two or more customers) promptly and in
no event later than 24 hours from the time of initial notification. All other
regular service requests will be responded to within 36 hours during the
normal work week for the company. The appointment window alternatives for
installations, service calls and other installation activities will be:
morning, afternoon and all day, during normal business hours for the company.
A company will schedule supplemental hours during which appointments can be
scheduled based on the needs of the Town, the subscribers and other residents
in the community. If at any time an installer or technician is running late,
an attempt to contact the subscriber will be made and the appointment
rescheduled as necessary at a time that is convenient to the subscriber. 



      (3)   A company shall maintain a written log for all cable
service interruptions, including trunk and feeder line outages, and the
record shall be kept for a period of three years.   



   (J)   Upon interruption of a subscriber’s cable service, if notice
of such interruption has been provided by such subscriber to the company and
the subscriber has requested the credit provided for below, the following
shall apply:



      (1)   For service interruptions of over four consecutive hours
and up to seven days, a company shall provide a credit of one-thirtieth of
one month’s fees for affected services for each 24-hour period service is
interrupted for four or more consecutive hours for any single subscriber,
with the exception of subscribers disconnected because of non-payment or
excessive signal leakage.



      (2)   For interruptions of seven days or more in one month, a
company shall provide a full month’s credit for affected services for all
affected subscribers.



      (3)   Nothing in this subsection limits a company from
applying a rebate policy more liberal than these requirements.



   (K)   The company will provide written information in each of the
following areas at the time of installation and at any future time upon the
request of a subscriber:



      (1)   Product and services offered;



      (2)   Prices and service options;



      (3)   Installation and service policies; and



      (4)   How to use the cable services.



   (L)   Bills will be clear, concise and understandable.



   (M)   Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than a
subscriber’s next billing cycle following the resolution of the request and
the return of the equipment by a company if cable service has been terminated.



   (N)   Subscribers will be notified a minimum of 30 days in advance
of any rate or channel change, provided that the change is within the control
of a company.



   (O)   A company shall maintain and operate its network in accordance
with the rules and regulations as are incorporated herein or may be
promulgated by the FCC, the United States Congress or the state.



   (P)   A company shall, throughout the term of its franchise,
maintain high quality service.



   (Q)   A company shall, within seven days after receiving a written
request from the Town, send a written report to the Town with respect to any
particular subscriber complaint. The report shall provide a full explanation
of the investigation, findings and corrective steps taken by a company.



   (R)   All field employees of a company shall carry identification
indicating their employment with a company.



   (S)   A company, via its computer system, will maintain a service
log which will indicate the nature of each subscriber service problem, the
remedy to the problem and the order and resolution time and date for one year.



(`83 Code, § 13-523)



§ 118.54  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.



   (A)   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving
service insofar as their financial and other obligations to a company are
honored. If a company elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell its
system, or the Town gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew a
franchise, such company shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers
receive continuous, uninterrupted cable service regardless of the
circumstances.



   (B)   If a new operator acquires a system, a transferring company
shall cooperate with the Town, and the new franchisee or operator in
maintaining continuity of cable service to all subscribers. During such
period, a transferring company shall be entitled to the revenues for any
period during which it operates the system and shall be entitled to
reasonable costs for its services until it no longer operates the system.



   (C)   If a company fails to operate the system for seven consecutive
days without prior approval of the Town or without just cause, the Town may,
at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as
such company restores cable service under conditions acceptable to the Town
or a permanent operator is selected. If the Town is required to fulfill this
obligation for a company, such company shall reimburse the Town for all
reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system received by
the Town that are the result of such company’s failure to perform.



(`83 Code, § 13-524)



§ 118.55  COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Town Administrator of the Town is designated as having
primary responsibility for the continuing administration of all franchises
and implementation of procedures for the reporting and resolution of
complaints.



   (B)   During the term of all franchises and any renewal thereof, a
company shall maintain a customer service center in the Town for the purpose
of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. A company shall provide
subscribers with a local, toll-free telephone number to receive complaints
regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters.



   (C)   As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, the
company shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish
information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints,
including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or
employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed
and furnish information concerning the Town office responsible for
administration of all franchises with the address and telephone number of the
office.



   (D)   When there have been similar complaints made or where there
exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the Town, casts doubt on the
reliability or quality of cable service furnished by a company, the Town
shall have the right and authority to require such company to test, analyze
and report on the performance of its system. A company shall fully cooperate
with the Town in performing such testing and shall prepare results and a
report, if requested, within 30 days after notice. The report shall include
the following information:



      (1)   The nature of the complaint(s) or problem(s) which
precipitated the special tests;



      (2)   What system component was tested;



      (3)   The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;



      (4)   The method, if any, in which such complaint(s) or
problem(s) was resolved;



      (5)   Any other information pertinent to the tests and
analysis which may be required.



   (E)   The Town may require that tests be supervised, at a
company’s expense, by a licensed professional engineer not on the permanent
staff of such company (“outside engineer”). The outside engineer shall
sign all records of special tests and forward to the Town such records with a
report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be
taken. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the outside engineer concludes in
his or her report that the cable system provided by such company meets the
FCC technical standards or that the cause of the problem to the cable system
is not the fault of the company, then the expense of the outside engineer
shall be borne by the Town.



   (F)   The Town’s right under this section shall be limited to
requiring tests, analysis and reports covering specific subjects and
characteristics based on complaints or other evidence when and under such
circumstances as the Town has reasonable grounds to believe that the
complaints or other evidence require that tests be performed to protect the
public against substandard cable service.



(`83 Code, § 13-525)



§ 118.56  COMPANY RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   A company shall have the authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as
shall be reasonably necessary to enable such company to exercise its rights
and perform its obligations under its franchise and to assure uninterrupted
service to each and all of its subscribers; provided, however, that such
rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the
provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations.



(`83 Code, § 13-526)



§ 118.57  FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)   For the reason that the streets of the Town to be used by a
company in the operation of its system within the boundaries of the Town are
valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the Town at great
expense to its taxpayers and that the grant to a company to use the streets
for the purpose of furnishing cable service is a valuable property right
without which a company would be required to invest substantial capital in
right-of-way costs and acquisitions, a company shall pay to the Town an
amount equal to 5% of the company’s gross revenue as defined herein (the
“franchise fee”).



   (B)   The payment of a franchise fee shall be in addition to any
other tax or payment owed to the Town by a company.



   (C)   The franchise fee and any other costs or penalties assessed
shall be payable on a quarterly basis to the Town, and a company shall pay
same and file a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross
revenue, as defined herein, within 45 days after each calendar quarter.



   (D)   The Town shall have the right to inspect a company’s income
records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be
payable under this chapter; provided, however, that such audit shall take
place within 36 months following the close of each of a company’s fiscal
years. Any additional amount due to the Town as a result of the audit
(together with the cost of the audit unless the shortage is of a de minimus
amount) shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to a company by
the Town, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an amount shall be deemed de minimus if such
amount is equal to 1% or less of the amount paid by a company during the
audited period.



   (E)   If any franchise fee or recomputed amount, cost or penalty is
not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest
shall be charged daily from such date at the then legal maximum rate in
Tennessee, and a company shall reimburse the Town for any additional expenses
and costs incurred by the Town by reason of the delinquent payment(s).



   (F)   Franchise fee does not include any tax, fee or assessment of
general applicability.



(`83 Code, § 13-527)



§ 118.58  CAPITAL CONTRIBUTION.



   As outlined in § 118.64 hereof, any company granted a franchise is to
provide access to certain channel capacity for public, educational or
governmental use. To assist in the providing of such access, any company
granted a franchise must provide funds to cover those capital costs incurred
in providing such access and facilities for such access. In the event that
more than one company is granted a franchise, each company is to share in the
capital contribution necessary to provide such access and facilities, from
and after the granting of its franchise, on a basis which shall be equitable
to the holder(s) of another franchise(s) and the Town. The terms of such
sharing shall be contained in the franchise(s) granted to any company which
receives a franchise while another franchise is in existence.



(`83 Code, § 13-528)



§ 118.59  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.



   (A)   A franchise shall not be sold, assigned or transferred
(including through inheritance), either in whole or in part, nor shall title
thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein, pass to
or vest in any person or entity without full compliance with the procedure
set forth in this section.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the sale or
transfer of all or a majority of a company’s assets or shares of stock and
to a merger (including any parent and its subsidiary corporation),
consolidation, creation of a subsidiary corporation of the parent company or
sale or transfer of stock in a company so as to create a new controlling
interest. The term CONTROLLING INTEREST as used herein is not limited to
majority stock ownership but includes actual working control in whatever
manner exercised, including the creation or transfer of decision-making
authority to a new or different board of directors.



      (1)   The parties to the sale or transfer shall make a written
request to the Town for its approval of a sale or transfer. The written
request shall be accompanied by all information required by FCC rules and
shall be presented on a form as prescribed by FCC rules. Thereafter, the Town
shall have 120 days to act on the request or it shall be deemed granted
subject to the provisions following. If the Town finds that the application
is not complete, as required by FCC rules, it shall notify the parties within
60 days of the initial filing. The notice shall stay the running of the 120
days until such time as the parties file a complete application in accordance
with FCC rules. If the Town does not so notify the parties within the 60 days
following the filing of an application, the application shall be deemed
complete and the 120 days shall run from the date the application was filed.
The Town may request such additional information as it might reasonably
determine to be necessary to act on the request. The request shall not,
however, extend the 120 day period unless mutually agreed to by all parties
or such extension is expressly permitted by the FCC rules.



      (2)   The Town shall signify in writing within the time
aforesaid its approval of the request or its determination that a public
hearing is necessary due to potential adverse effect on a company’s
subscribers.



      (3)   If a public hearing is deemed necessary pursuant to
subsection (2) above, such hearing shall be commenced within 30 days of such
determination and notice of any such hearing shall be given 14 days prior to
the hearing by publishing notice, as defined in § 118.33. The notice shall
contain the date, time and place of the hearing and shall briefly state the
substance of the action to be considered by the Town.



      (4)   Within 30 days after the closing of the public hearing,
the Town shall approve or deny in writing the sale or transfer request.



      (5)   Within 30 days of any transfer, a company shall file
with the Town a copy of the deed, agreement, mortgage, lease or other written
instrument evidencing such sale, transfer of ownership or control or lease,
certified and sworn to as correct by such company.



   (C)   In reviewing a request for sale or transfer pursuant to
division (A) of this section, the Town may inquire into the legal, technical
and financial qualifications of the prospective controlling party and a
company shall assist the Town in so inquiring. The Town may condition the
transfer upon such terms and conditions as it deems reasonably appropriate to
satisfy the qualifications; provided, however, the Town shall not
unreasonably withhold its approval. As a condition of approval of a transfer
or assignment of ownership or control, the Town may require that the
transferee become a signatory to the franchise agreement entered into by the
Town and the predecessor of the transferee.



   (D)   A company shall notify the Town in writing of any change in
administrative officials  regarding its cable system within 14 days of the
change.



   (E)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter or a
company’s franchise, no prior consent by the Town shall be required for any
transfer or assignment to any entity controlling, controlled by or under the
same common control of the transferring company. However, in such a transfer
or assignment, the transferring company shall remain liable for all financial
obligations as required pursuant to its franchise and this chapter, unless
otherwise agreed to by the Town. The agreement to release the transferring
company shall not be withheld unreasonably and shall further be provided in
all transfers or assignments where the transferee company has a net worth of
not less than $25 million as reflected by its most current audited financial
statement.



(`83 Code, § 13-529)



§ 118.60  AVAILABILITY OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   A company shall fully cooperate in making available at
reasonable times, and the Town shall have the right as it pertains to the
enforcement of a franchise, to inspect the books, records, maps, plans and
other like materials of a company applicable to a cable system at any time
during normal business hours; provided, where volume and convenience
necessitate, a company may require inspection to take place on such company
premises.



   (B)   The following records and/or reports are to be made available
to the Town upon request:



      (1)   There shall be a monthly review and resolution or
progress report submitted by a company to the Town;



      (2)   Periodic preventive maintenance reports;



      (3)   Any copies of FCC Form 395-A (or successor form) or any
supplemental forms related to equal opportunity or fair contracting policies;



      (4)   Reports filed with the FCC, SEC or any other federal or
state agency that has a potential impact on the administration of a franchise;



      (5)   Subscriber inquiry/complaint resolution data and related
documentation;



      (6)   Periodic construction update reports, including where
appropriate the submission of as-built maps.



(`83 Code, § 13-530)



§ 118.61  PETITIONS AND APPLICATIONS.



   Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports
submitted by a company to the FCC, Securities and Exchange Commission or any
other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in
respect to any matters affecting cable television operations authorized
pursuant to this franchise shall be provided to the Town when requested by
the Town.



(`83 Code, § 13-531)



§ 118.62  FISCAL REPORTS.



   (A)   A company shall file annually with the Town no later than 120
days after the end of the company’s fiscal year a copy of a gross revenue
report applicable to the cable system and its operations during the preceding
12 month period. The report shall deal exclusively with the services rendered
by the company under the franchise and shall be certified as correct by an
authorized officer of such company.



   (B)   A company shall file annually with the Town no later than 120
days after the end of the company’s fiscal year a copy of financial
statements, certified by a certified public accountant, of the income,
expenses and financial standing of such company.



(`83 Code, § 13-532)



§ 118.63  REMOVAL OF CABLE SYSTEM.



   At the expiration of the term for which a franchise is granted and any
denial of a renewal proposal or upon its termination as provided herein, a
company shall forthwith, if required by the Town but not otherwise, remove at
its own expense all designated portions of the cable system from all streets
and public property within the Town. If the company fails to do so, the Town
may perform the work at such company’s expense or elect to leave same in
place. A bond shall be furnished by the company in an amount sufficient to
cover this expense.



(`83 Code, § 13-533)



§ 118.64  REQUIRED SERVICES AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   A cable system of a company granted a franchise hereunder
shall have a minimum system capacity of at least 550 MHZ or 77 full video
channel equivalent and a minimum capacity no less than any other cable system
franchise then held by such company or by any entity controlling it,
controlled by it or under the same common control as such company for any
municipality within Shelby County, Tennessee or any unincorporated area of
Shelby County.



   (B)   The system shall maintain a plant having the technical
capacity for “two-way” communications.



   (C)   A company shall maintain the following:



      (1)   At least one specially-designated, noncommercial public
access channel available on a first- come, nondiscriminatory basis;



      (2)   At least one specially-designated channel for
educational access;



      (3)   At least one specially-designated channel for local
governmental uses;



      (4)   Leased access made available in accordance with federal
law;



      (5)   An Institutional Network (I-Net) of cable, optical,
electrical or electronic equipment, including cable television systems, used
for the purpose of transmitting cable signals interconnecting designated
buildings or places to be determined by the Town and incorporated into a
franchise;



      (6)   Provided, however, these uses may be combined on one or
more channels until such time as additional channels become necessary in the
opinion of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town.



   (D)   A company shall incorporate into its cable system the capacity
which will permit the Town, in times of emergency, to override, by remote
control, the audio of all channels which a company may lawfully override
simultaneously. The Town shall designate one of the three channels referenced
in § 118.64 hereof for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video. A
company shall cooperate with the Town in the use and operation of the
emergency alert override system.



   (E)   (1)   A company may be required to interconnect its system
with systems. Such interconnection shall be made within the time limit
established by the Town.



      (2)   Upon receiving the directive of the Town to
interconnect, a company shall immediately initiate negotiations with the
other affected system or systems in order that all costs may be shared
equally among cable companies for both construction and operation of the
interconnection link.



      (3)   A company may be granted reasonable extensions of time
to interconnect or the Town may rescind its order to interconnect upon
petition by a company to the Town. The Town shall grant the request if it
finds that a company has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an
approval from the operator or franchising authority of a system to be
interconnected or the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable
or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates.



      (4)   A company shall cooperate with any interconnection
corporation, regional interconnection authority or Town, county, state and
federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose
of regulating, financing or otherwise providing for the interconnection of
cable systems beyond the boundaries of the Town.



      (5)   Initial technical requirements to assure future
interconnection capability are as follows:



         (a)   All companies receiving franchises to operate
within the Town shall use the standard frequency allocations for television
signals;



         (b)   All companies are required to use in the cable
systems signal processors at the head end for each television signal;



         (c)   The Town also urges a company to provide local
origination equipment that is compatible throughout the area so that video
cassettes or videotapes can be shared by various systems.



(`83 Code, § 13-534)



§ 118.65  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the inherent powers of the Town to regulate and
control a franchise, and those powers expressly reserved by the Town or
agreed to and provided for herein, the right and power is reserved by the
Town to promulgate such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in
the exercise of its lawful powers and furtherance of the terms and conditions
of this franchise; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and
conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable
state and federal laws, rules and regulations or change a company’s
obligations or rights hereunder.



   (B)   The Town may also adopt such regulations as requested by a
company upon application.



(`83 Code, § 13-535)



§ 118.66  PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SESSIONS.



   (A)   The Town and a company shall hold scheduled performance
evaluation sessions every third year within 30 days of the anniversary date
of a company’s award or renewal of its franchise and as may be required by
federal and state law. Notice as defined at § 118.33 shall be provided for
all such evaluation sessions, which shall be open to the public.



   (B)   Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the
term of the franchise at the request of the Town or a company.



   (C)   Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special
evaluation session may include, but shall not be limited to, service rate
structures, franchise fee, penalties, free or discounted services,
application of new technologies, system performance, services provided,
programming offered, customer complaints, privacy, amendments to this
chapter, judicial and FCC rulings, construction policies and a company or
Town rules.



   (D)   Members of the general public may add topics either by working
through the negotiating parties or by presenting a petition. If such a
petition bears the valid signatures of 50 or more residents of the Town, the
proposed topic or topics shall be added to the list of topics to be discussed
at the evaluation session.



(`83 Code, § 13-536)



§ 118.67  RATE CHANGE PROCEDURES.



   The Town may regulate basic service rates charged by a company as
allowed pursuant to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992 or any other law or regulation. Should federal or state law
permit further rate regulation beyond the basic service, the Town may assume
such rate regulation immediately and adopt appropriate procedures for such
regulation.



(`83 Code, § 13-537)



§ 118.68  FORFEITURE AND TERMINATION.



   (A)   In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the
Town under this chapter or otherwise, the Town reserves the right to forfeit
and terminate a franchise and all rights and privileges of a company
thereunder in the event of a substantial breach of its terms and conditions.
A substantial breach by the company shall include, but shall not be limited
to, the following:



      (1)   Violation of any material provision of the franchise or
any material violation of any rule, order, regulation or determination of the
Town made pursuant to the franchise;



      (2)   Attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise
or practice any fraud or deceit upon the Town or its subscribers;



      (3)   Failure to begin or complete system construction as
provided under § 118.50 or in a company’s franchise;



      (4)   Failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of
interrupted service, except when approval of such interruption is obtained
from the Town; or



      (5)   Material misrepresentation of fact in a proposal for or
negotiation of a franchise.



   (B)   The foregoing shall not constitute a major breach if the
violation occurs but is without fault of a company or occurs as a result of a
force majeure. A company shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor
by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees.



   (C)   The Town may make a written demand that a company comply with
any provision, rule, order or determination under or pursuant to this
chapter. If the violation by a company continues for a period of 30 days
following such written demand without written proof that the corrective
action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the
Town may set a public hearing to decide the issue of termination of its
franchise. The Town shall cause to be served upon a company, at least 20 days
prior to the date of such hearing, a written notice of intent to request such
termination and establish the time and place of the hearing. Public notice as
defined in § 118.33 shall be given of the hearing and the issue(s) which
will be addressed at the hearing.



   (D)   The Town shall hear and consider the issue(s) and shall hear
any person interested therein and shall determine in its discretion whether
or not any violation by a company has occurred.



   (E)   If the Town shall determine that a violation by a company was
the fault of such company and within its control, the Town may, by resolution
by its Board of Mayor and Aldermen, declare that the franchise of such
company shall be forfeited and terminated unless there is compliance within
such period as the Board may fix. Such period shall not be less than 60 days,
provided no opportunity for compliance need be granted for fraud or
misrepresentation.



   (F)   The issue of forfeiture and termination shall be placed upon
the agenda of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town at the expiration
of the time set by it for compliance. The Town then may terminate the
franchise forthwith upon finding that a company has failed to achieve
compliance or may further extend the period in its discretion.



(`83 Code, § 13-538)



§ 118.69  FORECLOSURE.



   Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial
part of the system, a company shall notify the Town of such fact, and such
notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of
such company has taken place, and the provisions of its franchise governing
the consent of the Town to such change in control of the company shall apply.



(`83 Code, § 13-539)



§ 118.70  APPROVAL OF TRANSFER AND RIGHT OF ACQUISITION BY TOWN.



   (A)   At the expiration of a franchise, if it is not renewed, the
Town may, in lawful manner and upon payment of fair market value determined
on the basis of the system valued as a going concern exclusive of any value
attributable to the franchise itself, lawfully obtain, purchase, condemn,
acquire, take over and hold the system.



   (B)   Upon the revocation of a franchise, the Town may in lawful
manner and upon the payment of an equitable price lawfully obtain, purchase,
condemn, acquire, take over and hold the system.



(`83 Code, § 13-540)



§ 118.71  RECEIVERSHIP.



   The Town shall have the right to cancel a franchise 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee for a company to take over and conduct
the business of the company, whether in receivership, reorganization,
bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or
trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of 120 days, or
unless:



   (A)   Within 120 days after his or her election or appointment, such
receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this
chapter and a franchise issued pursuant hereto and remedied all defaults
thereunder; and



   (B)   The receiver or trustee, within the 120 days, shall have
executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by
each and every provision of this chapter and the franchise granted to a
company.



(`83 Code, § 13-541)



§ 118.72  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the
contrary, a company shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations
of the state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof;
provided, however, if any such state or federal law or regulation shall
require a company to perform any service, shall permit a company to perform
any service or shall prohibit a company from performing any service in
conflict with the terms of this chapter or of any law or regulation of the
Town, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof a company shall
notify the Town of the point of conflict believed to exist between such
regulation or law and the ordinances or regulations of the Town or its
franchise.



   (B)   If the Town determines that a material provision of this
chapter is affected by any subsequent action of the state or federal
government, the Town and a company shall have the right to negotiate a
modification to any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may
be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this chapter and any
franchise.



(`83 Code, § 13-542)



§ 118.73  LANDLORD/TENANT.



   (A)   Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling
nor his or her agent or representative shall interfere with the right of any
tenant or lawful resident thereof to receive cable service, cable
installation or maintenance from a company.



   (B)   Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling
nor his or her agent or representative shall ask, demand or receive any
payment, service or gratuity in any form as a condition for permitting or
cooperating with the installation of a cable service to the dwelling unit
occupied by a tenant or resident requesting service.



   (C)   Neither the owner or any multiple unit residential dwelling
nor his or her agent or representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a
tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant
or resident or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who
requests or receives cable service from a company.



   (D)   No person shall resell, without the expressed written consent
of both a company and the Town, any cable service, program or signal
transmitted by a cable company.



   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring
that the cable system conform to laws and regulations and reasonable
conditions necessary to protect safety, function, appearance and value of
premises or the convenience and safety of persons or property.



   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring
a company to agree to indemnify the owner, or his or her agents or
representatives, for damages or from liability for damages caused by the
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable communication
facilities.



(`83 Code, § 13-543)



§ 118.74  THEFT OF SERVICES AND TAMPERING.



   (A)   No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable system,
may intentionally or knowingly damage or cause to be damaged, any wire,
cable, conduit, equipment or apparatus of a company, commit any act with
intent to cause such damage or tap, tamper with or otherwise connect any wire
or device to a wire cable, conduit, equipment, apparatus or appurtenances of
a company with the intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the cable system
without authorization from or compensation to a company or to obtain cable
service with intent to cheat or defraud a company of any lawful charge to
which it is entitled.



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this
section is subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each
offense. Each day’s violation of this section shall be considered a
separate offense.



(`83 Code, § 13-546)



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, §§ 13-547 and 13-548)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 4-14-03)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



General Provisions



   130.001   Misdemeanors of the state adopted



Offenses Against the Public Peace and Safety



   130.015   Assault and battery



   130.016   Disturbing the peace



   130.017   Obstruction of public ways; unauthorized congregation on
school property



   130.018   Abandoned refrigerators



   130.019   Curfew for minors



   130.020   Malicious mischief



   130.021   Interference with traffic



   130.022   Anti-noise regulations



   130.023   Wearing masks



Offenses Against Morals



   130.040   Gambling



   130.041   Promotion of gambling



   130.042   Public drunkenness



   130.043   Drinking beer in public places



   130.044   Coercing people not to work



   130.045   Fortune telling and the like



   130.046   Nudity and sexual activities



Offenses Against Property



   130.060   Window peeping



   130.061   Trespassing on trains



   130.062   Posting notices and the like



   130.063   Spitting



   130.064   Caves, wells, cisterns and the like



Weapons



   130.075   Weapons and firearms generally



   130.076   Air rifles and the like



   130.077   Throwing of missiles



Offenses Against the Government and Public Administration



   130.090   Escape from custody or confinement



   130.091   Resisting or interfering with Town personnel



   130.092   Impersonating a government officer or employee



   130.093   False emergency alarm



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.001  MISDEMEANORS OF THE STATE ADOPTED.



   All offenses against the State of Tennessee which are committed within
the corporate limits of the Town of Collierville and which are defined as
misdemeanors by the Tennessee Code Annotated are declared and designated to
be offenses against this municipality also. Any violation of any such law
within the corporate limits is also a violation of this section. 



(`83 Code, § 10-101)  Penalty, see § 10.99



OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



§ 130.015 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or an assault
and battery.



(`83 Code, § 10-201)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.016  DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or assist in making any
noise, disturbance or any other improper diversion, any rout, riot or ring or
sound any gong by which the peace, harmony or good order of the neighborhood
are disturbed or be guilty of disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for
any person by talking, laughing, boisterous conduct or in any other manner to
interrupt the services in any place of worship, or by noise or in any other
manner disturb any public or private meeting for entertainment, convened or
assembled lawfully within the limits of the corporation.



(`83 Code, § 10-202)



§ 130.017  OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS; UNAUTHORIZED CONGREGATION ON SCHOOL
PROPERTY.



   (A)   (1)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or
prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons
or property in the vicinity.  Among the circumstances which may be
considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the
person takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify
himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or
any object.  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it
impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself or
herself and to explain his or her presence or conduct.  No person shall be
convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not
comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the person was true and, if it had been believed by the
police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.  Any police
officer may arrest any person suspected of being a loiterer or prowler
without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay in arresting the
suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the suspect’s escape.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being
warned by a police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have
been posted, to loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or
quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that
portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or
obstruct unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct, or prevent free
access to the entrance to any building open to the public.



      (3)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACEhas the
following definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:  an area generally visible to public view, including
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general
public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment,
and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds
enclosing them.



   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any persons to congregate upon
the school grounds at any time when school is not in session except when the
grounds are being used with the permission of the school authorities.



(`83 Code, § 10-203)  (Ord. 2003-07, passed 4-14-03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.018  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave in any place accessible to
children any abandoned, unattended, unused or discarded refrigerator, icebox
or other container with any type latching or locking door without first
removing therefrom the latch, lock or door. 



(`83 Code, § 10-222)  (Ord. passed 10- -75)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.019  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor between 17 and 18 years of age to
remain in or upon any public street, highway, park, vacant lot, establishment
or other public place within the Town during the following time frames:



      (1)   Monday through Thursday between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m.;



      (2)   Friday through Sunday between the hours of 12:00
midnight to 6:00 a.m.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any minor 16 years of age and under to
remain in or upon any public street, highway, park, vacant lot, establishment
or other public place within the Town during the following time frames:



      (1)   Monday through Thursday between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m.;



      (2)   Friday through Sunday between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.



   (C)   It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to
knowingly permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or
remain upon any street or establishment under circumstances not constituting
an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of divisions (A) and (B). 
The term “knowingly” includes knowledge which a parent or guardian should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that
parent’s legal custody.  The term “knowingly” is intended to continue
to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community standard
of parental responsibility through an objective test. It is not a defense
that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or
whereabouts of such minor child.



   (D)   The following are valid exceptions to the operation of the
curfew:



      (1)   At any time, if a minor is accompanied by such minor’s
parent or guardian;



      (2)   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent or
guardian of such minor to take such parent or guardian’s place in
accompanying the minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a
specified area;



      (3)   Until the hour of 12:30 a.m., if the minor is on an
errand as directed by such minor’s parent;



      (4)   If the minor is legally employed, for the period from 45
minutes before to 45 minutes after work, while going directly between the
minor’s home and place of employment.  This exception shall also apply if
the minor is in a public place during the curfew hours in the course of the
minor’s employment.  To come within this exception, the minor must be
carrying written evidence of employment which is issued by the employer;



      (5)   Until the hour of 12:30 a.m. if the minor is on the
property of or the sidewalk directly adjacent to the place where such minor
resides or the place immediately adjacent thereto, if the owner of the
adjacent building does not communicate an objection to the minor and the law
enforcement officer;



      (6)   When returning home by a direct route from (and within
30 minutes of the termination of) a school activity or an activity of a
religious or other voluntary association, or a place of public entertainment,
such as a movie, play or sporting event.  This exception does not apply
beyond 1:00 a.m.



      (7)   In the case of reasonable necessity, but only after such
minor’s parent has communicated to law enforcement personnel the facts
establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a
designated time for a described purpose including place or origin and
destination.  A copy of such communication, or the record thereof, an
appropriate notation of the time it was received and of the names and
addresses of such parent or guardian and minor constitute evidence of
qualification under this exception;



      (8)   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly.  A minor shall show evidence of the good
faith of such exercise and provide notice to the Town officials by first
delivering to the appropriate law enforcement authority a written
communication, signed by such minor, with the minor’s home address and
telephone number, addressed to the mayor of the county specifying when, where
and in what manner the minor will be on the streets at night during hours
when the curfew is still otherwise applicable to the minor in the exercise of
a First Amendment right specified in such communication; and



      (9)   When a minor is, with parental consent, in a motor
vehicle engaged in good faith interstate travel.



   (E)   Each of the foregoing exceptions and the limitations are
severable.



   (F)   When any minor is in violation of this section, the
apprehending officer shall act in one of the following ways:



      (1)   In the case of a first violation, and if in the opinion
of the officer such action would be effective, take the minor to the
minor’s home and warn and counsel the parents or guardians;



      (2)   Issue a summons to the minor and/or parents or guardians
to appear at the juvenile court; or



      (3)   Bring the child into the custody of the juvenile court
for disposition.



   (G)   (1)   A minor violating the provisions of this section
shall commit an unruly act disposition of which shall be governed pursuant to
Tenn. Code Ann. Title 37.



      (2)   Any parent, guardian, or other person having the care,
custody and control of a minor violating the provisions of this section
commits a Class C misdemeanor and shall be fined no more than $50 for each
offense; each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.



(`83 Code, § 10-223)  (Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-17-1702)  (Ord. 2003-08,
passed 4-14-03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.020  MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully break, pull down,
injure or destroy any tree which is now planted within the limits of
corporation; such person so offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
providing that nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prevent
the corporation from removing any shrub, hedge, tree, fence or wall which it
may deem so suited as to obstruct any street or sidewalk or to prevent any
owner of a lot from cutting down any tree on his or her lot. It shall also be
unlawful for any person to remove, deface or disfigure any street or traffic
sign or other public property belonging to the Town, as well as any private,
real or personal property.



(`83 Code, § 10-224)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.021  INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit or engage in any
activity whatever on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground in
such manner as to prevent, obstruct or interfere unreasonably with the free
passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon.



(`83 Code, § 10-231)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.022  ANTI-NOISE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, the creating of any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise is prohibited. Noise of
such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life and
health of any individual or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare is
prohibited. 



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      AMBIENT NOISE. The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment being usually a composite of sounds from many sources, near and
far.



      BANK PRESSURE LEVEL. Sound for a specified frequency band is the
sound pressure level for sound contained within the restricted band. The
reference pressure must be specified.



      CYCLE. The complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity
that occur during that period.



      DECIBEL or db. One-tenth of a BEL and is a unit level when the
base of the logarithm is the tenth root to ten and the quantities concerned
are proportional to power.



      PERSON. Any person, person’s firm, association, co-partnership,
joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature.



      SOUND ANALYZER. A device for measuring the band pressure spectrum
level of a sound as a function of frequency.



      SOUND-LEVEL METER. An instrument, including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting networks for measurement
of noise and sound levels in a specific manner.



      SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. In decibels of sound is 20 times the
logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of this sound to the
reference pressure, which reference pressure is for the purpose of this
section a reference pressure of 20 micro-newtons per meter squared.



      WEIGHTED LEVEL. The total sound pressure level of all noise as
measured with a sound level meter using the “A” weighing network. The
unit of measurement is the db (A).



   (C)   All technical definitions are in accordance with American
National Standards Institute S1-1960 entitled “Acoustical Terminology.”



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle,
including, but not limited to, cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles, motorbikes,
minibikes and go carts within the corporate limits on private or public
property which creates a noise or sound which exceeds the noise level limits
set out below:



      (1)   Trucks and buses over 10,000 pounds.



         (a)   87 db (A) measured at 50 feet maximum allowable
limit.



         (b)   93 db (A) measured at 25 feet maximum allowable
limit.



      (2)   Under 10,000 pounds.



         (a)   80 db (A) measured at 50 feet maximum allowable
limit.



         (b)   86 db (A) measured at 25 feet maximum allowable
limit.



         (c)   78 db (A) measured at 50 feet maximum allowable
limit.



         (d)   84 db (A) measured at 50 feet maximum allowable
limit.



         (e)   93 db (A) measured at 25 feet maximum allowable
limit.



   (E)   Measurement of noise:



      (1)   The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a
sound level meter meeting those standards prescribed by the American National
Standards Institute. The instrument shall be maintained in calibration. A
check shall be made of the systems at the time of any noise measurement. 
Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation
of the noise source and shall not exceed the above levels as measured in any
direction. The microphone during measurement shall be positioned so as not to
create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise.  A
windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required. Traffic, aircraft
and other transportation noise sources and other background noises shall not
be considered in taking measurements except where such background noise
interfered with the primary noise being measured.



      (2)   Measurement of noise levels caused by a moving vehicle
shall be confirmed by a noise level measurement taken with the vehicle
stationary. The driver of the vehicle shall be required to accelerate his or
her engine to one-half throttle in order to conduct the noise level reading.



         (a)   Mufflers. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate or cause to be operated any muffler attached to any motor vehicle or
any other mechanized unit which produces noise levels within the corporation
exceeding db (A) ratings as set out in the above table and accompanying the
subsections above.



         (b)   Horns and other warning devices. Generally, it
shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any horn,
siren, whistle, bell or any electronic blast which may be attached to any
motor vehicle or other mechanized unit which is in any manner inconsistent
with subsection (a).



         (c)   Trains. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate or cause to be operated a warning device of any type, included, but
not limited to, a whistle, horn or electronic blast on trains or vehicles
which operate on stationary rails, in excess of 87 db (A) at 50 feet within
the corporation for a sustained period of more than 30 seconds, except as may
be required by any federal safety regulations requiring sounding of warning
signals at grade crossings.



         (d)   Exempted vehicles. The following uses and
activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations:



            1.   Ambulances, whether owned by private company
or Town operated, while upon call to the scene of an accident or an emergency
situation;



            2.   Vehicles used as garbage collection trucks
while in performance of duties and used for either loading or processing of
garbage and debris, whether privately owned or Town operated;



            3.   Fire equipment upon emergency call and return;



            4.   Corporation of Collierville Police equipment
and/or other Town, county, state and federal law enforcement equipment upon
emergency call;



            5.   When the trucks have been issued permits by
the Collierville Police Department;



            6.   Vehicular equipment used in connection with
the removal of trees, brush, undergrowth and the like, whether privately
owned or Town operated;



            7.   All of the above mentioned vehicles, with the
exception of the Town of Collierville equipment, shall be required to
maintain mufflers and related equipment within the noise level regulations
contained in this section.



         (e)   Radios, televisions, musical instruments and
similar devices.



            1.   It shall be unlawful to operate or play any
radio, television, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifying equipment or
similar device on a public right-of-way in a public park or from a motor
vehicle which produces or reproduces sound in a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 7.5 meters (25 feet).



            2.   It shall be unlawful to operate or play, or
allow to be operated or played, any radio, television, phonograph, musical
instrument, loudspeaker or similar device in a residential area that is
plainly audible to any person off the premises of the operating party unless
a permit has been issued.



            3.   It shall be unlawful to operate or play any
musical instrument on a public right-of- way, in a public park, playground or
recreation area which produces sound in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 15 meters (50 feet), unless a permit has been issued.



         (f)   Yelling, shouting, hooting and the like. Yelling,
shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as
to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in any
hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any person in the
vicinity. The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which by causing frequent
or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in
the vicinity. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, truck or vehicle so out
of repair, so loaded or grinding, rattling or other noises.



         (g)   Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin
or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger upon request of proper
municipal authorities.



         (h)   Building operations. Noise-producing activities,
including but not limited to, framing, roofing, grading, the use of trucks,
the operation of any tools or equipment associated with the construction
(including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in
any residential area or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on
Saturdays shall be unlawful. Exceptions are permissible in cases of urgent
necessity in the interest of public health and safety with written approval
from the Town’s Building Official granted for a time period established by
the Town’s Building Official. The written approval for any such work shall
be available at all times at the building site for review by any Town
enforcement officer. This is not intended to regulate non-noise-producing
activities.



         (i)   Loading and unloading operations. The creation of
any loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading and unloading of
any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and other
containers.



            1.   Noises to attract attention. The use of any
drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device emitting noise for the
purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale or display
of merchandise.



            2.   Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions
hereof shall apply to or be enforced against the following.



               a.   Repair of streets and the like.
Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways at night, by or on
behalf of the municipality, the county or the state, when the public welfare
and convenience renders it impracticable to perform such work during the day.



               b.   Noncommercial and non-profit use of
loudspeakers or amplifiers. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers
in the cause of public addresses which are noncommercial in character and in
the course of advertising functions sponsored by non-profit organizations.
However, no such use shall be made until a permit thereof is secured from the
Town Clerk. Hours for the use of an amplifier or public address system will
be designated in the permit so issued and the use of such systems shall be
restricted to the hours so designated in the permit.



         (j)   Manner of enforcement.  Violations of this
section shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other misdemeanor
violations of the Town Code and shall be initiated upon issuance of a traffic
citation ticket or brought upon complaint by a private citizen by issuance of
a summons, after verification by a police officer using a sound meter.



         (k)   Violations. Any violation of the provisions of
this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $50, or confinement
in jail not to exceed 30 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 



(`83 Code, § 10-232)  (Ord. passed 11-11-74; Am. Ord. 2013-08, passed
8-12-13) 



§ 130.023  WEARING MASKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on or in a
public place or way while wearing any mask, device or hood, whereby any
portion of the face is so hidden or covered as to conceal the identity of the
wearer.



   (B)   The following are exempted from the provisions of this section:



      (1)   Children under the age of ten years;



      (2)   Workers while engaged in work wherein a face covering is
necessary for health and/or safety reasons;



      (3)   Persons wearing gas masks in civil defense drills and
exercises or emergencies;



      (4)   Any person having a special permit issued by the Town
Clerk to wear a traditional holiday costume.



(`83 Code, § 10-234)  Penalty, see § 10.99



OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS



§ 130.040  GAMBLING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to game for money, cigars, drinks,
property or things, with cards, billiards, dice, nine or ten pins, wheels of
fortune, tables, ball alley, boxes, machines or other public or private place
in the Town.



(`83 Code, § 10-215)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.041  PROMOTION OF GAMBLING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to encourage, promote, aid or
assist the playing at any game or the making of any bet or wager for money or
other valuable thing or to possess, keep or exhibit for the purpose of
gambling, any gaming table, device, ticket or any other gaming paraphernalia.



(`83 Code, § 10-216)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.042  PUBLIC DRUNKENNESS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk in a public
place or in any other place open to public view.



   (B)   The penalties for violation of this section shall be those
prescribed by Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-17-310.



(`83 Code, § 10-226)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross reference:



   Alcoholic beverages, see Chapter 116



§ 130.043  DRINKING BEER IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume, or have an
open case, bottle or glass of  an intoxicating beverage in or on any public
street, alley, avenue, highway, sidewalk, public park, public school ground
or other public place unless the place has a beer or liquor permit and
license for on-premises consumption.



(`83 Code, § 10-227)  (Ord. passed 10- -75)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross reference:



   Alcoholic beverages, see Chapter 116



§ 130.044  COERCING PEOPLE NOT TO WORK.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in association or agreement with
any other person to assemble, congregate or reside for the purpose of
inducing any such other person by threats, coercion, intimidation or acts of
violence to quit or refrain from entering a place of lawful employment. It is
expressly not the purpose of this section to prohibit peaceful picketing.



(`83 Code, § 10-229)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.045  FORTUNE TELLING AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold himself or herself forth to
the public as a fortune teller, clairvoyant, spiritualist, palmist,
phrenologist or other mystic endowed with supernatural powers.



(`83 Code, § 10-233)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.046  NUDITY AND SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform in a public
place, or for any person who owns or operates premises constituting a public
place, to knowingly permit or allow to be performed therein any of the
following acts of conduct:



      (1)   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation
or any sexual acts which are prohibited by laws, including but not limited to
the actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts,
buttocks, anus or genitals in public; or



      (2)   The actual or simulated public displaying of the pubic
hair, anus, vulva or genitals.



   (B)   Except as may be permitted in a properly licensed sexually
oriented business and with the exception of nursing mothers feeding their
babies, it shall be unlawful for any live female to appear in a public place
so costumed or dressed that one or both breasts are wholly or substantially
exposed to public view, and it shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of
premises constituting a public place to permit or allow any person to appear
on the premises owned or operated by him or her. WHOLLY OR SUBSTANTIALLY
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW, as it pertains to breasts, shall mean the showing of
the female breast, in a public place, with less than a fully opaque covering
of any portion of the areola.



   (C)   Except as may be permitted in a properly licensed sexually
oriented business, for the purpose of this section, the term PUBLIC PLACE
shall include: streets, sidewalks or highways; transportation facilities;
schools; places of amusement; parks; playgrounds; restaurants; nightclubs;
cocktail lounges; burlesque houses; bars; cabarets; taverns; taprooms;
private fraternal, social, golf or country clubs; or any public place that
allows the consumption of intoxicating beverages on the premises.



   (D)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to all penal provisions provided by law and the maximum fine
provided by law.



   (E)   Any violation of this section shall be a public nuisance and
shall be subject to abatement by injunction.



(`83 Code, § 10-235)  Penalty, see § 10.99



OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



§ 130.060  WINDOW PEEPING.



   No person shall spy, peer or peep into any window of any residence or
dwelling that he or she does not occupy nor shall loiter around or within
view of any window with the intent of watching or looking through it. 



(`83 Code, § 10-207)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.061  TRESPASSING ON TRAINS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to climb, jump, step, stand upon or
cling to or in any other way attach himself or herself to any locomotive
engine or railroad car, unless he or she works for the railroad corporation
and is acting in the scope of his or her employment or unless he or she is a
lawful passenger or is otherwise lawfully entitled to be on such vehicle.



(`83 Code, § 10-221)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.062  POSTING NOTICES AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall fasten in any way any show-card, poster or other
advertising device upon any public or private property unless legally
authorized to do so.



(`83 Code, § 10-225)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.063  SPITTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any public street or
sidewalk or upon the floors or walks of any public place.



(`83 Code, § 10-228)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.064  CAVES, WELLS, CISTERNS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABANDONED WELL. Any well that has been voluntarily abandoned for
further use, because the same has outlived its usefulness.



      CONDEMNED WELL. One that pollutes or contaminates, and tends in
the judgement of the Department of Health and health officer of the Town of
Collierville to pollute the water stratum and which cannot be corrected, in
the judgement of the Department of Health, to prevent pollution or
contamination.



      POTABLE WATER SUPPLY. Any public, quasi-public or other private
water supply of a quality approved by the Department of Health or by the
proper officials of Shelby County of the State of Tennessee as being fit for
human consumption.



   (B)   Having stated these definitions, it shall be stated that any
owner of private land who may wish to sink a well on his or her property
shall make application to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of Collierville,
Tennessee, in triplicate, setting out generally the point on his or her land
where such well shall be sunk or developed, giving the depth to which the
said well shall be dug and the volume of water to be taken from the well and
the amount of which is to be consumed by human beings. The application shall
state that the applicant agrees to comply with the statutory laws of the
State of Tennessee and of the County of Shelby respecting the operation of
the well. Reference to the statutes are hereby made, and they shall be deemed
incorporated herein by reference. Applicants shall further agree to forward
samples of water drawn from such wells, if to be designed for human
consumption, to the proper authorities of the state for the purpose of having
the same analyzed, to the end that such water may be safe for human
consumption and not a menace to the public health of residents of
Collierville or others who may consume such water.



   (C)   No person shall operate or maintain a private water supply
until permit therefor has been issued by the health officer of Collierville,
Tennessee, which permit shall not be valid for a period longer than one year,
but it may be renewed at the expiration thereof upon payment of fees
hereinafter set. The permit may be revoked by the health officer of
Collierville, Tennessee, upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms
of this section, or in any emergency, when, in the judgement of the health
officer, the continued operation of the private water supply will be a health
menace. The holder of the permit, after its revocation, shall have the right
to appeal to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen for hearing upon such revocation.



   (D)   The fee for obtaining a permit to dig such a well or to
maintain a private water supply shall subject the holder of such permit to an
inspection fee of $20 per year, paid by the owner of such well.



   (E)   Any person violating any of the terms stated herein shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be required to pay
a fine of not more than $50; and each day’s violation of the terms of this
section shall constitute a separate offense.



   (F)   All private wells shall be located, constructed and operated
in accordance with rules of the health officer of Collierville, Tennessee,
and the water drawn from such well shall be of a safe, sanitary quality. No
well shall be located close enough to any existing well operated and
maintained by the Town of Collierville as to materially affect the static
head of water from the underground strata of such well or proposed well which
will result in the diminution of the public water supply.



   (G)   No private well shall be located in a street, alley or other
public place, unless the person digging the well shall first obtain a permit,
as required by this section, and the holder of such permit shall be required,
as a condition precedent to the issuance thereof, to agree that if at any
time subsequent to the digging of such well it shall become necessary for the
Town to use such street, alley or other public place that such person, within
30 days after notice from the Town, or the health officer thereof, shall
within 30 days after receipt of such written notice, abandon, dismantle and
fill such well at his or her own expense.



   (H)   The use of all water pumped from a private well or a
quasi-public water supply for industrial or drinking purposes by humans shall
be limited to reasonable use. The term REASONABLE USE shall be defined as
that use of water which is ordinarily required by industries, firms and
individuals in the usual operation of its business.



(`83 Code, § 10-230)  (Ord. passed 3-3-69)



WEAPONS



§ 130.075  WEAPONS AND FIREARMS GENERALLY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry in any manner
whatever, with the intent to go armed, any razor, dirk, knife, blackjack,
brass knuckles, pistol, revolver or any other dangerous weapon or instrument,
except the army or navy pistol which shall be carried openly in the hand.
However, the foregoing prohibition shall not apply to members of the United
States Armed Forces carrying such weapons as are prescribed by applicable
regulations nor to any law enforcement officer engaged in their official
duties, in the execution of process or while searching for or engaging in
arresting persons suspected of committing crimes. Furthermore, the
prohibition shall not apply to persons who have been summoned by such officer
or police officer to assist in the discharge of his or her duties, nor to any
conductor of any passenger or freight train of any railroad while he or she
is on duty.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to discharge
a weapon or firearm, including, but not limited to, bow and arrow, crossbow,
compound bow, long bow, pistol, revolver, shotgun, muzzle loader or rifle,
within the municipality, except at a legally established shooting range. 



(`83 Code, § 10-212)  (Ord. 98-27, passed 1-26-99)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.076  AIR RIFLES AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the corporate limits to
discharge any air gun, air pistol, air rifle, BB gun, paint gun or sling shot
capable of discharging a metal bullet or pellet or paint filled projectile,
whether propelled by spring, compressed air, expanding gas, explosive or
other force- producing means or method except at a legally established
shooting range.



(`83 Code, § 10-213)  (Ord. 98-27, passed 1-26-99)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.077  THROWING OF MISSILES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously throw any stone,
snowball, bottle or any other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree
or other public property or upon or at any person.



(`83 Code, § 10-214)  Penalty, see § 10.99



OFFENSES AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION



§ 130.090  ESCAPE FROM CUSTODY OR CONFINEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under arrest or otherwise in
custody of or confined by the municipality to escape or attempt to escape or
for any other person to assist or encourage the person to escape from the
custody or confinement.



(`83 Code, § 10-209)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.091  RESISTING OR INTERFERING WITH TOWN PERSONNEL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to resist or in any way interfere
with any Town employee, including police officers and fire officers while the
officer is in the discharge or apparent discharge of his or her duties. 



(`83 Code, § 10-210)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.092  IMPERSONATING A GOVERNMENT OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.



   No person other than an official police officer of the municipality
shall wear the uniform apparel or badge or carry any identification card or
other insignia of office like or similar to, or to a colorable imitation of
that adopted and worn or carried by the official police officers of the
municipality.  Furthermore, no person shall deceitfully impersonate or
represent that he or she is any other government officer or employee.



(`83 Code, § 10-211)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.093  FALSE EMERGENCY ALARM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make, turn in or
give a false alarm of fire or of need of police or ambulance assistance or to
aid or abet in the commission of such an act.



(`83 Code, § 10-217)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   ZONING REGULATIONS



      152.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



Planning Commission



   150.001   Created



   150.002   Terms



   150.003   Vacancies



   150.004   Compensation



   150.005   Chairperson



   150.006   Expenditures and contractual services



   150.007   Staff



   150.008   Powers



   150.009   Rules and records



Transitional Rules



   150.020   Transitional rules



International Building Code



   150.030   Modifications and amendments adopted



   150.031   Building development privilege tax



International Fuel Gas Code



   150.040   Modifications and amendments adopted



   150.041   Appendices adopted



International Plumbing Code



   150.050   Modifications and amendments adopted



   150.051   Appendices adopted



International Mechanical Code



   150.060   Modifications and amendments adopted



International Residential Code



   150.070   Modifications and amendments adopted



   150.071   Appendices adopted



National Electrical Code



   150.080   Modifications and amendments adopted



International Property Maintenance Code



   150.090   Amendments adopted



Permit Requirements



   150.305   Requirements applicable to the issuance of certain permits



   150.999   Penalty



PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 150.001  CREATED.



   There is created a Municipal Planning Commission to consist of nine
members. One member shall be the Mayor of the Town, or the Mayor’s
designee, and one member of the Board, elected by his or her fellow members.
Seven members shall be citizens of the Town appointed by the Mayor.



(`83 Code, § 11-101)



§ 150.002  TERMS.



   All appointed members of the Planning Commission shall serve a one year
term that will expire on December 31 of each calendar year or until their
successors are appointed. Members may be reappointed to serve more than one
year upon appointment by the Mayor. Members shall be removed from membership
for three or more absences from regular scheduled meetings in a consecutive
12 month period. A member may be removed from membership by the Mayor.



(`83 Code, § 11-102)  (Ord. 2001-05, passed 4-9-01)



§ 150.003  VACANCIES.



   Any vacancy in the appointive membership shall be filled for the
unexpired term by the Mayor. The term of office of the member elected from
the Board shall run concurrently with membership on the Board and the term of
office of the Mayor shall be concurrent with his or her term as Mayor.



(`83 Code, § 11-103)



§ 150.004  COMPENSATION.



   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



(`83 Code, § 11-104)



§ 150.005  CHAIRPERSON.



   The Commission shall elect its Chairperson from among its appointive
members. The term of office of the Chairperson shall be for one year, with
eligibility for reelection. 



(`83 Code, § 11-105)



§ 150.006  EXPENDITURES AND CONTRACTUAL SERVICES.



   The expenditures of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within
the amounts appropriated, if any, for that purpose by the Board. The
Commission may contract with Town planners and other consultants for such
services as it may require, provided that such contracts are first approved
by the Board. 



(`83 Code, § 11-106)



§ 150.007  STAFF.



   The Commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for
its work, provided such appointments are first approved by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen. 



(`83 Code, § 11-107)



§ 150.008  POWERS.



   The Planning Commission shall have the powers, duties and
responsibilities set forth in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 13, Chapters 4 and 7.



(`83 Code, § 11-108)



§ 150.009  RULES AND RECORDS.



   The Commission shall adopt rules for the procedure and conduct of its
business and shall record its findings and determinations, which shall be a
public record.



(`83 Code, § 11-108)



TRANSITIONAL RULES



§ 150.020  TRANSITIONAL RULES.



   The purpose of transitional regulations is to resolve the status of
pending applications or recent approvals of permit applications for
construction projects which may not be completed on March 1, 2012.
Construction project which are under a valid permit shall be allowed to be
completed in compliance with the code editions under which the permit was
issued. Buildings, uses or structures with outstanding violations as of March
1, 2012 are still in violation. Any violation of previous versions of this
chapter shall continue to be a violation under Ord. 2011-23, unless the use,
building, or structure complies with the provisions of the adopted code
referenced by Ord. 2011-23. Payment shall be required for any civil penalty
assessed under the previous regulations, even if the original violation is no
longer considered to be a violation under Ord. 2011-23.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12)



INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE



§ 150.030  MODIFICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS ADOPTED.



   The 2012 International Building Code (IBC) as published by the
International Code Council is hereby modified, amended and adopted as follows:



   (A)   IBC modification. When the Building Code refers to the
“applicable governing authority,” it shall be deemed to be a reference to
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Collierville, Tennessee. When
the Building Code refers to the “code official,” it shall mean the person
appointed or designated by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of
Collierville, Tennessee to administer and enforce the provisions of the
Building Code.



   (B)   (1)   IBC Amendment No. 1. Amend Section 101.4 of the 2012
International Building Code, by deleting Section 101.4.5 Fire Prevention.



      (2)   IBC Amendment No. 2. Delete Section 113 of the 2012
International Building Code in its entirety and substitute in its place, the
following:



         113.1  Appeals: Appeals and/or variance request to the
requirements of the International Building, Plumbing, Fuel Gas, Mechanical,
Existing Building, Property Maintenance, Energy Conservation Codes, National
Electrical Code (NFPA 70) as amended and adopted by the Town of Collierville
shall be heard by the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



         113.2  Limitations on authority. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of
construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive
requirements of this code.



         113.3  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove,
demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this
code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of
the provisions of this code.



         113.4  Notice of violation. The building official is
authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible
for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving,
removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of
the provisions of this code, or in violation of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the
violation.



         113.5  Prosecution of violation. If the notice of
violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized
to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation,
or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the
building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the
order or direction made pursuant thereto.



         113.6  Violation penalties. Any person who violates a
provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure
in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the
building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.



         113.7  Board established. There is hereby established a
board to be called the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The
purpose of the Board is: 1) To hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions,
or determinations made by the Building Official and/or Fire Code Official
regarding the application and interpretation of the various provisions of the
building, construction, and fire codes adopted by the town; 2) To review and
make recommendations to the Board of Mayor and Alderman regarding the
adoption and amendments to building, construction and fire codes; and 3) To
provide recommendations to the Building Official regarding the suitability of
alternate materials and methods of construction. The Board shall consist of
seven (7) members and shall be appointed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



         113.8  Chairman: The board shall annually select one of
its members to serve as chairman.



         113.9  Membership: The Construction Board of Adjustment
and Appeals shall consist of seven (7)  members. Such board members shall be
composed of individuals with knowledge and expertise in the technical codes,
such as design professionals, contractors or building industry
representatives.



         113.10  Disqualification of member: A member shall not
hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or
financial interest.



         113.11  Terms: The terms of office of the board members
shall be one-year.



      (3)   IBC Amendment No. 3. Amend Chapter 1 of the 2012
International Building Code by adding section 117 as follows:



         Section 117  Moving Buildings.



         117.1  General: A building or part of any building shall
not be moved through or across any sidewalk, street, alley or highway within
the governmental limits without first obtaining a permit from the building
official.



         117.2  Written application: Any person desiring to move a
building shall first file with the building official a written application
setting forth the following information:



            1.   Type and kind of building to be moved.



            2.   The original cost of such building.



            3.   The extreme dimensions of the length, height
and width of the building.



            4.   Its present location and proposed new
location by lot, block, subdivision and street numbers.



            5.   The approximate time such building will be
upon the streets and contemplated route that will be taken from present to
new location.



            6.   The age of the building sought to be moved.



            7.   A written finding by a competent electrician
that the electrical wiring and all outlets thereof are in sound and useable,
condition, and that the same not constitute a fire hazard. A report to this
effect shall be made in writing by a licensed electrical contractor.



            8.   A similar report by a licensed architect or
general contractor describing the structural integrity of the building frame,
the overall condition of the building, and any other pertinent information
necessary to reflect the utility of the property, shall be filed with said
application.



            9.   Any other facts which will fully advise the
Collierville Building Official or the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of
Collierville, Tennessee, with reference to the building proposed to be
transported to Collierville and used thereafter.



         117.3  Notice and approval process: Upon the submittal for
application for moving permit, the Building Official shall cause notice be
given to the Police Department, the Fire Department, utilities and the
Telephone Company.



         117.4  Approval: Upon approval of the above noted
departments, the application for moving permit shall be forwarded to the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen who may issue a permit to allow the moving of
said building in the Town of Collierville.



         117.5  Notification: Before issuance of said permit, the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen may require the notification of all property
owners within the block in which it is proposed to locate such building, and
it shall be the duty of the applicant to undertake and provide documentation
of such notification. Notification shall include forms, provided by the Town
of Collierville, which require the signature of adjacent property owners,
their address, and their comments for or against the proposal. The comments
received from those noted, if any, shall be advisory to the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen on consideration of the permit application.



      (4)   IBC Amendment No. 4. Amend Section 1101.2 of the 2012
International Building Code by adding the following code references at the
end of the section:



         and the Fair Housing Act where applicable.



      (5)   IBC Amendment No. 5. Amend Section 1406.3 of the 2012
International Building Code by adding section 1406.3.1 as follows:



         1406.3.1  Private Balconies. On private balconies where
separate tenants are provided and the balcony perimeter walls are less than
50% open and constructed of combustible construction, tenant separation
requirements at the balcony floor shall be provided.



      (6)   IBC Amendment No. 6. Amend Section 3109 of the 2012
International Building Code by adding section 3109.6 as follows:



         3109.6  Ladders and steps. All pools whether public or
private shall be provided with a ladder or steps in the shallow end where
water depth exceeds 36 inches. In private pools where water depth exceeds 5
ft. there shall be ladders, stairs, or underwater benches/swim outs in the
deep end. Where manufactured diving equipment shall be used, benches or swim
outs shall be recessed or located in a corner. In public pools, there shall
be steps or ladders in the shallow end and ladders in the deep end. Ladders,
stairs, or underwater benches/swim outs shall be no more than 75 ft. apart.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12; Am. Ord. 2014-07, passed 11-24-14)



§ 150.031  BUILDING DEVELOPMENT PRIVILEGE TAX.



   (A)   (1)   A building development privilege tax of $300 per
single family dwelling units; $100 per multi-family apartment and $100 per
room for hotel and motels; $.15 per square foot for all retail buildings;
$.10 per square foot for all office buildings and $.10 per square foot for
the office areas of all industrial warehousing and storage buildings and $.01
per square foot for the warehousing and storage portions of industrial
buildings be assessed on each new building and shall be paid at the execution
of a development agreement authorizing such construction.



      (2)   If the amount of the privilege tax paid at the time of
execution of a development agreement is found to be incorrect upon approval
by the Town of final plans, the parties shall make an appropriate adjustment
between themselves.



   (B)   Square footage for the purpose of this section shall be
measured from the centerline of all walls and shall include both heated and
unheated areas of such improvements.



   (C)   The building development privilege tax shall be assessed and
collected upon the issuance of any development agreement for structures
within the Town.



   (D)   The proceeds from this building development privilege tax
shall be deposited in the Town general funds



   (E)   If any division or specific provision of this section is found
by a court to be invalid for any reason, the decision of the court shall not
affect the validity of any other section, provision or standard of this
section except the provision in question. The other portions of this section
not affected by such decision of the court shall remain in fill force and
effect.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12)



INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE



§ 150.040  MODIFICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS ADOPTED.



   The following modifications and amendments to the International Fuel
Gas Code (IFGC) are hereby adopted:



   (A)   IFGC modification. Whenever the Gas Code refers to the “code
official,” it shall mean the person appointed or designated by the
municipal governing body to administer and enforce the provisions of the Gas
Code.



   (B)   (1)   IFGC Amendment No. 1. Amend Section 109 of the 2012
International Fuel Gas Code by deleting sections 109.2,109.3,109.4,109.5 and
109.6 and inserting the following in place of the deleted sections:



         109.2  Appeals: Appeals and or request for variance to the
requirements of the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted and amended by the
Town of Collierville, shall be heard by the Construction Board of Adjustments
and Appeals.



      (2)   IFGC Amendment No. 2. Amend Section 402.4 of the 2012
International Fuel Gas Code by adding the following:



         4.   The minimum size of pipe connections to the meter
shall be 1 inch.



         5.   The maximum length of 1/2 inch schedule 40 metallic
pipe shall be six (6') foot in length.



      (3)   IFGC Amendment No. 3. Amend Sections 404.11 of the 2012
International Fuel Gas Code by adding the following:



         404.11.3  Underground Piping: No gas piping shall be
placed underground closer than 8 inches (203mm) from a water pipe or a sewer
line and 12 inches from an electrical line. Underground gas piping to outside
appliances and equipment shall be installed at a minimum depth of 12 inches
(305mm) below finished grade. If a minimum of 12 inches (305mm) of cover
cannot be maintained, the pipe shall be installed in conduit or bridged
(shielded).



         404.11.4  Cathode protection. This metallic gas piping
shall have approved external coating and cathode protected with anodes or
other cathode means of protection.



         404.11.5  Dielectric unions. Dielectric unions shall be
installed at each end of underground piping.



      (4)   IFGC Amendment No. 4. Amend the 2012 International Fuel
Gas Code Section 406.4.1 by deleting the existing language and substituting
the following:



         406.4.1  Method of testing. Low pressure gas piping (2
psig or less) shall withstand a pressure of 30 psig for a period of not less
than 10 minutes without showing any drop in pressure. All high pressure gas
piping must have a minimum of 100 psig test.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12)



§ 150.041  APPENDICES ADOPTED.



   The following Appendices of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code are
here by adopted:



   (A)   Appendix A, Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping,



   (B)   Appendix B, Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances
Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances and Appliances,



   (C)   Appendix C, Exit Terminals of Mechanical and Direct Vent
Venting Systems.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12)



INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE



§ 150.050  MODIFICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS ADOPTED.



   The following modifications and amendments to the International
Plumbing Code (IPC) are hereby adopted:



   (A)   IPC modification. Whenever the Plumbing Code refers to the
“code official,” it shall mean the person appointed or designated by the
municipal governing body to administer and enforce the provisions of the
Plumbing Code.



   (B)   (1)   IPC Amendment No. 1. Amend Section 106.1 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by adding:



         “including residential and non-residential lawn
irrigation sprinkler systems” after the words plumbing system to read as
follows:



         106.1  When required. Any owner, authorized agent or
contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish
or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install,
enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any plumbing system,
including residential and non-residential lawn irrigation sprinkler systems,
the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such
work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain
the required permit for the work.



      (2)   IPC Amendment No. 2. Amend Section 106 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by adding:



         106.3.4  Irrigation Construction Documents required.
Documents submitted with the permit application shall include a site plan
showing location of the system, sprinkler heads, pipes, valves and backflow
preventer.



      (3)   IPC Amendment No. 3. Amend Section 106 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by adding:



         106.3.5  Irrigation located in Right of Way. Components of
the irrigation system located within the public right-of-way or utility
easements are installed at the owner's risk and shall be the owner’s
responsibility to replace and/or repair in the event of the utilization of
the easement or right-of-way.



      (4)   IPC Amendment No. 4. Amend Section 109 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by deleting sections 109.2,109.3,109.4,109.5 and
109.6 and inserting the following in place of the deleted sections:



         109.2  Appeals; Appeals and or request for variance to the
requirements of the International Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the
Town of Collierville, shall be heard by the Construction Board of Adjustments
and Appeals.



      (5)   IPC Amendment No. 5. Amend Section 306.2 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by adding the following section:



         306.2.4  Support. Under slab plumbing installations placed
on un-compacted fill shall be properly supported in accordance with section
308.



      (6)   IPC Amendment No. 6. Amend Section 403.1 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by adding the following exception and table:



         Exception: A single, unisex, toilet room with one water
closet and one lavatory is allowed in the-following occupancies when the
total area does not exceed the values listed in table.



 


Occupancy

 
Maximum Area, net square feet


Assembly
 
500


Business
 
1500


Mercantile
 
1500


Factory and Industrial
 
1500


Storage
 
4500



 



      (7)   IPC Amendment No. 7. Amend Section 603.1 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by deleting the last sentence and substituting
the following in its place:



         The minimum diameter of water service pipe shall be 1 inch.



      (8)   IPC Amendment No. 8. Amend Table 605.3 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code as follows:



         Delete the reference to copper or copper alloy tubing,
types M and MW.



      (9)   IPC Amendment No. 9. Amend table 605.4 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code as follows:



         Delete the reference to copper or copper alloy tubing,
Types M and MW.



      (10)   IPC Amendment No. 10. Amend Section 605 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by adding the following sentence at the end of
the section:



         605.5  Water Distribution fittings shall not be placed
under slab installations unless prior approval is made with the Code Official.



      (11)   IPC Amendment No. 11. Amend Section 608.1 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by adding section 608.1.1 as follows:



         608.1.1  A backflow prevention device shall be required in
all new and existing buildings when the Building Official determines that
there is a hazard of contamination of the potable water supply.



      (12)   IPC Amendment No. 12. Amend Section 608.16.5 of the
2012 International Plumbing Code by adding section 608.16.5.1 as follows:



         608.16.5.1  A Reduced, Pressure, Backflow Preventer and
all components shall be installed to meet the following conditions:



            1.   A valve shall be placed within close
proximity of the water meter.



            2.   A minimum of schedule 40 service pipe shall
be installed from the meter to the backflow preventer.



            3.   The schedule 40 service pipe shall be buried
at a minimum depth of 12 inches.



            4.   There shall be a minimum of 12 inches of
gravel at the bottom of the backflow preventer.



            5.   Each backflow preventer shall be tested and
certified by an individual certified by the State of Tennessee to test such
devices. The test results shall be on site at the time of inspection.



      (13)   IPC Amendment No. 13.Amend Tables 702.1 and 702.2 of
the 2012 International Plumbing Code by deleting the reference to Type M and
DWV copper or copper alloy tubing in table.



         702.1.1  Type M and (DWV) Copper tube and Copper pipe not
permitted for Drain and Waste material.



      (14)   IFC Amendment No. 14. Amend Table 709.1 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by increasing the minimum size of a shower drain
to 2 inches and add footnote “i” as follows:



         i.   For showers with two or more shower valves the
drain and strainer shall be 3 inches in diameter or additional drains shall
be added.



      (15)   IPC Amendment No. 15. Amend Section 903.1 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code by inserting the number 10 in place of the
bracketed word [number].



      (16)   IPC Amendment No. 16. Amend Table 913.4 of the 2012
International Plumbing Code, by adding footnote “a” as follows:



         a.   A minimum 2" diameter main vent will be required on
all installations.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12)



§ 150.051  APPENDICES ADOPTED.



   The following appendices of the 2012 International Plumbing Code are
hereby adopted:



   (A)   Appendix B, Rates of Rainfall for Various Cities.



   (B)   Appendix E, Sizing of Water Piping Systems.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12)



INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE



§ 150.060  MODIFICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS ADOPTED.



   The following modifications and amendments to the International
Mechanical Code (IMC) are hereby adopted:



   (A)   IMC modification. Whenever the Mechanical Code refers to the
“code official,” it shall mean the person appointed or designated by the
municipal governing body to administer and enforce the provisions of the
Mechanical Code.



   (B)   (1)   IMC Amendment No. 1. Amend Section 109 of the 2012
International Mechanical Code by deleting sections 109.1.1,109.2,109.3,
109.4,109.5 and 109.6 and inserting the following in place of the deleted
sections:



         109.2  Appeals. Appeals and or request for variance to the
requirements of the International Mechanical Code as adopted and amended by
the Town of Collierville, shall be heard by the Construction Board of
Adjustments and Appeals.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12)



INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE



§ 150.070  MODIFICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS ADOPTED.



   The following modifications and amendments to the International
Residential Mechanical Code (IRC) are hereby adopted:



   (A)   IRC modification. Whenever the International Residential Code
refers to the “code official,” it shall mean the person appointed or
designated by the municipal governing body to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Residential Code.



   (B)   (1)   Residential Building.



         (a)   IRC (B) Amendment No. 1. Amend Section R105.1 of
the 2012 International Residential Code, by deleting in its entirety and
replacing with the following:



            R105.1  Required. Any owner or authorized agent who
intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the
occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter,
repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or
plumbing system or irrigation system, the installation of which is regulated
by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make
application to the building official and obtain the required permit.



         (b)   IRC (B) Amendment No. 2. Amend Section R105.2 of
the 2012 International Residential Code as follows:



            Delete exceptions 1, 2, 3, 4 and amend number 5 as
follows:



               5.   Sidewalks and driveways on private
property.



         (c)   IRC (B) Amendment No. 3. Amend Section R105.8 of
the 2012 International Residential Code by adding the following:



            R105.8.1  Components of the irrigation system
located within the public right-of-way or utility easements are installed at
the owners risk and shall be the owner's responsibility to replace and/or
repair in the event of the utilization of the easement or right-of-way by any
and all franchised utility contractors and their subcontractors as approved
by the Town Of Collierville.



         (d)   IRC (B) Amendment No. 4. Amend Section R112 of the
2012 International Residential Code by deleting sections R112.1 and inserting
the following in place of the deleted sections:



            R112.1  Appeals and or request for variance to the
requirements of the Residential Building Code shall be heard by the
Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals.



         (e)   IRC (B) Amendment No. 5. Delete Section R301.2.2
number 2 of the 2012 International Residential Code (IRC) in its entirety and
substitute in its place, the following:



            2.   Detached one- and two-family dwellings in D0,
D1 and D2, however, such detached one- and two-family dwellings constructed
using wood framing in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 shall be
allowed, as an alternative compliance method for meeting the structural
requirements of this code’s seismic provisions, to comply with the
requirement in Section R301.2.2.3.8.



         (f)   IRC (B) Amendment No. 6. Amend the 2012 IRC by
adding a new Section R301.2.2.3.8 and new Subsections R301.2.2.3.8.1 through
R301.2.2.3.8.12 so that when amended, the entire new section and its
subsection shall read as follows:



            R301.2.2.3.8  Alternative compliance method for
structural requirements. In addition to meeting all the structural
requirements for Seismic Design Category C and sections R301.2.2.3.1,
R301.2.2.3.6 and R301.2.2.3.7, an alternative compliance method for meeting
structural requirements when wood framing is used shall include compliance
with the following items. In the event any requirement in this section
differs from wind code structural requirements, the more stringent will apply.



               R301.2.2.3.8.1  Anchorage exterior walls (Sole
Plates). Exterior wall sole plates shall be secured to the foundation or
framing below by one of the following methods:



                  1.   Foundation: ½ inch (12.7 mm)
anchor bolts, with minimum .229 inch by 3 inch by 3 inch (5.8 mm by 76 mm by
76 mm) washers, embedded in the foundation a minimum of 7 inches (178 mm).
Such anchor bolts are to be placed 4 feet on center maximum and within 12
inches (305 mm) of the end of each plate section. A minimum of two anchors
per plate section is required.



                  2.   Foundation: Pre-fabricated
mudsill anchors1 (ex. FA3 or MASA) embedded in the foundation and placed at 4
feet (1219 mm) on center maximum and within 12 inches (305 mm) of the end of
each plate section. A minimum of two anchors per plate section is required.



                  3.   Elevated Floors: l0d nails placed
at 8 inches on center and embedded in a continuous rim board. Rim board depth
to match depth of floor framing. Rim board shall be nailed to the end of each
floor framing member with three l0d nails. Where floor framing parallels
exterior wall, double rim boards shall be provided and nailed per Table
R602.3(l). The Rim board shall be fastened to the wall top plate with metal
connector plates at 6 feet (1829 mm) on center; installed plate shall provide
a minimum vertical and horizontal capacity of 440 pounds minimum.



               R301.2.2.3.8.2  Anchorage of all interior
load-bearing walls (Sole Plates). Interior load-bearing walls shall be
secured by one of the following methods:



                  1.   Foundation: ½ inch (12.7mm)
anchor bolts, with minimum .229 inch by 3 inch by 3 inch (5.8 mm by 76 mm by
76 mm) plate washers, embedded a minimum of 7 inches (178 mm) in a continuous
footing (sized per Table R403.1) at 4 feet (1219 mm) on center maximum and
within 12 inches (305mm) of the end of each plate section. A minimum of two
anchors per plate section is required.



                  2.   Foundation: By powder actuated
fasteners that provide 210 pounds per linear foot shear capacity, placed 2
feet (610 mm) on center maximum and within 12 inches (305 mm) of each plate
section or equivalent means of anchorage. A minimum of two anchors are
required per plate section.



                  3.   Elevated Floors: l0d nails placed
at 8 inches (204 mm) on center and embedded in one of the following:



                     a)   Structural wall top plate
flush with bottom of floor sheathing, or



                     b)   Floor joist parallel with
and directly below plate, or



                     c)   Blocking, depth to match,
placed between floor joists and running the full length of the plate.
Blocking to be nailed per Table R602.3(l).



               R301.2.2.3.8.3  Stud spacing - Exterior walls.
All 2x4 exterior walls shall be a maximum of 16 inch (406 mm) center to
center stud spacing up to 3 stories. Gypcrete flooring or similar
cementitious leveling products shall not be used on elevated floors.



               Exception: Thin-set or other base material
required for installation of flooring products in isolated confined spaces
such as bathrooms.



                  R301.2.2.3.8.4.1  Exterior wall
sheathing. Exterior walls shall be continuously sheathed with a minimum of
7/16 inch (11mm) exterior rated OSB or plywood. Sheathing is to be fastened
every 6 inches (152 mm) on the edges and 12 inches (305 mm) at intermediate
supports with minimum 8d common nails.



                  R301.1.2.2.3.8.4.2  Interior
load-bearing wall sheathing. Interior load-bearing walls shall have sheathing
on both sides. Sheathing shall be a minimum of Vi inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board
with fasteners spaced at a maximum of 7 inches (178 mm), on edges and 7
inches (178 mm) at intermediate supports. Minimum fastener size shall be 5d
cooler or wallboard nails or l 1/4" #6 Type S or W screws.



               R301.2.2.3.8.5.  Garage door openings. Brace
wall panels are required for garage openings as per Section R602.10.6 of this
Code.



               Exception - An engineered pre-manufactured wall
panel is allowed to be used at garage openings.



               R301.2.2.3.8.6  Connections across floor joist
space. A Minimum 36" long by 1 1/4" wide by 18 gauge (1219 mm by 31.75 mm by
1.31 mm) galvanized steel coil strap1 (ex. RS200 or CS18) installed at 4 feet
(1219 mm) on center across floor joist space or equivalent is required on all
exterior walls and stacked interior load-bearing walls. Straps shall run
vertical along the edge of studs and shall be centered on floor joist space.
Studs shall be vertically aligned.



               R301.2.2.3.8.7 Roof framing connections. Roof
framing members shall be attached to wall top plates with 18 gauge galvanized
steel clips1 (ex. RT7A or H2.5A) or equivalent spaced not more than 4 feet
(1219 mm) on center. Provide clips in addition to the fastening requirements
in Table R602.3(l). This requirement applies to all contact points with
load-bearing walls. In the event wind fastening requirements differ, the more
stringent shall apply.



               R301.2.2.3.8.8  Braced wall hold-downs.



                  1.   Exterior walls: A single
hold-down shall be installed at each end of each wall over 8 feet (2438 mm)
in length (two hold-downs per wall length). Hold-down capacity (P), in
pounds, shall be equal to 210 lbs/ft times wall height (P = 210 * H).



                  2.   Wall height (H): distance from
wall bottom plate to wall top plate.



                  3.   A cut sheet of the hold-down
type(s) used shall be provided to code enforcement when requested by the
Building Official. Cut sheet shall show tested product load rating and
manufacturer information.



               R301.2.2.3.8.9  Opening straps/clips. This
section applies only to window and door openings located in exterior walls
and interior load-bearing walls. Louver, pipe penetrations, dryer vents, and
all other wall openings are not required to meet this section unless they
exceed 4 sq. ft. in area.



                  1.   Studs above and below headers and
window sill plates: Provide 18 gauge galvanized steel clips1 (ex. RT7A or
H2.5A) or equivalent at 32 inches (813 mm), top and bottom of studs, minimum
two clips per opening width at headers and sills.



                  2.   Headers: headers shall bear on a
minimum 2x jack post and be fastened to the post with minimum 18 gauge
galvanized steel clips1 (ex. RT7A or H2.5A), or continuous sheathing from
king post to header or sill.



                  3.   Window sill plate: Sill plate
shall be end nailed with three l0d nails each end through a minimum 2x
king/jack posts, or continuous sheathing from king post to header or sill, or
equivalent.



                  4.   King/Jack posts: Provide 20 gauge
galvanized steel stud plate connector1 (ex. SPT22 or SP1) or equivalent from
post to wall plate, top and bottom. King and jack posts shall be nailed
together with l0d nails at 8 inches (204 mm) on center staggered full height.



               R301.2.2.3.8.10  Brick veneer.



                  1.   Exterior brick veneer shall not
exceed 25 feet (7620 mm) in height above non-combustible foundation. Brick at
gable peaks shall not exceed 40 feet (12 192 mm) in height above
non-combustible foundation.



                  2.   Exterior brick veneer shall
comply with all other applicable Chapter 7 IRC requirements.



                  3.   Interior brick veneer and masonry
chimneys shall comply with Chapter 7 IRC requirements.



               R301.2.2.3.8.11 Floor openings. When floor
openings in the second or third floors exceed 15 percent of the ground floor
square footage, garage space excluded, they shall be considered as large
floor openings.



                  1.   The gross floor area shall be the
area bounded by exterior walls.



                  2.   Openings for stairs and egress
are excluded from the net floor opening area.



                  3.   Perimeter interior walls bounding
a large floor opening shall be considered load-bearing walls and shall be
subject to all requirements as such. If perimeter walls are not present below
opening (i.e. beam and column system is used),  the supporting structures
shall be engineered.



               1USP and Simpson connectors. Other connectors
with equal or better values are allowed.



         (g)   IRC (B) Amendment No. 7. Amend Section R313.1 of
the 2012 International Residential Code by changing it to read as follows and
adding the following exception:



            R313.1  Town House Automatic fire Sprinkler Systems.
An automatic residential fire sprinkler system complying with NFPA 13 shall
be installed in townhouses.



               Exception: An automatic residential fire
sprinkler system complying with NFPA 13-R may be installed in town houses
less than 4 stories.



         (h)   IRC (B) Amendment No. 8. Amend Section R313.2 of
the 2012 International Residential Code by changing it to read as follows:



            R313.2  One and two family dwelling automatic fire
sprinkler systems; An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be
installed in one and two family dwellings with finished floor area (excluding
garages) of 4500 square feet or greater.



               R313.2.1  One and two family dwelling located
more than 300 feet from the nearest point of public access; An automatic fire
sprinkler system shall be installed in one and two family dwellings which
exceed 2000 square feet (excluding garages) and have drive ways or private
access roads which exceed 300 feet in length.



         (i)   IRC (B) Amendment No. 9. Delete Section R401.3 of
the 2012 International Residential Code entirely and substitute the following:



            R401.3  Surface drainage shall be diverted to a
storm sewer conveyance or other approved point of collection that does not
create a hazard. The finish floor elevation, except for basements, shall be a
minimum of 10 inches above the exterior finish ground. The grade away from
the foundation walls shall fall a minimum of 6 inches within the first 10
feet.



               Exception: Where lot lines, walls, slopes or
other physical barriers prohibit 6 inches of fall within 10 feet, drains, or
swales shall be provided to ensure drainage away from the structure.



         (j)   IRC (B) Amendment No. 10. Ch. 11, Energy Code, is
deleted in its entirety and replaced with the 2009 International Residential
Code Chapter 11, Energy Code.



      (2)   Residential Mechanical.



         (a)   IRC (M) Amendment No. 1. Amend Section MI305.1.3
of the 2012 International Residential Code by adding new section as follows:



            1305.1.3.2  Access to mechanical equipment located
in the attic of one and two family dwelling units shall be provided by
permanent stairs or pull down stairs if accesses provided from the floor
below.



         (b)   IRC (M) Amendment No. 2. Amend Section M1411.3 of
the 2012 International Residential Code by adding the following sentence to
the end of the paragraph:



            Units shall drain to a sanitary sewer drain through
an indirect waste located within two feet of the equipment, or to an approved
french drain which extends two feet below grade and provides eight cubic feet
of drain material for a unit three tons(10.6 kW) nominal capacity or less or
sixteen cubic feet of drain material for a unit larger than three tons.



      (3)   Residential Plumbing.



         (a)   IRC (P) Amendment No. 1. Amend Section P2801.5.1,
Pan Size and Drain, of the 2012 International Residential Code, by replacing
the number 3/4" with 1".



            P2801.5.1.1  The pan shall be drained by an indirect
waste pipe of not less than 1 inch diameter.



         (b)   IRC (P) Amendment No. 2. Amend Section P2902.5.3,
Lawn Irrigation Systems, of the 2012 International Residential Code, by
deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following:



            P2902.5.3  Lawn irrigation systems The Reduced
Pressure, Backflow Preventer and all components shall be installed to meet
the following conditions:



               1.   A valve shall be placed within close
proximity of the water meter if a separate meter is not installed solely for
the irrigation system.



               2.   A minimum of schedule 40 service pipe
shall be installed from the meter to the backflow preventer.



               3.   The schedule 40 service pipe shall be
buried at a minimum depth of 12 inches.



               4.   There shall be a minimum of 12 inches
of gravel at the bottom of the backflow preventer.



               5.   Each backflow preventer shall be tested
and certified by an individual certified by the State of Tennessee to test
such devices. This test shall be on site at the time of inspection.



         (c)   IRC (P) Amendment No. 3. Amend Section P2903.7 of
the 2012 International Residential Code, Size of Water Service Mains, Branch
Mains and Risers, by deleting the minimum diameter size listed (3/4) and
substituting in its place (1) inch.



            P2903.7.1  The size of the water service pipe shall
not be less than 1 inch diameter.



         (d)   IRC (P) Amendment No. 4. Amend Tables P2905.4 and
2905.5 of the 2012 International Residential Code by deleting the references
to Type M with Type L copper or copper alloy tubing.



         (e)   IRC (P) Amendment No. 5. Amend Section 2905.6 of
the 2012 International Residential Code by adding the following Subsection:



            2905.6.1  Water Distribution fittings shall not be
placed under slab installations unless prior approval is made with the Code
Official.



         (f)   IRC (P) Amendment No. 6. Amend Tables P3002.1(l)
and P3002.1(2) in the 2012 International Residential Code by adding the
following footnote to both tables:



            a.   Type M and Type DWV Copper Tube and Copper
Pipe is not allowed for drain and waste material.



         (g)   IRC (P) Amendment No. 7. Amend table 3004.1 in the
2012 International Residential Code by adding footnote “d.” as follows:



            d.   For showers with two or more shower valves,
the drain and strainer shall be increased from 2" to 3" or additional drains
shall be provided.



         (h)   IRC (P) Amendment No. 8. Amend Section P3113.1 of
the 2012 International Residential Code by adding the following section:



            P3113.1.1  A minimum 2" diameter main vent will be
required on all installations.



         (i)   IRC (P) Amendment No. 9. Amend Table 3201.7 of the
2012 International Residential Code by deleting the 1 1/2 inch trap size in
showers and substituting 2" in its place.



            P3201.7.1  The size of trap and trap arm for a
shower shall not be less than 2 inch.



TABLE P3201.7



SIZE OF TRAPS AND TRAP ARMS FOR PLUMBING FIXTURES



 


PLUMBING FIXTURE

 

TRAP SIZE MNIMUM (inches)





Bathtub (with or without shower head and/or whirlpool attachments)
 

1 1/2



Bidet
 

1 1/4



Clothes washer standpipe
 

2



Dishwasher (on separate trap)
 

1 1/2



Floor drain
 

2



Kitchen sink (one or two traps, with or without dishwasher and garbage
grinder)
 

1 1/2



Laundry tub (one or more compartments)
 

1 1/2



Lavatory
 

1 1/4



Shower (based on the total flow rate through showerheads and bodysprays)

Flow rate:

  5.7 gpm and less

  More than 5.7 gpm up to 12.3 gpm

  More than 12.3 gpm up to 25.8 gpm

  More than 25.8 gpm up to 55.6 gpm
 










1 1/2



2



3



4



Water closet
 

Note a





 



For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12; Am. Ord. 2012-11, passed 6-11-12; Am. Ord.
2013-09, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 2015-20, passed 11-9-15)



§ 150.071  APPENDICES ADOPTED.



   (A)   The following Appendices of the 2012 International Residential
Code are hereby adopted:



      (1)   A, Sizing and Capacity of Gas Piping.



      (2)   B, Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances With
Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances And Appliances Listed for Use With Type B
Vents.



      (3)   C, Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent
Systems.



      (4)   G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. Residential
Electrical.



   (B)   Residential Electrical. Delete Chapter 34 though 43 of the
2012 International Residential Code in its entirety and substitute the
following:



      Residential Electrical Wiring shall be installed incompliance
with and according to 2008 NFPA 70, The National Electrical Code.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12)



NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE



§ 150.080  MODIFICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS ADOPTED.



   The following modifications and amendments to the 2008 National
Electrical Code (NEC) are hereby adopted:



   (A)   NEC modification. Whenever the National Electrical Code refers
to the “code official,” it shall mean the person appointed or designated
by the municipal governing body to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Electrical Code.



   (B)   (1)   NEC Amendment No. 1. Amend Article 80, Section
80.19(F) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section 80.19(F)(6)
as follows;



         80.19(F)(6)  In dwelling units, all low voltage systems
must be included for a rough in inspection and must include smoke detector /
alarms where applicable to meet the requirements of the 2012 International
Residential Code.



      (2)   NEC Amendment No. 2. Amend Article 90, Section 90.1 of
the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section 90.1(E) as follows:



         90.1(E) Inspection Results. The issuance or receipt of a
certificate of inspection or approval for electrical installation shall not
relieve the contractor, or specialist, master, licensee or journeyman
electrician of the responsibility for any improper, defective wiring or work.



      (3)   NEC Amendment No. 3. Amend Article 110, Section 110.5 of
the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section 110.5(a) as follows:



         110.5(a)  Inside of a one or two family or multi-family
dwellings, aluminum conductors shall not be permitted.



      (4)   NEC Amendment No. 4. Amend Article 210, Section
210.11(C)(2) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section
210.11(C)(2)(a) as follows:



         210.11(C)(2)(a)  Each electric clothes washing machine
shall be installed on a separate 20AMP circuit with a 20AMP single receptacle
outlet device.



      (5)   NEC Amendment No. 5. Amend Article 210, Section
210.12(B) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding the following
exception:



         Exception: Arc-fault circuit interrupters, combination
type, shall be required for all bedrooms and in all other rooms shall be
optional.



      (6)   NEC Amendment No. 6. Amend Article 210, Section
210.52(B)(3) of the 2008 National Electrical Code as follows:



         210.52(B)(3)  Receptacles installed in a kitchen to serve
countertop surfaces shall be supplied by two or more 20 AMP small-appliance
branch circuits, and each such circuit shall supply not more than three
receptacle outlets. These small-appliance circuits shall be installed in
every kitchen in new buildings, where kitchens are completely remodeled, or
where kitchens are added to existing buildings and shall serve not more than
one kitchen. A vent-a-hood or gas cook top ignition receptacle may be added
as a fourth outlet on a small appliance branch circuit.



      (7)   NEC Amendment No. 7. Amend Article 210, Section
210.52(C)(2) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding the following
exception:



         Exception: The installation of receptacles for island
counter spaces and peninsular counter spaces below the countertop surface
shall be optional.



      (8)   NEC Amendment No. 8. Amend Article 210, Section
210.70(A)(1) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section
210.70(A)(l)(a) as follows:



         210.70(A)(l)(a)  Switches for lighting outlets in all
areas shall be located on the strike side of doors or as close as possible.
In no case shall switches be behind the door swing.



      (9)   NEC Amendment No. 9. Amend Article 220, Section 220.1 of
the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section 220.1(a) as follows:



         220.1(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or contractor,
designing or installing new electrical systems or adding load to an existing
electrical system shall be responsible for determining that the main service
conductors, main service equipment, feeders and all equipment be of the
proper size for the total connected load as required by the National
Electrical Code.



      (10)   NEC Amendment No. 10. Amend Article 220, Section
220.14(I) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section 220.I4(I)(1)
as follows:



         220.14(I)(1)  Not more than six convenience outlets or
floor box receptacles, single or duplex, shall be connected to one 120-volt
circuit in commercial installations unless designed by a Tennessee Licensed
Electrical Engineer.



      (11)   NEC Amendment No. 11. Amend Article 220, Section
220.14(J) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section 220.14(J)(4)
as follows:



         220.14(J)(4)  Not more than 16 convenience outlets, single
or duplex shall be connected to any circuit and no single circuit shall
supply an area of more than 750 sq. ft. Receptacle circuits shall be wired
with a 12-gauge wire and protected by a 20 AMP over-current device. Not more
than 12 outlets connected to any circuit where lighting and receptacle
outlets are combined on one 20 AMP arc-fault protected over current device.



      (12)   NEC Amendment No. 12. Amend Article 220, Section
220.14(J) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section 220.14(J)(5)
as follows:



         220.14(J)(5)  At least one lighting circuit shall be
installed for each 750 square feet of floor area or fraction of this area, in
residential occupancies. Not more than 12 lighting outlets shall be connected
to any lighting circuit. Lighting circuits may be wired with I4-gauge wire
and protected by 15-amp over current devices.



      (13)   NEC Amendment No. 13. Amend Article 220, Section
220,18(A) of the 2008 National Electrical Code as follows:



         For circuits supplying loads consisting of motor operated
utilization equipment fastened in place rated 1,000 watts or more and any
electrical motor of 1/2 HP or larger shall be supplied by individual circuits
of adequate capacity for the device to be connected. Receptacles installed in
such circuits shall be single opening grounding type rated at 125% of the
name plate current of the equipment to be connected, but in no case shall
they be rated less than 20 amperes.



      (14)   NEC Amendment No. 14. Amend Article 230, Section
230.70(A)(1) of the 2008 National Electrical Code as follows:



         230.70(A)(1)  Location. The service disconnecting means
shall be installed at a readily accessible location either outside of a
building or structure or inside nearest the point of entrance of the service
conductors. Service conductors shall not extend more than 15 feet of total
conductor length inside a building or structure, measured from the point of
entrance prior to over-current protection. No service disconnecting means or
over current protective device shall be installed in a bathroom or in a
clothes closet.



      (15)   NEC Amendment No. 15. Amend Article 250, Section
250.52(A)(5) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section
250.52(A)(5)(c) as follows:



         250.52(A)(5)(c)  Residential ground rods shall be buried
with the use of an approved direct burial ground clamp. The grounding
electrode conductor from residential meters to the ground clamp shall be
protected with rigid metallic, PVC or flexible conduit.



      (16)   NEC Amendment No. 16. Amend Article 250, Section
250.104(A) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section
250.104(A)(4) as follows:



         250.104(A)(4)  In residential structures, the hot water
pipe at each water heater shall also be bonded to the system. Where
instant-hot units are installed, the equipment-grounding conductor for these
units shall be permitted to serve as the bonding means in the area where the
unit is installed.



      (17)   NEC Amendment No. 17. Amend Article 250, Section
250.104(B) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section
250.104(B)(1) as follows:



         250.104(B)(1)  A minimum size #6 solid copper conductor
shall be installed from the electrical service panel to the exterior gas pipe
and terminated on the building side of the gas meter for all one and two
family dwellings.



      (18)   NEC Amendment No. 18. Amend Article 300, Section 300.4
of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section 300.4(H) as follows:



         300.4(H)  In residential installations all wiring,
including low voltage, installed in or around areas of water pipes, metal
ductwork, vents, flues, fireplaces, hydro massage tubs, etc. shall be secured
or strapped away from conductive material or separated with approved material
such as electrical nonmetallic tubing or flexible non-metallic tubing.



      (19)   NEC Amendment No. 19. Amend Article 300, Table 300.5 of
the 2008 National Electrical Code to add Note 6 as follows:



         Note 6, Direct buried conductors, raceways, conduits, etc.,
including low voltage, shall be separated from dissimilar systems i.e.
swimming pool plumbing, gas pipe, waterline and or utilities by a minimum of
12 inches when installed in the same ditch, trench, slab, etc.



      (20)   NEC Amendment No. 20. Amend Article 310, Section
310.15(B)(6) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section
310.15(B)(6)(a) as follows:



         310.15(B)(6)(a)  The service conductor ampere rating shall
not be less than the MAIN over current protective device rating or the bus
bar rating of a MAIN LUG ONLY panel.



      (21)   NEC Amendment No. 21. Amend Article 334, section
334.12(A) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section
334.12(A)(11) as follows:



         334.12(A)(11)  Commercial installation.



      (22)   NEC Amendment No. 22. Amend Article 340.12, section
340.12 of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding section 340.12(12) as
follows:



         340.12(12)  Commercial installation.



      (23)   NEC Amendment No. 23. Amend Article 406, section
406.8(B)(1) of the 2008 National Electrical Code by adding the following
exception:



         Exception: The installation of listed weather-resistant
type receptacles shall be optional if approved by the code official.



      (24)   NEC Amendment No.24. Amend Article 422, Section
422.16(B)(2)(2) of the 2008 National Electrical Code to add the following
exception to condition 2:



         Exception: An approved minimum 14 gauge factory molded
flexible cord with factory installed cord cap and identified as suitable for
the purpose may be used. The length of the cord shall be a maximum of 6 feet
measured from the face of the attachment plug to the electrical termination
point of the built-in dishwasher, ice machine or trash compactor.



      (25)   NEC Amendment No. 25. Appeals. Appeals and or request
for variance to the requirements of the National Electrical Code as adopted
and amended by the Town of Collierville, shall be heard by the Construction
Board of Adjustments and Appeals.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12)



INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



§ 150.090  AMENDMENTS ADOPTED.



   (A)   Amendment No. 1. Amend Section 108.6 of the 2012 International
Property Maintenance Code by adding the following sections:



      108.6.1  General. If, after such notice and hearing before the
Building Official, the Building Official determines that the structure under
consideration is an unsafe structure and is unfit for human occupation or
use, the Building Official shall state in writing the code official's
findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause
to be served upon the owner an order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the structure into compliance with
the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code, according to the following
standards:



         a.   If an existing building is damaged by fire or
otherwise and the cost of repairing such building is in excess of 50% of its
value before such damage occurred, it shall be made to conform to the
requirements for new buildings under the Building Code;



         b.   If the cost of such alterations or repairs or the
amount of damage by fire or otherwise is more than 25% but not more than 50%
of the value of the building before such damage occurred, the portions to be
altered or repaired shall be made to conform to the requirements for new
buildings under the Building Code to such extent as the code official may
determine;



         c.   Repairs and alterations, not covered by the
preceding paragraphs of this section and necessary to restore a building to
its condition prior to damage or deterioration shall be permitted without the
necessity of conforming to the requirements for new buildings under the
Building Code except for matters which, in the judgment of the code official,
present issues of health and safety, and as to those issues compliance with
the requirements for new buildings under the Building Code shall be required.



      108.6.2  Vacation. If the structure is in such condition as to
make it dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of its occupants,
it shall be ordered vacated pending proceedings pursuant to the Property
Maintenance Code.



      108.6.3  Failure to comply. If the owner fails to comply with an
order to remove or demolish the structure, the Building Official may cause
such structure to be removed or demolished. The amount of the cost of
repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition by the Building Official shall be assessed against the owner of
the property, and shall, upon the filing of the notice with the Shelby County
Register’s Office, be a lien on the property in favor of the Town, second
only to liens of the state, county and the Town for taxes, any lien of the
Town for special assessments, and any valid lien, right or interest in such
property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of
such notice pursuant hereto. These costs shall be collected by the Town or
the Shelby County Trustee at the same time and in the same manner as property
taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay such costs, the costs may be
collected and shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as delinquent
property taxes. In addition, the Town may collect the costs assessed against
the owner through an action for debt filed in any court of competent
jurisdiction. The Town may bring one action for debt against more than one or
all of the owners of properties against whom said costs have been assessed,
and the fact that multiple owners have been joined in one action shall not be
considered by the court as a misjoinder of parties. If the structure is
removed or demolished by the Building Official, the Building Official shall
sell the materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such
sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining
shall be deposited in the chancery court by the Building Official, shall be
secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be
disbursed by such court to the person found to be entitled thereto by final
order or decree of such court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the Town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or
otherwise.



   (B)   Amendment No. 2. Amend Section 108 of the 2012 International
Property Maintenance Code, by adding the following section:



      108.8  Notification.  Complaints issued to owner or to person
or persons responsible. Whenever a petition is filed with the Building
Official by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the Town
charging that any structure is unfit for occupation or use, the Building
Official shall, if the Building Official’s preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner of and parties in interest of such structure, a complaint stating the
charges in that respect.



         108.8.1  Form. Such complaint prescribed in Section 108.8
shall:



            1.   Must be in writing;



            2.   Include a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification;



            3.   Include a statement of the violation or
violations and why the notice is being issued;



            4.   Inform the owner and parties in interest of a
structure that a hearing shall be held before the Building Official, or the
code official's designated agent, at a place therein fixed, not less than ten
(10) days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the notice, that:



               a.   The owner and parties in interest shall
be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person
and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and



               b.   The rules of evidence prevailing in
courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in a hearing before the
Building Official; and



            5.   Inform the property owner and parties in
interest of the right to appeal.



         108.8.2  Method of service. Complaints or orders shall be
deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:



            1.   Delivered personally to the owner and parties
in interest;



            2.   Sent by registered mail to the aforementioned
parties; or



            3.   If the whereabouts of such persons are
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Building Official in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the code official shall make an
affidavit to that effect, then:



               a.   By publishing the notice once each week
for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper circulated and distrinuted in
the Town of Collierville;



               b.   By posting the notice in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the notice; and



               c.   By filing such notice in the Office of
the Shelby County Register.



         108.8.3  Placarding. If the owner fails to comply with an
order to repair, alter or improve or vacate and close the structure, the code
official may cause such structure to be repaired, altered or improved, or to
be vacated and closed; and the code official may cause to be posted on the
main entrance to the structure so closed, a placard with the following words:
“This building is unfit for human occupation or use. The use or occupation
of this building for human occupation or use is prohibited and unlawful.”



   (C)   Amendment No. 3. Amend Section 111.1 of the 2012 International
Property Maintenance Code, to read as follows:



      111.1  Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by
an order of the code official shall have the right to appeal to the
Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals, provided that a written
application for appeal is filed within ten (10) days after the day such order
was issued. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that (he true
intent of the Property Maintenance Code has been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of the Property Maintenance Code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of Property Maintenance Code are adequately satisfied by other
means.



   (D)   Amendment No. 4. Amend Section 202 of the 2012 International
Property Maintenance Code, edition, to amend and restate an existing
definition contained therein and to add certain definitions, as follows:



      OWNER The holder of title in fee simple and every mortgagee of
record.



      PARTIES IN INTEREST All individuals, associations, corporations,
and others who have interests of record in a structure and any who are in
possession thereof.



      PUBLIC AUTHORITY Any housing authority or any officer of the Town
of Collierville, Tennessee who is in charge of any department or branch of
the Town of Collierville, Tennessee or the state relating to health, fire,
building regulations, or other activities concerning structures in the Town
of Collierville, Tennessee.



   (E)   Amendment No. 5. The following appendices of the 2012
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby adopted:



      Appendix A. Boarding Standard.



(Ord. 2011-23, passed 1-23-12)



PERMIT REQUIREMENTS



§ 150.305  REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO THE ISSUANCE OF CERTAIN PERMITS.



   (A)   In all cases where a permit is required to be issued by the
Town for electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and/or gas work, such permits
shall only be issued to either:



      (1)   A business entity possessing a license in the
appropriate field of work issued by the State of Tennessee; or



      (2)   An individual possessing a master tradesman license
issued by Shelby County, Tennessee in the appropriate field.



   (B)   All individuals performing work in the Town shall be subject
to the licensing requirements and restrictions of the authority which issued
the license under which they are permitted to do such work.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 4-14-03)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be fined not more than $50
or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation.



(`83 Code, § 4-1404)  (Ord. 98-22, passed 2-8-99; Am. Ord. 2003-05, passed
4-14-03)



CHAPTER 151:  ZONING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   151.001   Title, purpose and legislative enactment



   151.002   Construction of language in code



   151.003   Definitions



   151.004   Legal status provisions



   151.005   Exceptions and modifications



   151.006   General provisions for all Districts



   151.007   Chapter amended and restated



Establishment of Districts



   151.020   Districts established



   151.021   Uses permitted in each zoning district



   151.022   Provisions for Official Zoning Map



   151.023   Rules for interpretation of District boundaries



   151.024   Specific provisions for conditional uses



   151.025   Accessory uses permitted in each zoning district



   151.026   Temporary uses, activities, and structures



   151.027   Bulk regulations and yard requirements for all zoning
districts



Residential Districts



   151.035   Statement of purpose



   151.036   R-1 Low Density Residential Districts



   151.037   R-1A Low Density Residential Districts



   151.038   R-2 Medium Density Residential Districts



   151.039   R-2A Medium Density Residential Districts



   151.040   R-3 High Density Residential Districts



   151.041   R-3A High Density Residential Districts



   151.042   R-4 Multi Family Residential Districts



   151.043   T-Mobile Home Park Residential Districts



   151.044   R-TH Townhouse Residential Districts



   151.045   R-L Large Lot/Estate Development Residential Districts



   151.046   R-L1 Large Lot/One Acre Residential Districts



   151.047   R-25 Low Density Residential Districts



   151.048   FAR Forest - Agricultural - Residential Districts



   151.049   TN Traditional Neighborhood District



   151.050   MU Mixed Use District



Commercial Districts



   151.060   Statement of purpose



   151.061   NC Neighborhood Commercial District



   151.062   MPO Medical-Professional Office District



   151.063   SCC Shopping Center Commercial District



   151.064   CB Central Business District



   151.065   GC General Commercial District



Industrial Districts



   151.075   Statement of purpose



   151.076   RI - Restrictive Industrial District



   151.077   GI - General Industrial District



Flood Plain Zoning



   151.090   Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and
objectives



   151.091   Definitions



   151.092   Application



   151.093   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   151.094   Requirements for development permit



   151.095   Compliance



   151.096   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.097   Interpretation



   151.098   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   151.099   Administration



   151.100   Provisions for flood hazard reduction



   151.101   Variance procedures



   151.102   Violations



Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations



   151.115   Accessory off-street parking regulations



   151.116   Accessory off-street loading regulations



   151.117   Table of off-street parking requirements and off-street
loading berth codes



Nonconforming Uses



   151.130   Statement of purpose



   151.131   Applicability



   151.132   Determination of nonconformity status



   151.133   Continuation of nonconforming nonresidential use or
structure



   151.134   Variances and conditional uses



   151.135   Governmental acquisition



   151.136   Discontinuance



   151.137   Continuation of nonconforming residential use or structure



Planned Developments



   151.150   General



   151.151   Objectives and size requirements



   151.152   Relation between planned developments and zoning districts



   151.153   Coordination with subdivision regulations



   151.154   General standards and criteria



   151.155   Additional provisions



   151.156   Specific standards and criteria for residential planned
developments



   151.157   Specific standards and criteria for commercial or
industrial planned developments



   151.158   Mixed use planned development



   151.159   Specific standards and criteria for seniors housing
planned developments



   151.160   Procedures for planned development approval



Sign Regulations



   151.170   Purpose and intent



   151.171   Definitions



   151.172   Applicability



   151.173   General visual quality



   151.174   Signs prohibited in all zoning districts



   151.175   Exemptions



   151.176   Sign permit application and issuance



   151.177   Transitional provisions for shopping centers



   151.178   Requirements applicable to all zoning districts



   151.179   Sign standards by sign type and zoning district



   151.180   Sign-specific conditions



   151.181   Nonconforming signs



   151.182   Administration and penalties



   151.183   Severability



Exterior Lighting



   151.190   Exterior lighting



Historic District



   151.195   H-1 Historic Zoning District



   151.196   Historic District Commission



   151.197   Designation of Local Historic Districts



   151.198   Design guidelines



   151.199   Certificate of Economic Hardship



   151.200   Administration



   151.201   Maintenance and repair of improvements



   151.202   Remedying of dangerous conditions



   151.203   Injunctive powers and penalties



   151.204   Authority of Development Director



   151.205   Severability



Single Family Design Standards



   151.210   Single family design standards



Design Review Commission



   151.240   Creation and purpose



   151.241   Members; appointment, terms and qualifications



   151.242   Meetings



   151.243   Development subject to Commission review



   151.244   Development exempt from design review



   151.245   Design guidelines



   151.246   Procedure; application and review



   151.247   Standards



   151.248   Appeals



   151.249   Continuing maintenance



   151.250   Project development contracts



Tree Protection and Grading



   151.265   Purpose and intent



   151.266   Administration



   151.267   Protection of existing tree cover



   151.268   Tree planting specifications



   151.269   Grading plan permit



   151.270   Submittal of application for permit



   151.271   Approval



   151.272   Right of appeal



   151.273   Violations



Well Head Overlay Protection District



   151.285   Statutory authority, finding of fact, purposes and
objectives



   151.286   Definitions



   151.287   Authority and applicability



   151.288   Extent and designations



   151.289   Use regulations



   151.290   Variance regulations



   151.291   Performance standards



   151.292   Site plan submission and administration requirements



Administration and Enforcement



   151.305   Administrative Officer



   151.306   Building Official, building permits and certificates of
occupancy



   151.307   Planning Commission



   151.308   Board of Zoning Appeals



   151.309   Variances



   151.310   Conditional use permits



   151.311   Site plan review



   151.312   Amendments



 



   151.998   Remedies and enforcement



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.001  TITLE, PURPOSE AND LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENT.



   (A)   Long title.  An ordinance, in pursuance of the authority
granted by the Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-201 through 13-7-306, to provide for
the establishment of districts within the corporate limits of Collierville,
Tennessee; to regulate within such districts the location, height, bulk,
number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage
of lot occupancy, the size of open spaces, the density of population and the
uses of land, buildings and other structures for trade, industry, residence,
recreation, public activities and similar purposes to include a special
district for areas subject to flooding; to provide regulations governing
nonconforming uses and structures; to provide for a Board of Zoning Appeals
and for its powers and duties; to provide for permits; to establish and
provide for the collection of fees; to provide for the administration of this
chapter and for the official whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions
thereof, to provide penalties for the violation of this chapter; and to
provide for conflicts with other ordinances or regulations.



   (B)   Short title.  This chapter may be cited as the “Zoning
Ordinance of Collierville, Tennessee.”  The map portion may be cited
separately as the Zoning Map of Collierville, Tennessee.



   (C)   Repeal.  The existing zoning regulations of the Town of
Collierville, as amended, are repealed.  The adoption of this chapter,
however, shall not affect nor prevent any pending or future prosecution of an
action to abate any existing violation of the existing regulations, as
amended, if the violation is also a violation of this chapter.



   (D)   Legislative enactment.



      WHEREAS, Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-201 through 13-7-306 empowers
the Town to enact a zoning ordinance and to provide for its administration,
enforcement and amendment; and,



      WHEREAS, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen deems it necessary, for
the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the Town to enact such an Ordinance; and,



      WHEREAS, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, pursuant to the
provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-201 through 13-7-306 has appointed a
Planning Commission to recommend the boundaries of the various original
districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein; and,



      WHEREAS, the Planning Commission has divided the Town into
districts and has prepared regulations pertaining to such districts in
accordance with a comprehensive plan designed to lessen congestion in the
streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote the
health and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to
facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks and other public requirements; and,



      WHEREAS, the Planning Commission has given reasonable
consideration among other things, to the character of the districts and their
peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view of conserving the value
of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate uses for the land
throughout the municipality; and,



      WHEREAS, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen has given due public
notice of hearings related to zoning districts, regulations and restrictions,
and has held public hearings; and,



      WHEREAS, all the requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-201
through 13-7-211 with regard to the preparation of the report of the Planning
Commission and subsequent action of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen have been
met.



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE TOWN OF COLLIERVILLE,
TENNESSEE:



   (E)   Intent and purpose.  This chapter is enacted pursuant to
applicable provisions of the statutes of the State of Tennessee and the
Charter of the Town of Collierville for the following purposes:



      (1)   To promote and protect the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the people;



      (2)   To divide the Town into zones and districts restricting
and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration
and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business,
commercial, manufacturing and other specified uses;



      (3)   To protect the character and maintain the stability of
residential, business, commercial and manufacturing areas within the Town and
to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas;



      (4)   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience
of access to property;



      (5)   To regulate the intensity of open spaces surrounding
buildings that is necessary to provide adequate light and air and protect the
public health;



      (6)   To establish building lines and the location of
buildings designed for residential, business, commercial, manufacturing or
other uses within such lines;



      (7)   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or
structures shall conform;



      (8)   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures which are
incompatible with the character or development of the permitted uses within
specified zoning districts;



      (9)   To prevent such additions to, and alterations or
remodeling of, existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the
restrictions and limitations imposed hereunder;



      (10)   To limit congestion in the public streets and to
protect the public health, safety, convenience and the general welfare by
providing for the off-street parking of motor vehicles and for the loading
and unloading of commercial vehicles;



      (11)   To provide protection against fire, explosion, noxious
fumes and other hazards in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort
and general welfare;



      (12)   To prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration
of structures so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by
regulating the use and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land
surrounding them;



      (13)   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings
throughout the Town;



      (14)   To provide for the gradual elimination of those uses of
land, buildings and structures and of those buildings and structures which do
not conform to the standards of the districts in which they are respectively
located and which are adversely affecting the development and taxable value
of property in each district;



      (15)   To provide for the condemnation of such nonconforming
buildings and structures and of land as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall
determine is necessary or appropriate for the rehabilitation of the area
blighted by such buildings or structures;



      (16)   To define and limit the powers and duties of the
administrative officers and bodies as provided herein;



      (17)   To prevent construction in areas designated as flood
hazard areas unless suitably protected;



      (18)   These general purposes include the specific purposes
stated in the various subchapters throughout this chapter.



(`00 Code, § 11-201)



§ 151.002  CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE IN CODE.



   In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions
contained in this chapter shall be observed and applied, except when the
context clearly indicates otherwise:



   (A)   The particular shall control the general;



   (B)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary;



   (C)   The word “may” is permissive;



   (D)   The word “lot” shall include the words “piece” or
“parcel;”



   (E)   The word “building” or “structure” includes all other
structures, or parts thereof, of every kind regardless of similarity to
buildings; and the phrase “used for” shall include the phrases
“arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained
for” and “occupied for;”



   (F)   In the case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration or table, the
text shall control;



   (G)   The word “permitted” or words “permitted as of right”
means permitted without meeting the requirements for a conditional use by
special permit pursuant to § 151.310 and all other applicable provisions;



   (H)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and
words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary;



   (I)   All public officials, bodies and agencies to which reference
is made are those of the Town of Collierville, Tennessee, unless the context
indicates otherwise.



(`00 Code, § 11-202)



§ 151.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Where
words have not been defined, the standard dictionary definition shall
prevail.  For definitions related to signage see § 151.171.  In any case,
the Building Official shall have the right to interpret the definition of any
word.



   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign that no longer correctly directs or exhorts any
person, advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, project or activity
conducted or product available on the premises where such sign is displayed.



   ACCESSORY. An activity, use, building or structure that is customarily
associated with and is appropriately incidental and subordinate to a
principal activity, use, building and/or structure and located in the same
zone lot.



   ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL (ABOVE A NON-RESIDENTIAL USE). A separate and
complete dwelling unit that is located within the same structure as a
permitted non-residential use.  Accessory residential units shall be
developed in accordance with the standards set forth in the code of
ordinances.



   ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL (IN CONJUNCTION WITH A PRINCIPAL RESIDENTIAL
USE). A second home or dwelling, together with a primary (usually larger)
home on the same lot or property (also known as granny flats, carriage
houses, secondary dwellings). Such dwellings have a kitchen complete with
cooking facilities, at least one bathroom, and sleeping and living
arrangements.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure detached from a principal building
located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal building or use.  See Figure 1.















Figure 1. Accessory Structure




   ACCESSORY USE. A use of land or of a building or a portion thereof
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building and located on the same lot with the principal use.



   ACTIVITY. The performance of a function or operation that constitutes
the use of land.



   ADULT CARE CENTER.  A facility providing care for the elderly and/or
functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a portion of a
24-hour day. (A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms: Wheaton,
IL)



   ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign containing an implicit or explicit commercial
message directing attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises
where the sign is maintained, including but not limited to billboard signs.



   AFFORDABLE. A sales price or rent within the means of a low or
moderate-income household as defined by state or federal legislation.



   AGRICULTURAL SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in supplying
soil preparation services, crop services, landscaping, horticultural services
and farm labor and management services. 



   ALLEY. A public way intended to provide only secondary vehicular access
to abutting properties.



   ALTERATION. Within the H-1 Historical District, any change in
materials, size, height, shape, chapter, design, occupancy, or use of a
building, structure, or site.



   ANIMATED SIGN. Any sign which moves or which appears to move by any
means, including fluttering or rotating. ANIMATED SIGNS shall include but not
be limited to pennants, flags, ribbons, streamers, propellers, balloons or
banners. For purposes of this chapter, this term does not refer to flashing
or changing signs, all of which are separately defined.



   APPURTENANCE.  The visible, functional, or ornamental objects
accessory to, and part of a building, such as chimneys, decks, stoops, steps,
porches, bay windows, roof overhangs, awnings, and similar features.



   ARCHITECTURAL LIGHTING.  Exterior lighting that is designed to
highlight structures, plantings, or significant architectural features in a
direct or indirect fashion.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with 1% or greater annual chance of flooding
to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD. The land within a
community that is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion
loss. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map
(FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion
hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM Zone E may be further
refined.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM.  After detailed ratemaking
has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM Zone A usually
is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99.



   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY.  A building, establishment, complex, or
distinct part thereof, housing six or more persons, on a 24 hour basis, who,
because of age, mental disability, or other reasons, live in a supervised
residential environment which provides personal care and supportive
services.  The establishment provides, on-site to its residents, room,
board, and services with the activities of daily living (bathing, grooming,
dressing, toileting, eating, ambulation, medication reminders, etc.)
appropriate to the residents' respective needs as determined and licensed by
the Tennessee Department of Health, Board of Licensing Health Care
Facilities.  The establishment shall include individual dwelling units and
shall contain common living and dining areas.  For the purposes of this
chapter, a dwelling unit for an Assisted Living/Home for Seniors facility
shall consist of one or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters, with sleeping and bathroom facilities
provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family. 



   AWNING. A secondary covering attached to the exterior wall of a
building.  It is typically composed of canvas, cotton or polyester yarn, or
vinyl laminated to polyester fabric that is stretched tightly over a light
structure of aluminum, iron, or steel.  Location of an awning on a building
may be above a window, a door, or above the area along a sidewalk.



   AWNING SIGN.  A sign that is attached to or part of an awning.



   BANNERS. Any streamer, flag-like pennant or like other object, whether
constructed of fabric or of other materials which, with or without insignia,
attracts the attention of citizenry to a location or business.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASEMENT. A story whose floor is more than 12 inches, but not more than
one-half of its story height below, the average level of the adjoining ground
(as distinguished from a cellar which is a story more than one-half below
such level).



   BEACON.  Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source;
also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.



   BED AND BREAKFAST HOMESTAYS. An owner-occupied detached dwelling in
which the owner rents rooms to overnight guests and may offer meals only to
those guests.



   BILLBOARD SIGN. A type of advertising or business sign having more than
100 square feet of sign face that is either erected on the ground or attached
to or supported by a building or structure.



   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling unit or part thereof in that, for
compensation, lodging and meals are provided.



   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.



   BREWERY.  An industrial uses that brews ales, beers, and/or similar
beverages on site. Breweries are classified as a use that manufactures more
than 15,000 barrels of beverage (all  beverages  combined)  annually.  In
addition, uses that manufacture 15,000 barrels of beverage or less, but which
do not meet one or more of the additional requirements needed to be
considered microbreweries, are breweries.  (A Glossary of Zoning,
Development, and Planning Terms: Bloomington, IN)



   BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot bounded by the required rear and
side yards and the building setback line.  See Figure 2.







 



Figure 2. Buildable Area



   BUILDING. A structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or
other covering and designed or used for the shelter or enclosure of any
person, animal or property of any kind, including tents, awnings or vehicles
situated on private property and used for purposes of a building. Where
roofed structures are separated from each other by party walls having no
unprotected openings, each portion so separated shall be considered a
separate building.



   BUILDING FACE OR WALL. All window and wall areas of a building in one
plane or elevation.  See Figure 3.







 



Figure 3. Building Face



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from finished grade to the
average distance between the eaves and ridge level for gable, hip, and
gambrel roofs and the deck level on a mansard roof.  See Figure 4.







 



Figure 4. Building Height



 



   BUILDING/LOT TYPE. A system of clarifying a structure or lot in a
traditional area that considers both how the building is to be placed on a
lot and the intended use of the building. BUILDING/LOT TYPES include, but may
not be limited to, detached residential (street loaded), detached residential
(alley loaded), attached residential, mixed use, and nonresidential.



   BUILDING MATERIALS BUSINESS. A business engaged in the wholesale or
retail sale of various materials used in construction, including but not
limited to lumber, plumbing and electrical supplies, paint and glass.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL. That person designated, from time to time, by the
Town as such official with said title.  Whenever the term BUILDING OFFICIAL
is used in this chapter, same shall mean the BUILDING OFFICIAL then in office
or his or her designee.



   BULK. Describes the size of buildings or other structures and their
relationship to each other and to open areas and lot lines and therefore
includes:



      (1)   The size (including height and floor area) of buildings
or other structures;



      (2)   The area of the zone lot upon which a building is
located and the number of dwelling units within residential buildings in
relation to the area of the zone lot;



      (3)   The location of exterior walls of buildings or other
structures in relation to lot lines, to other walls of the same building, to
legally required windows or to other structures; and



      (4)   All open areas relating to buildings or other structures
and their relationship thereto.



   BUSINESS SIGN. A sign that directs the attention to a business,
profession, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
upon the same lot where the sign is located.



   CAMPUS. The grounds and buildings of a public or private college,
university, school or institution.



   CANDELA.  A  measure of luminous or light intensity in a certain
direction.  Useful in determining how much light is shining out of a fixture
and in what direction. 



   CANOPY.  A solid structure typically constructed with metal, wood,
brick  supported by columns which is either self-supporting as used for gas
stations or allows the canopy to extend further from a building.  In
commercial buildings, an awning is often used as a sign.



   CELLAR. See BASEMENT.



   CEMETERY. Property used for the interring of the dead.



   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (MANUAL). A sign on which copy is changed
manually, for example, reader boards with changeable letters or changeable
pictorial panels.  All changeable copy shall be included within the allotted
face of sign square footage and enclosed under a locked and vandal proof case.



   CHANGING SIGN (AUTOMATIC). A sign such as an electronically or
electrically controlled public service time, temperature and date sign,
message center or reader board, where different copy changes are shown on the
same lamp bank.



   CHURCH. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses,
that by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting
organized religious services and associated accessory uses.



   CIVIC SIGN. A sign that identifies a nonprofit institution or
organization on whose premises it is located and which contains:



      (1)   The name of the institution or organization;



      (2)   The name or names of the persons connected with it; and



      (3)   Greetings, announcements of events or activities
occurring at the institution or similar messages.



   CLINIC. An establishment where patients are admitted for examination
and treatment on an outpatient basis by one or more physicians, dentists,
other medical personnel, psychologists or social workers and where patients
are not usually lodged overnight (also see HOSPITAL).



   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE.  Any sign wording, logo, or other representation
that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a
business, product, service, or other commercial activity.



   COMMUNICATIONS, INSTALLATIONS OR EXCHANGES.  A facility used to assist
in the operations of the communications industry that does not serve as a
truck or equipment storage yard.



   COMMUNITY CENTER. A building used for recreational, social, educational
and cultural activities, open to the public or a designated part of the
public, usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency.



   COMPLETELY ENCLOSED. Refers to a building or other structures having a
roof and separated on all sides from the adjacent open area or from other
buildings or other structures, by party walls or exterior walls, pierced only
by windows or entrance and exit doors normally provided for persons, goods or
vehicles.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The declaration of purposes, policies and programs
for the  development of the Town of Collierville.



   CONDITIONAL USE. A use that would not be appropriate generally or
without restriction throughout the zoning division or district but which
would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort,
convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. Such uses may be
permitted in such zoning division or district as conditional uses, if
specific provisions for such use is made in this chapter.  Conditional uses
typically meet the purpose and intent of the zoning district but require the
approval of the appropriate review body to ensure that any adverse impacts on
adjacent uses, structures, or public services and facilities are mitigated,
and any special requirements unique to that use are addressed.



   CONSTRUCTION, COMMENCEMENT OF.  The point in time commemorating the
breaking of ground for the construction of a development or structure.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign erected on the premises on which
construction is taking place, during the period of construction and
indicating the names of the architects, contractors, owners, financial
supporters, sponsors and similar persons or firms involved with the
construction and development of the project.



   CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC).  A building,
establishment, campus, complex, or distinct part thereof, housing six or more
persons, on a 24 hour basis, that provides a variety of living arrangements
and services to meet the needs of people who have different levels of
physical ability and health as a result of age, mental disability, or other
reasons.  A CCRC shall integrate at least two of the following senior
housing components: Independent Living Senior Housing Complex, Assisted
Living/Home for Seniors, and/or Nursing Home, into a development.  The CCRC
is intended to accommodate a variety of lifestyle needs and preferences to
care for the changing needs of residents as they age.



   CONVENIENCE STORE. A retail establishment offering items of everyday
consumption such as those offered by food stores and eating places, in which
convenience and habit play a more important role in the buying decision than
price alone. Gasoline pumps may be allowed as accessories to the primary
retail uses, except in neighborhood commercial zones.



   CONVENTIONAL AREA.  Portions of the town that are appropriate for, or
characterized by, development that is typically segregated by use, two
stories or less in height, primarily or exclusively automobile-oriented, has
parking between the building and the street, and served primarily by
curvilinear streets as described in the Collierville Design Guidelines.



   COPY. The wording or graphics on a sign surface.



   COUNTRY CLUB. Land area and buildings containing golf courses,
recreational facilities, a clubhouse and customary accessory uses, open only
to members and their guests.



   CUL-DE-SAC. The turnaround at the end of a dead-end street.



   CUT-OFF FIXTURE/SEMI-CUT OFF FIXTURE.  Partially shielded light
sources are shielded so that the bottom edge of the shield is below the
centerline of the light source (lamp), using “barn doors”, “glare
shields”, fixed boxes, fixed hoods, and grid louvers to minimizing light
above horizontal. 



   DAY CARE. An establishment providing for the care, supervision and
protection of children.



   DAY CARE CENTER.  A place other than an occupied dwelling that
provides for the care of children under 17 years of age, for less than
24-hour periods without transfer of custody.



   DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL. Unless noted otherwise, RESIDENTIAL DENSITY shall
be measured by the number of dwelling units per net acre of land. Net acre of
land shall not include land required for public street rights-of-way and
other publicly dedicated improvements such as parks, greenbelts, open space,
and storm water detention and retention facilities.



   DEPARTMENT STORE.  A retail establishment that offers a variety of
unrelated merchandise and services.



   DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.   That person designated, from time to time, by
the Town as such official with said title.  Whenever the term DEVELOPMENT
DIRECTOR is used in this chapter, same shall mean the DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
then in office or his or her designee.



   DESIGN STANDARDS MANUAL. A set of guidelines defining parameters to be
followed in site and/or building design and development.



   DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A temporary sign, not to exceed one year, relating to
the promotion of a sale or rental of a new development or subdivision being
constructed on the site upon which the sign is located or located off-site
and containing information and directions to a new development or subdivision.



   DRY CLEANING PICK-UP STATION.  An establishment or business maintained
for the pick-up and delivery of dry cleaning and/or laundry without the
maintenance or operation of any laundry or dry- cleaning equipment or
machinery on the premises. (A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning
Terms: Wheeling, IL)



   DUPLEX. See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED. A one family dwelling attached to one or more one
family dwellings by common vertical walls.



   DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling that is not attached to any other
dwelling by any other means.



   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME. See MANUFACTURED HOME.



   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME. See MOBILE HOME.



   DWELLING, MODULAR HOME. See MODULAR HOME.



   DWELLING, MULTI FAMILY.  A building containing three or more dwelling
units, including units located one over the other.



   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. See TOWNHOUSE.



   DWELLING, TWO FAMILY. A detached residential building containing two
dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families.



   DWELLING UNIT. A room or rooms connected together, constituting a
separate independent housekeeping establishment for one family only, for
owner occupancy or for rental, lease or other occupancy for a period of 30 or
more continuous days, physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling
units and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.



   ELECTION SIGN.  A temporary sign erected to publish the name of a
candidate or enlist votes in any official public election.



   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building:



      (1)   Built to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by
means of pilings, columns (posts and piers); and



      (2)   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base
flood.  In the case of Zones Al-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D,
ELEVATED BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters.



   EMERGENCY FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM or EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The program as
implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with § l336 of the Act.  It
is intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of insurance on all
insurable structures before the effective date of the initial FIRM.



   EROSION. The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any type structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of this chapter.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pad) is completed before
the effective date of this chapter.



   EXTERIOR DIRECTORY SIGN. A sign containing the building identification
and address and the name and location of each tenant and allowed in any
project where one or more tenants does not have an exterior entrance or does
not qualify for an exterior sign.



   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a single housekeeping unit and
using common cooking facilities, provided that unless all members are related
by blood, marriage or adoption, no such family shall contain over five
persons.



   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME.  A home (an occupied residence) operated by a
person for the purpose of receiving therein a minimum of five and a maximum
of seven children under 17 years of age, who are not related to such person
and whose parent(s) or guardian(s) are not residents in the same house, for
less than 24 hours per day for care, without transfer of legal. 



   FARMERS MARKET.



      (1)   A designated area on public or private property where,
on designated days and times, growers and producers, often paying booth
rental fees, sell certain locally-grown agricultural products directly to the
public from open or semi-open facilities.



      (2)   Such markets often sell farm products including, fruits,
vegetables, mushrooms, herbs, grains, legumes, nuts, shell eggs, honey or
other bee products, flowers, nursery stock, livestock food products
(including meat, milk, yogurt, cheese and other dairy products), and seafood
(farm raised or harvested from the wild).



      (3)   Markets also commonly sell products processed in a
properly permitted and inspected kitchen, including, baked goods, jams and
jellies, canned vegetables, dried fruit, syrups, salsas, salad dressings,
flours, coffee, smoked or canned meats or fish, sausages, or other forms of
prepared food products.



      (4)   Non-food products, such as cookbooks related to the food
being sold, and wool (prepared for sale but not crafted into other items) are
also common to such markets. Other types of open air markets, such as flea
markets, garage sales, or consignment sales, are not consistent with the
definition of a FARMERS MARKET.



   FENCE. An unroofed enclosing barrier of any nature or construction
(including vegetation).



   FINAL SITE PLAN. See SITE PLAN, FINAL.



   FINISHED ELEVATION. The elevation of the land surface of a site after
completion of all site preparation work.



   FIXED BALLOON.  Any lighter than air or gas-filled inflatable object
attached by a tether to a fixed place used as a means of directing attention
to any business or profession, or to a commodity or service sold, offered, or
manufactured, or to any entertainment. 



   FLASHING SIGN. Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing
light source or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light
by means of animation, changes in the degree of light intensity, an
externally mounted intermittent light source or reflective metal strips.



   FLOOD. A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in water
overtopping its banks and inundating areas adjacent to the flood channel.



   FLOOD CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible
extent, with a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or
periodically flowing water. Channel flow thus is that water which is flowing
within the limits of the defined channel.



   FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION. A determination by the Town Engineer of
the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that
has a 1% or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.



   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazard and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations or
an examination, evaluation and determination of muddy (for example, mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.



   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the flood plain outside the floodway.
(See Figure 5)



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of
the flood related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated
as Zone A, M and/or E.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles as well as
the Flood Boundary Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.



   FLOOD LIGHT.  A form of lighting designed to direct its output in a
diffuse, more or less specific direction, with reflecting or refracting
elements located external to the lamp.



   FLOOD OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit,
culvert, building, wire fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure or
matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, water course or
regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction
of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris
carried by such water or that is placed where the flow of water might carry
the same downstream to the damage of life or property.



   FLOOD PROFILE. A graph or a longitudinal profile showing the
relationship of the water-surface elevation of a flood event to location
along a stream or river.



   FLOOD PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings in a flood hazard
area.



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The elevation of the regulatory flood on
all streams and waterways.



   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with
sound engineering standards.



   FLOOD RELATED EROSION. The collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.



   FLOOD RELATED EROSION AREA or FLOOD RELATED EROSION PRONE AREA. A land
area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the
composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wide-driven
currents is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.



   FLOOD RELATED EROSION AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related
erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans,
flood-related erosion control works and floodplain management regulations.



   FLOOD, REGULATORY. The computed 100-year flood.



   FLOODPLAIN. The land adjacent to a body of water which has been or may
be hereafter covered by flood water, including but not limited to the
regulatory flood, as determined by the Federal Emergency Management
Association (FEMA).  See Figure 5.







 



Figure 5. Flood Plain



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a stream and those portions of the flood plain
adjoining the channel that are required to carry and discharge the floodwater
or flood flows of any river or stream, including but not limited to flood
flows associated with the regulatory flood, as determined by the Federal
Emergency Management Association (FEMA).



   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of all horizontal areas of floors of a
building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or from the center
of party walls or two feet inside the roof line of structures without walls,
but excluding the following:



      (1)   Areas used for off-street parking spaces or loading
berths and driveways and maneuvering aisles relating thereto required in this
chapter;



      (2)   In the case of nonresidential facilities: arcades,
porticoes and similar open areas which are located at or near street level,
which are accessible to the general public and which are not designed or used
as sales, display, storage, service or production areas.



   FLOOR AREA, NET. The gross floor area exclusive of vents, shafts,
courts, elevators, stairways and similar facilities.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The total gross floor area on a lot divided by the
lot area of that lot. (For example, a building containing 3,000 square feet
of floor area on a zone lot of 12,000 square feet has a floor area ratio of
0.25).  See Figure 6.







 



Figure 6. Floor Area Ratio



   FOOTCANDLE (FC).  A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light
(illumination) falling onto a given point.  One foot equals one lumen per
square foot.



   FREEBOARD.  A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for the purpose of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood height greater
than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions,
such as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.



   FREIGHT FORWARDING OFFICE.  Establishments primarily engaged in the
transshipment of goods from shippers to receivers for a charge, covering the
entire transportation route and, in turn, making use of the services of other
transportation establishments as instrumentalities in effecting delivery.
(The New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions)



   FREIGHT HANDLING FACILITY.  Terminals with the capability of handling
a large variety of goods involving various forms of transportation and
providing multimodal shipping capabilities, such as rail to truck and truck
to air.  FREIGHT HANDLING FACILITIES differ from warehouses in that they do
not usually store the freight for an extended period of time, although they
may have warehouse structures associated with them.  (The New Illustrated
Book of Development Definitions)         



   FRONT FACADE ZONE. In traditional areas, the area in which the front
facade of a structure should be placed, as regulated for the applicable
building/lot.



   FULL CUT-OFF FIXTURE.  An outdoor light fixture shielded or
constructed in such a manner so that light emitted from the fixture, directly
or indirectly, is projected below a horizontal plane through the lowest point
of the fixture where light is emitted. 



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use that cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   FUNERAL HOME. A building used for the preparation of the deceased for
burial and the display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith before
burial or cremation.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building or a portion of a building not more than
1,000 square feet in area, in which only private or pleasure type motor
vehicles used by the tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are
stored or kept (ICC).



   GLARE.  The effect produced by a light source within the visual field
that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted,
to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance and ability. 



   GREENHOUSE. A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass
or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.



   GROUND LEVEL. Immediate surrounding grade.



   GROUND SIGN. A sign mounted at ground level, the bottom face of which
shall be 24 inches from the surrounding grade.  See Figure 7.







 



Figure 7. Ground Sign



   HARDWARE STORE.  A facility of 30,000 or fewer square feet gross floor
area, primarily engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware lines,
including but not limited to tools, builders’ hardware, plumbing and
electrical supplies, paint and glass, house wares and household appliance,
garden supplies and cutlery. (A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning
Terms: Prince William County, VA)



   HEALTH CLINIC.  A facility or institution, whether public or private,
principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance and
treatment of mental or physical conditions. (The New Illustrated Book of
Development Definitions)



   HEALTH SPA/CLUB.  An establishment that provides facilities for
aerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts,
swimming facilities, saunas, showers, massage rooms, and lockers.  Health
clubs may also include a pro shop selling a variety of sports equipment and
clothing.  (The New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions)



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER. A facility of more than 30,000 square feet
gross floor area, engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware lines
including, but not limited to tools, lumber and other building materials,
builders’ hardware, plumbing and electrical supplies, paint and glass,
housewares and household appliance, garden supplies and cutlery. (A Glossary
of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms: Prince William County, VA)



   HOME OCCUPATION.  A business, profession, occupation, or trade that is
conducted within a residential dwelling unit, or in some cases in a detached
accessory structure, and is incidental and subordinate to the principal
residential use of the lot and that does not adversely or perceptively affect
the character of the lot or surrounding area. HOME OCCUPATIONS are sometimes
referred to as home-based-businesses.



   HOSPITAL. An institution providing primary health services and medical
or surgical care to persons, primarily in-patients, suffering from illness,
disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions
and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities,
such as laboratories, out-patient facilities, training facilities, medical
offices and staff residences.



   HOTEL. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, entertainment and recreational facilities.



   ICE CREAM PARLOR.  An establishment where ice cream and related
desserts are served and consumed.



   IESNA.  The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a
non-profit professional organization of lighting specialist that has
established recommended design standards for various lighting applications. 



   ILLUMINANCE.  The amount of light falling on a surface; measured in
lux or footcandles.



   ILLUMINATION.  The calling of attention to a sign or device by means
of brightening or shining with light or a luminous substance.



   INCIDENTAL ALTERATIONS.



      (1)   Changes or replacements in the nonstructural parts of a
building or other structure, without being limited to the following examples:



         (a)   Alteration of interior partitions to improve
livability in a nonconforming residential building, provided that no
additional dwelling units are created;



         (b)   A minor addition to the exterior of a residential
building, such as an open porch;



         (c)   Alterations of interior non-load-bearing
partitions in all other types of buildings or other structures;



         (d)   Replacement of, or minor changes in, capacity of
utility pipes, ducts or conduits; or



      (2)   Changes or replacements in the nonstructural parts of a
building or other structure, without being limited to the following examples:



         (a)   Making windows or doors in exterior walls;



         (b)   Replacement of building facades having
non-load-bearing capacity;



         (c)   Strengthening the floor load-bearing capacity, in
not more than 10% of the total floor area, to permit the accommodation of
specialized machinery or equipment.



   INDEPENDENT LIVING SENIOR HOUSING COMPLEX.  The use of a site for a
residential/service complex to house senior persons who are capable of caring
for themselves and maintaining independent households. A complex shall
include separate dwelling units, containing independent cooking, bathroom,
and sleeping facilities, and must have a minimum of 90% of the dwelling units
occupied by at least one person 55 years of age, or older, and comply with
all standards of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C., Sections 3601 et seq. and
the rules issued thereunder, as amended from time to time, and the Tennessee
Fair Housing Act, Tenn. Code Ann. §4-21-602, as amended from time to time.
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or
recurrently needed services of a personal nature, such as barber or beauty
services, a pharmacy, and so forth, may be included in the complex.



   INFRASTRUCTURE. Facilities and services, including public utilities,
streets, roads, communications, firehouses, parks and schools, needed to
sustain industry, residential, commercial and all other land use activities.



   INSTRUCTIONAL SIGN. A sign solely conveying instructions intended
strictly for the direction, safety and convenience of the public with respect
to the premises on which it is maintained, such as a sign designating the
entrance to or exit from a parking area, a sign identifying restrooms, a
trespassing sign, a danger sign and similar signs.



   INTERNAL REFRACTIVE LENS.  A glass or plastic lens installed between
the lamp and the sections of the outer fixture globe or enclosure. 
Refractive refers to the redirection (bending) of the light as it goes
through the lens, softening and spreading the light being distributed from
the light source thereby reducing direct glare.



   ISOFOOTCANDLE.  The isofootcandle diagrams show what the light level
will be at any given point.  The dimensions for the diagram are based on the
mounting height of the light.  Each isofootcandle line shows where the
footcandle level is the same.



   LAND USE PLAN. A description of how land will be occupied or utilized
in the future.



   LAND WITH INCIDENTAL IMPROVEMENTS. A tract of land that contains
improvements, including buildings or other structures having a total assessed
valuation of $5,000 or less.



   LANDSCAPING. The planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs, lawns and
other ground cover or materials, provided that terraces, fountains, retaining
walls, street furniture, sculptures or other art objects and similar
accessory features may be included as landscaping if integrally designed.



   LIGHT SOURCE.  The element of the lighting fixture that is the point
of origin of the lumens emitted by the fixture.



   LIVE/WORK UNIT. A combination working space and dwelling unit that
includes a living area plus a room or suite of rooms dedicated (but not
necessarily restricted) to commercial activity and connected (internally or
externally) to the living area. Either portion of the unit (living or
commercial) may be owned or rented by different parties.



   LODGE.



      (1)   The place where members of a local chapter of an
association or a fraternal, cultural or  religious organization hold their
meetings.



      (2)   The local chapter itself. 



   LOGO.  The graphic or pictorial presentation of a message, including,
but not limited to, the use of shapes, designs, decorations, emblems,
trademarks, symbols or illustrations, or the superimposition of letters or
numbers or any other use of graphics or images other than the sequential use
of letters and numbers.



   LOT. A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum
zoning requirements for use, coverage and area and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are herein required. Such LOT shall have frontage on an
improved public street or on an approved private street and may consist of:



      (1)   A single lot of record;



      (2)   A portion of a lot of record; provided that in no case
of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which
does not meet the requirements of this chapter.



   LOT AREA. The entire area of a lot.



   LOT COVERAGE. That portion of a lot that is covered by a building or
any part of a building.



   LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on
corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage and yards shall be provided as indicated under yards.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.   In the case of an interior lot, the line separating
such lot from a street.  In the case of a corner, double frontage, or
reversed frontage lot, each line separating such lot from a street shall be
considered a front lot line.  See Figure 8.







 



Figure 8. Lot Line, Front



   LOT LINE, REAR.



      (1)   The lot line that is the most distant from, and is, or
is most nearly, parallel to, the front property line;



      (2)   The rear lot line of a corner lot, for the purposes of
this code, shall be defined at the time the building permit is issued;



      (3)   The rear lot line of an irregular or triangular lot, for
the purposes of this code, shall be a line entirely within the lot at least
ten feet long and parallel and most distant from the front property line. 
See Figures 8 and 14.







 



Figure 14. Lot Line, Rear



   LOT LINE, SIDE.   Any lot line other than a front lot line or a rear
lot line.  See Figure 8.



   LOT LINE EQUIVALENT. A straight line established for the purpose of
determining the location and depth or width of a required yard and which
either:



      (1)   Joins points specified in these regulations; or



      (2)   Is an extension of a street line or a lot line.



   LOT MEASUREMENTS.



      (1)   Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance
between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the
side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the
rear.



      (2)   Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance
between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines of each side of
the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided,
however, the width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where
they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than 80% of the
required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of the
cul-de-sac where the 80% requirements shall not apply.  See Figure 9.







 



Figure 9. Lot Measurement



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the County Register or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been so recorded  prior to the adoption
of this chapter.



   LOT TYPES. Lots present in the Town of Collierville include the
following.



      (1)   CORNER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of two or
more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be
considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of
the side lot lines to the foremost points of the lot meet at an interior
angle of less than 135 degrees.



      (2)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with only
one frontage on a street.



      (3)   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT or THROUGH LOT. A lot other than a
corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two
streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.



      (4)   FLAG LOT. A lot so shaped and designed that the
buildable area is set back from the street on which it fronts and includes
only a narrow access strip connecting it to the street.



      (5)   REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT. A through lot that is not
accessible from one of the parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which it
fronts. See Figure 10.







 



Figure 10. Lot Types



   LUMBER YARD.  An area used for the storage, distribution, and sale of
finished or rough-cut lumber and lumber products, but not including the
manufacture or fabrication of lumber, lumber products, or firewood. (A
Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms: Siskiyou County, CA)



   LUMEN.  A unit of luminous flux.  One foot-candle is one lumen per
square foot and is roughly equivalent to the light emitted by a 60 watt light
bulb.  Lumen output values shall be the maintained footcandle/lumen output
ratings of a lamp.



   MAINTAINED FOOTCANDLES.  Illuminance of lighting fixtures adjusted for
a maintenance factor accounting for dirt build-up and lamp output
depreciation.  The maintenance factor used in the design process to account
for this depreciation cannot be lower than 0.72 for high pressure sodium and
0.64 for metal halide.  Maintained illuminance occurs just prior to lamp
replacement and luminare cleaning.  They are not initial values.



   MAJOR MAIL PROCESSING CENTER.  A facility used to sort and
redistribute mail.  The facility does not provide walk-up customer service
or delivery to individual patrons.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.  For
floodplain management purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term
manufactured home does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles.



   MICROBREWERY.  An eating place that includes the brewing of beer as an
accessory use.  The brewing operation processes water, malt, hops, and yeast
into the beer or ale by mashing, cooking, and fermenting.  The area used for
brewing, including bottling and kegging, shall not exceed 25% of the total
floor area of the commercial space.  (A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and
Planning Terms: Vail, CO)



   MISCELLANEOUS YARD SIGNS.  Signs solely containing non-commercial
messages which are not otherwise defined herein.



   MIXED USE BUILDING.  A structure containing both a residential and a
nonresidential use.



   MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land or structure developed for both
residential and nonresidential uses.  Such uses may be vertically integrated
within a multi-story building or horizontally integrated within a single
story building on a lot or development site.



   MOBILE HOME. A detached, single-family dwelling unit with a permanent
steel chassis possessing all of the following characteristics:



      (1)   Designed for long-term occupancy and containing sleeping
accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities,
with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside
systems;



      (2)   Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own
wheels;



      (3)   Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a
complete dwelling and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, location of foundation supports,
connections to utilities and the like.



   MOBILE HOME PARK. An area where two or more mobile homes or trailers
can be and are intended to be parked, designed or intended to be used as
temporary or permanent living facilities for two or more families.



   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a mobile home park, designed
to accommodate one mobile home and which has water, sewer and electricity
available at the space.



   MOBILE HOME STAND. That part of an individual mobile home space that
has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home.



   MODULAR HOME. A single family housing unit that is constructed
basically as a conventionally built wood frame house except it is built at a
factory and is transported to the site on which it will be permanently
located. The MODULAR HOME may not have a permanent steel chassis.



   MOVING EQUIPMENT (RENTAL). Any motor vehicle available for rent that is
designed or operated for the transportation of property utilizing a maximum
of six vehicle wheels; or associated equipment, including but not limited to
storage trailers and automobile trailers.  Items characterized as MOVING
EQUIPMENT in this chapter shall be stored only in the side or rear yard of
properties.  Such equipment shall not be displayed in the front yard.  All
equipment shall be properly screened from public view.



   MOVING EQUIPMENT RENTAL STORE. A commercial establishment that offers
for rental for any form of consideration one or more pieces of equipment (for
example, vehicles or associated equipment) characterized as moving equipment
in this chapter.



   NON CUT-OFF.  A fixture light distribution where there is no light
intensity limitation in the zone above the maximum distribution of the light
intensity.



   NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE.



      (1)   Any lawful building or other structure which does not
comply with any one or more of the applicable bulk regulations; or



      (2)   Any lawful use other than a nonconforming use which does
not comply with any part or any one or more of the applicable regulations
pertaining to:



         (a)   Location along district boundary; or



         (b)   Accessory off-street parking and loading, either
on the effective date of this chapter or as a result of any subsequent
amendment.



   NONCONFORMING USE. A lawful use of a building or other structure or of
a tract of land which does not conform to any one or more of the applicable
use regulations of the district in which it is located, either on the
effective date of this chapter or as a result of any subsequent amendment.



   NONRESIDENTIAL USE.  A use of land by a civic, commercial, office,
industrial, or institutional enterprise.



   NURSING HOME.  A privately operated establishment providing long-term
personal or nursing care for seniors, or for other individuals incapacitated
in some manner for medical reasons, as determined and licensed by the
Tennessee Department of Health, Board of Licensing Health Care Facilities. A
dwelling unit within a Nursing Home for the purposes hereof shall be a room
of sufficient size to meet the requirements of the Tennessee Department of
Health, Board of Licensing Health Care Facilities and approved for occupancy
by one or more persons. 



   OBSERVATION REHABILITATION CENTER.  A facility or institution, whether
public or private, principally engaged in providing services for treatment of
mental or physical conditions which may or may not include overnight or
long-term care accommodations.



   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign that identifies or communicates a message
related to an activity conducted, a service rendered or a commodity sold,
which is not the primary activity, service or commodity provided on the
premises where the sign is located; any sign allowed as an off-premises sign
must have written approval of the property owner upon which property the sign
is to be located prior to consideration of approval and placement of the sign.



   OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use.



   OPEN SPACE, COMMON. Land within or related to a development, not
individually owned or dedicated for public use, that is designed and intended
for the common use or enjoyment of the residents and their guests of the
development and may include such complimentary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate.



   OPEN SPACE, GREEN. Any open space area not occupied by any structures
or impervious surfaces.



   OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE. Common open space, the use of which is normally
limited to the occupants of a single dwelling, building or property.



   OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC. Open space owned by a public agency and maintained
by it for the use and enjoyment of the general public.



   OPEN SPACE RATIO. The area of open space divided by the total site area
in which the open space is located.



   OPENING SIGN. A temporary sign erected only for that limited period
during which an enterprise not theretofore in operation begins its operation
initially or at a new location.



   OUTDOOR DISPLAY.   The display and sale of products and services
primarily outside of a building or structure, including vehicles, garden
supplies, gas, tires and motor oil, food and beverages, boats and aircraft,
farm equipment, motor homes, burial monuments, building and landscape
materials, and lumber yards.  (Moskowitz and Lindbloom, The New Illustrated
Book of Development Definitions, 1997.)



   OUTDOOR PERFORMANCE AREA.  An area permanently dedicated to the public
presentation of music, dance, theater, media arts storytelling, oratory, or
other performing arts, whether publically or privately owned, including but
not limited to amphitheaters and similar open or semi-enclosed structures.



   OUTDOOR SPORTS FIELD.  An area permanently dedicated to public or
private use for sports but not limited to baseball, softball, soccer,
football, golf ranges, and tennis courts.



   OUTDOOR STORAGE.   The keeping, in an unenclosed area, not accessible
to the public, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the
same place for more than 24 hours.



   PARK. A tract of land designated and used by the public for active and
passive recreation.



   PARKING BAY.  A parking area consisting of one row of parking spaces
or stalls and the aisle from which motor vehicles enter and leave the spaces.



   PARKING, DEFERRED.  A portion of the required off-street parking
associated with a use that is not installed at the time of construction, but
delayed or deferred until a parking demand study can be completed to
determine if the additional required parking is needed.



   PARKING LOT DRIVE AISLE.  A vehicular accessway located within an
off-street parking or vehicular use area that serves individual parking
stalls and driveways.



   PARKING, OFF-SITE. An off-street parking area intended to serve one or
more nonresidential use provided on a different parcel or lot than the use(s)
it is intended to serve.



   PARKING, SHARED.  Off-street parking shared by two or more uses that
area in proximity to one another and the parking area, and that have
different operational characteristics such that utilization of the parking
facilities by one use will not generally overlap with the utilization of the
parking area by the other use(s).



   PARKING SPACE(S).   A space, whether off-street or on-street, public
or private, designated for the parking of a motor vehicle.  (Moskowitz and
Lindbloom, The New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions, 1997.) 
Specific regulations regarding the design and layout of parking spaces are
provided in §§ 151.115 to 151.117.



   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET.  A space that is designated for the parking
or temporary storage of one motor vehicle located outside of a dedicated
street right-of-way, vehicular traffic way, or parking aisle.



   PARKING SPACE, ON-STREET.  A location or area within the right-of-way
of a public or private street that is reserved for parking vehicles.  Such
areas may or may not be formally designated with signage, striping or parking
meters.



   PARKING, TANDEM.  A parking space within a group of two or more
parking spaces arranged one behind another.



   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic and includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative.



   PHOTOGRAPHY RETAIL STORE.  A facility primarily engaged in the retail
sale, lease, and service of photography equipment and supplies and limited
onsite film processing and development. (A Glossary of Zoning, Development,
and Planning Terms: Prince William County, VA)



   PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY (INCLUDING PLACES OF WORSHIP). An institution
or facility that congregations of people regularly attend to participate in
or hold meetings, workshops, lectures, civic activities, religious services,
and other similar activities, including buildings in which such functions and
activities are held.



   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. An area specified by ordinance to be planned,
developed, operated and maintained as a single entity and containing one or
more structures with appurtenant common areas. 



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. An area of minimum contiguous size, as
specified by this chapter, to be planned, developed, operated and maintained
as a single entity and containing one or more residential clusters or planned
unit residential developments and one or more public, quasi-public,
commercial or industrial areas in such ranges or ratios of non-residential
uses to residential uses as specified in this chapter. 



   PLANNING JURISDICTION. The area within the Town limits as well as the
area beyond the Town limits within which the Town is authorized to plan for
and regulate development.



   PLAT.



      (1)   A map representing a tract of land showing the
boundaries and location of individual properties and streets.



      (2)   A map of a subdivision or site plan.



   POLE SIGN. A sign mounted upon the ground but which by reason of
height, width or other characteristics does not qualify as a ground sign.



   PORTABLE SIGNS. Any sign constructed on a trailer with wheels which may
be detached and which is not permanently affixed to a building or lot.



   PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN. See SITE PLAN, PRELIMINARY.



   PRINCIPAL ACTIVITY. An activity that fulfills a primary function of an
establishment, institution, household or other entity.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building that contains the principal activity or
use located on a lot.



   PRIVATE STREET. A street that has not been accepted by the municipality
or other governmental entity.



   PROFESSION (PROFESSIONAL OFFICE). The term profession, as used in this
chapter, is limited in its application to physicians and surgeons, lawyers,
members of the clergy, architects and engineers or other persons holding
advanced degrees from institutions of higher learning in the field in which
they practice. The term is not intended to include insurance agents,
insurance adjusters, realtors, photo studios, beauty parlors, barber shops,
dance schools, business schools or any persons engaged in sales or trade.



   PROJECT SIGN. A sign solely consisting of numbers and/or letters
erected to display the identity of five or more occupants in a single
building, business or office complex.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any improvement, facility or service, together with
its associated site or right-of-way necessary to provide transportation,
drainage, utilities or similar essential services and facilities and that are
usually owned and operated by a government agency.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. Building, structures and facilities, including
generating and switching stations, poles, lines, pipes, pumping stations,
repeaters, antennas, transmitters and receivers, valves and all buildings and
structures relating to the furnishing of utility services, such as electric,
gas, telephone, water, sewer and public transit to the public.



   QUEUING SPACE. That space, designated for a vehicle, located directly
alongside a drive-through, fuel island or similar auto-oriented use.  For
purposes of this chapter, queuing space does not include the stacking lane(s)
for vehicles waiting in line to obtain the service.



   RAILROAD YARD OR OTHER EQUIPMENT MARSHALING & STORAGE AREA.  An area
of land, a portion of which is covered by a system of tracks, that provides
for the making up of trains by one or more railroads or private industry
concerns. Necessary functions of a rail yard include, but are not limited to,
the classifying, switching, storing, assembling, distributing, consolidating,
moving, repairing, weighing or transferring of cars, trains, engines,
locomotives and rolling stock. (A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and
Planning Terms: El Paso, TX)



   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign employed to announce or display the
sale of real property, the sign being erected on the property for sale.



   RECREATION, ACTIVE. Leisure-time activities, usually of a formal nature
and often performed with others, requiring equipment and taking place at
prescribed places, sites or fields.



   RECREATION, PASSIVE. Activities that involve relatively inactive or
less energetic activities, such as walking, sitting, picnicking, chess,
checkers or similar games.



   RECREATION FACILITY. A place designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports and leisure- time activities.



   REQUIRED YARD. That portion of a lot that is required by the specific
district regulation to be open from the ground to the sky and may contain
only explicitly listed obstructions.  See Figure 11.







 



Figure 11. Required Yard



   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CENTER.  Research, development, and testing
laboratories that do not involve the mass manufacture, fabrication,
processing or sale of products.  Such uses shall not involve testing on
humans or animals nor shall they violate any odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise,
radiation, vibration, or similar pollution standards.



   RESERVOIR. A pond, lake, tank or basin, natural or man-made, used for
the storage, regulation and control of water.



   RESIDENCE. A building or part of a building containing one or more
dwelling units or rooming units, including single family or two family
houses, multiple dwellings, boarding or rooming houses or apartment hotels.
However, residences do not include:



      (1)   Such transient accommodations as transient hotels,
motels, tourist homes or similar establishments;



      (2)   Dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses, monasteries,
convents or similar establishments containing group living or sleeping
accommodations;



      (3)   Nurses’ residences, sanitariums, nursing homes,
convalescent homes, resthomes or other sleeping or living accommodations in
community facility buildings or portions of buildings used for community
facilities; or



      (4)   In a mixed building, that part of the building used for
any nonresidential uses, except uses accessory to residential uses.



   RESIDENCE, ALLEY-LOADED DETACHED.  A lot where a garage is accessed
from an alley rather than a front driveway, especially common where narrower
widths, such as 50 feet or less, are desired.



   RESIDENCE, ATTACHED.  A lot/building with multiple dwelling units such
as townhouses, stacked flats, apartments, lofts, and condominiums.  Attached
residential lots may vary in size depending upon the scale of the residential
structure.



   RESIDENCE, STREET LOADED DETACHED. A lot/building where a garage is
accessed from a driveway extending from the street.  These are often used
for large lots, such as those greater than 50 feet in width, or when
topography or other site constraints prohibit alleys.



   RESIDENT MANAGER LIVING QUARTERS. An apartment unit for an actual
full-time or equivalent employee of the operation during normal business
hours.



   RESTAURANT. An establishment where food is ordered, prepared and served
for pay.



   ROOF LINE. The apex, or highest point of the roof. In a series of
roofs, the apex of the lowest roof will be considered.  See Figure 12.







 



Figure 12. Roof Line with Seies of Roofs



   ROOF SIGN. A sign that is erected, constructed or maintained on a roof.



   SCHOOL. Any building or part thereof that is designed, constructed or
used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge.



   SEMI-TRANSIENT RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment where
lodging is provided for compensation partly on a monthly or longer basis and
partly for a shorter time period, but with less than 30% of the living units
being occupied on a less than monthly basis, but excluding institutional
living arrangements involving the provision of specific kinds of forced
residences, such as nursing homes, orphanages, asylums and prisons.



   SENIORS.  Persons who are 55 years of age or older.



   SETBACK.   The minimum horizontal distance by which any building or
structure must be separated from a lot line.  See Figure 13.







 



Figure 13. Setback Line



   SETBACK, SIDE STREET.  The setback on a corner lot measured from the
edge of the right-of-way of the secondary street, or the street that does not
face the primary entrance.  The secondary street shall not be the street
from which a structure derives its street address.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. An adult entertainment use or
establishment consisting of, including or having the characteristics of the
following.



      (1)   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin- operated, slug-operated or for any form of
consideration, electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled, still
or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players or other
image- producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO
STORE. A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of
the following:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matters or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which regularly depicts
material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas;” or



         (b)   Paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with “specified sexual activities.”



         (c)   Note: a commercial establishment may have other
principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or
rental of material depicting or describing “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as ADULT
BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Such other business
purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being
categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE
so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or
rental for any form of consideration the specified materials which regularly
depicts or material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”



      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:



         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or
semi-nude;



         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual
activities;” or



         (c)   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions which regularly depict material which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or
describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”



      (4)   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:



         (a)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form
of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which regularly depict material which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or
describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises
the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;



         (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time that is less than ten hours; or



         (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown
which regularly depict material which is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting or describing “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas.”



      (6)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or semi-nude or live performances which are
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of “specified anatomical
areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”



      (7)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person regularly
appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or regularly displays “specified
anatomical areas” and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay
money or any form of consideration. NUDE MODE STUDIO shall not include a
proprietary school licensed by the State of Tennessee or a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a
private college or university which maintains and operates education programs
in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure.  As used in
this division, SEMI-NUDE OR SEMI-NUDE CONDITION means the showing of the bare
female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its
highest point or the showing of the bare male or female buttocks. This
definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast,
but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast,
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing
apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



      (8)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, regularly offers
for any form of consideration, activities between male and female persons
and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is nude or
semi- nude.



      (9)   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following
offenses: prostitution; patronizing prostitution; promoting prostitution;
sexual performance by a child; aggravated sexual exploitation of a minor;
sexual exploitation of a minor; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public indecency; engaging in organized criminal activity;
aggravated sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution
of a controlled substance; or any similar offences to those described above
under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries.



   SHOEBOX-STYLE LIGHTING FIXTURE.  An exterior lighting device in the
shape of a box that is typically mounted on a pole and constructed to direct
illumination to a discrete area directly beneath the lighting fixture.



   SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY. Any existing dwelling (whether attached,
detached, two-family, multi-family, townhouse, mobile home, manufactured
home, or modular home), dwelling unit, or residence used for transient
occupancy. Bed and Breakfast homestays shall not be considered SHORT-TERM
RENTAL PROPERTY.



   SHOW WINDOW SIGN. Any temporary sign advertising sales or specials
attached to a window surface or visible from a public right-of-way.



   SIGN. Any device conveying either commercial or noncommercial messages
or both commercial and noncommercial messages for visual communication 
that  is  used  for  the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the
attention of the public; but not including any lawful display of merchandise.
The term SIGN shall also mean and include any display of one or more of the
following:



      (1)   Any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, picture, outline,
character, spectacle delineation, announcement, trademark, logo; or



      (2)   Multiple colored bands, stripes, patterns, outlines or
delineations displayed for the purpose of commercial identification; or



      (3)   Anything specified above in part or in combination by
any means whereby the same are made visible from beyond the boundaries of the
lot or parcel of property on which the same are displayed for the purpose of
attracting attention outdoors to make anything known.



   SIGN STRUCTURE. Supporting structure erected or intended for
identifying/advertising purposes, with or without a sign thereon, situated
upon or attached to real property, upon which any sign is fastened, affixed,
displayed, applied or a part of, provided however, the definition shall not
include a building, fence, pole or illumination device.



   SITE PLAN, (PRELIMINARY AND FINAL SITE PLAN). A scaled graphic
schematic of a development site indicating the location of buildings,
walkways, parking, signs, lighting fixtures, grading, utilities, drainage
facilities, topography and landscaping as they are to appear upon the
completion of development. SITE PLANS may be required to contain such other
information as may be deemed necessary by the town to ensure proper
development of the site.



   STABLES. The housing and maintenance of three or more horses for the
purpose of work or pleasure riding. This definition shall include both the
private and for-profit housing of horses and all associated uses and
structures.



   STORY. A portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, the
space between such floor and the ceiling next above it, provided that the
following shall not be deemed a story:



      (1)   A basement or cellar if the finished floor level
directly above is not more than six feet above the average adjoining
elevation of finished grade;



      (2)   An attic or similar space under a gable, hip or gambrel
roof, the wall plates or any exterior walls are not more than two feet above
the floor of such space.



   STREET. A publicly maintained right-of-way, other than an alley, which
affords a primary means of access to abutting property. The word STREET shall
include the words “road,” “highway” and “thoroughfare” (also see
PRIVATE STREET).



   STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS.



      (1)   Every person owning or occupying any house or building
fronting on any street in the Town of Collierville shall, prior to occupancy,
have the official street number, as assigned by Memphis Light Gas and Water,
attached to, stenciled on or painted on the front part of such house or
building.



      (2)   The numbers shall be posed over, on or by each main
entrance to the building in such a manner that the number is plainly visible
from the street and meets all the following:



         (a)   Numbers shall be posted using Arabic numerals 0,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9;



         (b)   Numerals shall not be less than 3 inches in height;



         (c)   Numerals shall be of a color that contrasts with
the color of the background on which it is located.



      (3)   If, because of setback of the house or building, or for
reason the number cannot readily be seen from the street, the owner shall, in
addition to posting per subsection (2), position additional numbering so that
it is clearly visible from the street.



      (4)   Additional posting per subsection (3) for other reasons
(such as on a mailbox or curbside) shall not be used in lieu of posting
numerals in accordance with the above sections.



      (5)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of $50. Each day that such
violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense and may be fined
as such.



   STREET BANNER. A temporary sign composed of lightweight material either
enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame.



   STREET LINE. The property line which bounds the right-of-way set aside
for use as a street.  Where sidewalks exist and the location of the property
line is questioned, the side of the sidewalk furthermost from the traveled
street shall be considered as the street line.



   STREET, SIDE (or SECONDARY).  The street adjacent to a building facade
that is not the primary building facade.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a
permanent location on the ground. This includes but is not limited to
buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission lines.



   SUBDIVISION ENTRANCE SIGN. An on-site sign, masonry wall, landscaping
or similar materials or features, which separately or together form a display
for identifying the subdivision, provided that the legend of the sign shall
consist only of the name of the subdivision.



   SUBSTANCE ABUSE CENTER.  Structures and land used for the treatment of
alcohol or other drug abuse where one or more patients are provided with
care, meals, and lodging. (A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning
Terms: Jefferson, MO)



   SURROUNDING GRADE. Finish grade of the ground upon which a sign is
placed, as per approved site plan by the Collierville Design Review
Commission.



   TAVERN, BAR.  A structure or portion of a structure that is primarily
devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of
food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. (A Glossary of
Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms: Blue Springs, MO)



   TAXIDERMY SERVICES. A business that prepares, stuffs or mounts the
skins of animals, but does not include the slaughtering or tanning of hides
on-site.



   TEA ROOM.  A public house or restaurant where tea and light
refreshments are served, generally during midday. (A Glossary of Zoning,
Development, and Planning Terms: Galesburg, IL)



   TECHNOLOGY. An economic development classification that may include
telecommunications, information technology, software, biotechnical/medical,
logistics, computer, defense, test and measurement, electronic components,
technology-oriented education facilities, training, multimedia, semiconductor
and fiber optics.



   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign neither intended nor designed for permanent
display.



   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A movable structure (anything constructed or
erected) which either is not permanently attached to a permanent foundation,
concrete slab or footing or which is equipped with a permanent steel chassis,
and that is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for
which it was erected has expired.



   TOWNHOUSE. A one family dwelling attached to at least two or more such
units in which each unit has its own access to the outside, no unit is
located over another unit and each unit is separated from any other unit by
one or more vertical fire-resistant walls. The maximum number of attached
dwelling  units shall not exceed six dwelling units.



   TRADITIONAL AREA.  Portions of the town, including the historic
district, that are appropriate for, or characterized by, development that
typically includes mixed-uses, or residential and nonresidential uses in
proximity to one another, buildings typically more than one story tall and
built close to the street, a high level of architectural detailing on the
primary building façades, the use of a modified street grid system,
pedestrian oriented site design rather than exclusively or predominantly for
the automobile, and off-street parking located to the side or rear of
buildings as described in the Collierville Design Guidelines.



   TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY. The rental or lease of all or a portion of a
short-term rental property for a period of less than 30 continuous days for
any consideration.



   TRAVEL TRAILER. A travel trailer, pick-up camper, converted bus,
tent-trailer, tent or similar device used for temporary portable housing or a
unit which:



      (1)   Can operate independent of connections to external
sewer, water and electrical systems;



      (2)   Contains water storage facilities and may contain a
lavatory, kitchen sink and/or bath facilities; and/or



      (3)   Is identified by the manufacturer as a travel trailer
and/or is designed as a travel trailer.



   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK. Any plot of ground upon which two or more travel
trailers, occupied for camping or periods of short stay, are located.



   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT. A development option permitting a site plan to be
submitted as an aggregation of two or more lots; however, bulk requirements,
such as, but not limited to, buffers, open space, building setbacks, yard
requirements, height requirements, lot size requirements, floor area ratios,
landscape surface ratios, and parking shall be determined based on perimeter
lot lines, regardless of the location, ownership, size, or quantity of the
interior lots, effectively treating the aggregation of lots as one lot for
meeting the requirements by the Zoning Ordinance and Design Guidelines.



   UNIFORM SIGN POLICY.  A plan establishing parameters for the size,
location and design of signs on a property.



   UNIFORMITY RATIO.  A measurement of the relative difference in
illumination values, at ground level, between differing exterior lighting
sources on a single parcel of land.



   USE. The purpose for which land or water or a structure thereon is
designed, arranged and intended to be occupied or utilized or for which it is
occupied or maintained.



   USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMIT. A written permit issued by the Building
Inspector required  before occupying or commencing to use any building or
other structure or any lot.



   USE, PUBLIC. Any use that is under control of a unit of general purpose
government or governmental agency.



   USE, SEMI-PUBLIC. Any use that is under the control of a non-private
organization or a non- governmental agency that provides a public service.



   UTILITY CORPORATION TRUCK YARD.  An area of land that provides for the
storage of service trucks and/or utility equipment and construction and
maintenance materials.



   VARIETY STORE.  A retail store that sells a wide variety of relatively
small and inexpensive items. (A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning
Terms: Valdez, Alaska)



   VEHICLE SIGN.  A sign that is attached to or painted on a vehicle that
is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is
to attract attention to a product sold or business.



   VEHICULAR CANOPY.  A roofed, open, drive-through structure designed to
provide temporary shelter for vehicle and their occupants while making use of
a business’ services. 



   VENDING MACHINES. Shall be deemed a sign and not allowed to be placed
on property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. A place where animals are given medical care and
the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the
hospital use.



   VOCATIONAL SCHOOL.  A secondary or higher education facility primarily
teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade and meeting
the state requirements as a vocational facility. (The New Illustrated Book of
Development Definitions)



   WALL-MOUNTED LIGHT.  A type of lighting fixture typically
surface-mounted on a vertical wall surface.



   WALL SIGN. A sign designating the name of the business, institution, or
organization which is attached to, in a rigid manner, and parallel to a
building wall or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a
manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for or forms the
background surface of the sign and which does not extend more than 12 inches
from such building or structure.



   WATER TANK. See RESERVOIR.



   WINDBLOWN DEVICES. Pennants, streamers, spinners, balloons, gas-filled
figures and other similar devises.



   WINDOW SIGN. A permanent business sign painted on or posted in a window
and visible from a public right-of-way.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



      (1)   ANTENNA.  A device used to transmit and/or receive
radio-frequency signals, microwave signals, or other telephonic, radio, or
television signals.



      (2)   ANTENNA ARRAY.  Two or more devices used to transmit
and/or receive radio-frequency signals, microwave signals, or other
telephonic, radio, or television signals.



      (3)   CELL SITE.  A tract or parcel of land that contains a
WCF antenna, its support structure, accessory building(s), parking, and other
uses associated with wireless communications.



      (4)   CO-LOCATION.  Shared use by locating wireless
communications equipment from more than one provider on a single support
structure.



      (5)   EQUIPMENT ENCLOSURE.  A structure, cabinet, box, vault,
or shelter designed for and used to house and protect electronic equipment
necessary for processing wireless communication signals and data, including
mechanical cooling equipment, air conditioning, ventilation, and electric
generators.



      (6)   GUYED TOWER.  A vertical support structure that is
supported by guy wires and ground anchors.



      (7)   INSTITUTIONAL USE.  A nonprofit, religious, or public
use, including but not limited to a place of worship, public or private
school, day care center, library, hospital, nursing home, adult care center,
cemetery, funeral home, community center, country club, golf course, stables,
park, or other government owned or operated building, structure, or land used
for a public purpose.



      (8)   LATTICE TOWER.  A guyed or self-supporting support
structure that consists of multiple legs and metal cross bars.



      (9)   MONOPOLE.  A self-supporting structure, constructed
without guy wires and ground anchors, that consists of a single vertical
metal, concrete, or wooden pole, typically round or square, and driven into
the ground or attached to a foundation.



      (10)   STEALTH DESIGN.  The design of wireless communications
facilities in a manner that camouflages, conceals, or disguises the
facilities as described below:



         a.   Camouflage. The use of shape, color, and texture to
cause an object to appear to become a part of something else, usually a
structure, such as a building, wall or roof. “Camouflage” does not mean
invisible, but rather appearing as part of or exactly like the structure used
as a mount.



         b.   Concealment. Fully hidden from view. For example, a
wireless communications facility (WCF) is concealed when it is completely
hidden or contained within a structure, such as a building, wall, or roof.



         c.   Disguised. A wireless communications facility (WCF)
that has been changed to appear to be something other than what it really is.
For example, WCFs are sometimes disguised to appear as flagpoles.



   WORK OF ART.  An object, painting, sculpture, picture, or other
similar artistic rendering which contains no commercial message.



   YARD.  An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot
lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward, except as specifically provided in the Zoning Ordinance. 
Exceptions include:



      (1)   Accessory uses and structures as provided in § 151.025,
which includes, but is not limited to:



         (a)   Off-street parking, driveways, and loading areas.



         (b)   Flag poles.



         (c)   Landscape elements, posts, and customary yard
accessories.



         (d)   Fences, walls, and hedges.



      (2)   Chimneys, belt courses, sills, pilasters, ornamental
features, cornices, gutters and eaves projecting not more than 24 inches from
an exterior wall.



      (3)   Bay windows, porches, balconies, fire escapes, and steps
projecting not more than 36 inches from an exterior wall for a distance not
more than one-third of the length of such wall.



      (4)   Landscape elements, posts, and customary yard
accessories.



   YARD, REQUIRED FRONT.   A yard extending across the entire width of
the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance established by
the Zoning Ordinance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto
on the lot.  See Figure 8.  (APA PAS Report No. 491/492)



   YARD, REQUIRED REAR.   A yard extending across the entire width of the
lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance established by the
Zoning Ordinance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the
lot.  See Figure 8.



   YARD, REQUIRED SIDE.   A yard extending parallel to the side lot line
between front and/or rear yards, the width of which is the minimum horizontal
distance established by the Zoning Ordinance.  See Figure 8.



(`00 Code, § 11-202)  (Ord. passed 5- -02; Am. Ord. 2002-11, passed 7-2-02;
Am. Ord. 2003-15, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2003-22, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord.
2003-27, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 2003-34, passed 11-24-03; Am. Ord. 2003-38,
passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. 2005-01, passed 2-14-05; Am. Ord. 2005-12, passed
12-12-05; Am. Ord. 2006-12, passed 7-10-06; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-
11-08; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 2-9-09;
Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 2009-16, passed 11-23-09; Am.
Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord.
2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord. 2011-06,
passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-28-15 ; Am. Ord. 2017-10, passed
7-10-17 ; Am. Ord. 2018-02, passed 8-14-18)



§ 151.004  LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Interpretation.  In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.



   (B)   Relationship to other laws and private restrictions.



      (1)   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this
chapter upon the use of land or buildings or upon the height or bulk of
buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or of any other
law, resolution, ordinance, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive shall apply.



      (2)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement,
covenant or any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations
of this chapter are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or
requirements) than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the
requirements of this chapter shall govern.



   (C)   Ordinance provisions do not constitute permit.  Nothing
contained in this chapter shall be deemed to be a consent, license or permit
to use any property or to locate, construct or maintain any building,
structure or facility or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation or
activity.



   (D)   Provisions are cumulative.  The provisions of this chapter
are cumulative with additional limitations imposed by all other laws and
ordinances, heretofore, passed or which may be passed hereafter, governing
any subject matter appearing in this chapter.



   (E)   Separability.  It is declared to be the intention of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Collierville, Tennessee, that the
several provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the
following:



      (1)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect any
other provision of this chapter not specifically included in the judgement;



      (2)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge
invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular
property, building or other structure, such judgement shall not affect the
application of the provisions to any other property, building or structure
not specifically included in the judgement.



   (F)   Application of regulation. 



      (1)   No building or other structure shall be constructed,
erected, placed or maintained and no land use commenced within the Town,
except as specifically or by necessary implication authorized by this
chapter. Conditional uses are allowed only on permit granted by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen based on a recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses
and structures are authorized, except as prohibited specifically or by
necessary implication.



      (2)   Reserved.



   (G)   Scope of regulations.



      (1)   New uses, lots, buildings or other structures.  Upon
the effective date of this chapter, any new building or other structure or
any tract of land shall be used, constructed or developed only in accordance
with the use, bulk and all other applicable provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Existing uses, lots, buildings or other structures.



         (a)   Any existing use legally established prior to the
effective date of this chapter which does not comply with its provisions
shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions in §§ 151.130et seq.



         (b)   Any existing lot, parcel, building or other
structure legally established prior to the effective date of this chapter
which does not comply with its provisions, other than use provisions, shall
be subject to the noncomplying regulations in § 151.138.



      (3)   Alteration of existing buildings and other structures. 
All structural alterations or relocations of existing buildings or structures
occurring after the effective date of this chapter and all enlargements of or
additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all
regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in
which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.



   (H)   Effective date.  This chapter shall be in force and effect
from and after its passage on third and final reading and adoption, the
public welfare requiring it.



(`00 Code, § 11-203)  (Ord. passed 7-14-80; Am. Ord. 97-34, passed - -; Am.
Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 2-9-09)



§ 151.005  EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Front yards.  The front yard requirements of this chapter for
dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average depth of existing
front yards on developed lots, located within 300 feet on each side of such
lot, is less than the minimum required front yard depth. In such cases, the
depth of the front yard on such lot may be less than the required front yard,
but not less than the average of the existing front yard depth on the
developed lots. In residential districts, however, the front yard shall in no
case be less than 15 feet in depth.



   (B)   Lot of record. 



      (1)   Where the owner or subsequent owner of a lot of official
record at the time of the adoption of this chapter does not own sufficient
land to enable him or her to conform to the yard or other  requirements of
this chapter, an application may be submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals
for a variance from the terms of this chapter in accordance with § 151.309.
Such lot may be used as a building site, provided however, that the yard and
other requirements of the district are complied with as closely as is
possible in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (2)   If a proposed structure to be built on a substandard lot
of record complies with all of the setback requirements for the zoning
district in which the lot is located, a variance need not be obtained and the
building permit may be issued.



   (C)   Adjoining substandard lots of record.  Where two or more
substandard lots of record with a continuous frontage are under the same
ownership, such lots shall be combined to form one or more building sites
meeting the minimum requirements of the district in which they are located. 



   (D)   Exception on height limits.  The height limitations of this
chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not
intended for human occupancy, monuments, water towers, observation towers,
transmission towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors,
flag poles in non-residential districts, radio towers, masts and aerials,
provided other district requirements are met.  The height of flagpoles
located in residential districts shall not exceed the maximum heights
allowable under § 151.025(D)(6).



(`00 Code, § 11-204) (Ord. 2005-10, passed 8-22-05)



§ 151.006  GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   General district regulations.  The regulations set by this
chapter within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly,
except as hereinafter provided:



      (1)   No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used
or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located; 



      (2)   No building or other structure shall hereafter be
erected or altered:



         (a)   To exceed the height or bulk;



         (b)   To accommodate or house a greater number of
families;



         (c)   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area, where
applicable;



         (d)   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front
yards, side yards or other open space than herein required or in any other
manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter;



      (3)   No part of a yard, other open space or off-street
parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building
for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a
yard, open space or off-street parking or loading spaces similarly required
for any other building;



      (4)   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this
chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.



   (B)   Visibility at intersections.  On a corner lot in any
district, except CB, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to
grow in such a manner as to impede vision between a height of two and
one-half and ten feet. This restriction applies to that area formed by the
centerline of streets or a street and a railroad at a distance of 100 feet
from their intersections.



   (C)   Fences, walls and hedges.



      (1)   Purpose and intent. The Town of Collierville recognizes
the health, safety, aesthetic, and economic value of walls and fences. These
provisions are intended to:



         (a)   Allow for areas on-site for privacy, while
maintaining the Town’s general open design along streets;



         (b)   Provide screening and mitigation of potential
conflicts between active areas and more passive areas;



         (c)   Enhance the overall aesthetic conditions within
the Town;



         (d)   Limit sight line obstructions;



         (e)   Reduce the potential for criminal and illegal
activities; and



         (f)   Prevent conflicts with utilities and drainage flow.



      (2)   Applicability.



         (a)   General. Except where expressly exempted, these
standards shall apply to all development and redevelopment.



         (b)   Fence permit required. It shall be unlawful for
any contractor, individual or property owner to commence the installation of
a fence or wall until the Development Department has issued afence permit for
such work. Any fence permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter shall be null and void. It shall be the responsibility of the
contractor, individual or property owner to correct any violations that may
exist as determined by the Development Director (or his/her designee) within
a reasonable time period specified by the Development Department. Fence
permits shall not be required for maintenance of an existing fence unless
more than 50% of the fence is being reconstructed.



      (3)   Measurement of fence and wall height.



         (a)   Determination of height. Fence height is measured
to include the body of the fence, plus allowing a maximum of six inches (on
average between posts) above the finished grade (i.e. for drainage purposes).
Masonry columns and fence posts are permitted to extend a maximum of 12
inches above the body of the fence. In the event fence height has been
elevated through the creation of a berm, or other method for the primary
purpose of increasing the elevation of the fence, the fence height is
measured from the ground elevation prior to grade modification.



         (b)   Variations. To allow for minor variation in
topography (less than one foot of grade change over 12 feet), the height of a
fence or wall may vary up to six inches. In cases where the slope is greater
than one foot of grade change over 12 feet between the ends of a particular
section of a fence or wall, the height of that section of the fence or wall
may vary up to 18 inches provided any fence or wall steps are proportional.



         (c)   Average finished grade. The average finished grade
shall be construed as the average grade measured at a point three feet on
each side of the fence. In the case of a fence on a retaining wall, adjacent
grade shall be the grade of the top of the wall.



         (d)   Maximum height. The average height of a fence or
wall shall not exceed the maximum height allowed.



      (4)   Maximum height by function and location.



         (a)   Height. Fences or walls shall not exceed the
height as depicted in the table below.



 




Fence and Wall Height







Fence or Wall Function

 

Maximum Height




Front Yard (feet)

 

Side Yard, Rear Yard, (feet)



Dumpster, refuse area, loading area, or recycling container screen walls in
nonresidential developments
 
The greater of: 8 feet or 2 feet taller than the container being screened[6]


Exterior storage (Site Plan approved) in RI or GI Districts
 
The greater of: 15 feet or 2 feet taller than the materials being screened


All other fences & walls
 
Residential, except as noted
 

4[1][2][3][4][6]

 

6[6]



Nonresidential and mixed-uses
 

8[2][3][4][6]

 

8[6]



Perimeter common open space or reversed frontage lot
 

6[5][6]

 

6[5][6]



FAR, R-L, and R-Ll Districts
 

6[2]

 

6



Notes:

[1]   For corner lots, see § 151.006(C)(9) for allowable front yard
exceptions.

[2]   Front yard fences shall have a maximum opacity of 75% except for the
exceptions specified in § 151.006(C)(8).

[3]   Except in FAR, R-L, and R-Ll Districts, front yard fences outside of
the Historic District shall be reviewed by the Design Review Commission prior
to the issuance of a fence permit.

[4]   The Historic District Guidelines state that front yard fences should
not exceed 3.5 feet. The Historic District Commission may approve taller
fences on a case-by-case basis, but in no case shall front yard fences exceed
a height of 4 feet.

[5]   A perimeter common open space or reversed frontage fence or wall
abutting an arterial street or a four-lane or greater collector street as
designated by the Collierville Major Road Plan may rise to a maximum height
of six feet subject to the review and approval of the Design Review
Commission. See § 151.006(C)(5) for materials requirements.

[6]   In the Historic District, all fences and walls visible from a public
right-of-way require the approval of the Historic District Commission.




 



      (5)   Materials. Fences and walls must be constructed of
brick, ornamental iron or aluminum, vinyl, or rot resistant wood (pressure
treated lumber, redwood, cypress and cedar), with the following exceptions:



         (a)   Wooden fence boards used in a nonresidential
development shall be naturally rot resistant wood (redwood, cypress and
cedar).



         (b)   Fence boards used within a perimeter fence
required in Planned Developments, Common Open Space, Reversed Frontage fence,
or a fence abutting an arterial street or collector street as designated by
the Collierville Major Road Plan, in subdivisions developed after January 1,
2016, shall be naturally rot resistant wood (redwood, cypress and cedar).



         (c)   The Design Review Commission or the Historic
District Commission may approve alternative materials on a case-by-case basis.



         (d)   Retaining walls.



         (e)   Formed concrete walls or concrete wall panels
provided they are within side or rear yards, front yard encroachments allowed
for corner lots per § 151.006(C)(9), common open space, or along the rear
property line of reverse and double-frontage lots.



         (f)   Plastic and composite materials (100% recycled
plastic, recycled plastic and waste wood fiber/sawdust).



      (6)   Prohibited materials. Specifically prohibited fencing
materials shall include, vinyl coated chain link and chain link (except as
may be authorized by the Development Director (or his/her designee) or the
Design Review Commission for legally approved animal boarding or health care
facilities, side and rear yards of RI and GI Districts when abutting similar
zoned properties, municipal and governmental facilities, and when used for
sports facilities to protect health, safety and public welfare), cinder block
or concrete block and barbed wire. Wire mesh, single wire, or electrified
fencing are prohibited except in relation to agricultural uses or when used
in combination with wooden fences as may be authorized by the Design Review
Commission or the Historic District Commission (if located in the
Collierville Historic District).



      (7)   Front yard fences or walls. Fences and walls, with the
exception of retaining walls, may be allowed in front yards, subject to the
following:



         (a)   Front yard fences outside of the Historic District
of not more than 48 inches height may be allowed subject to the review and
approval of the Design Review Commission and as noted in the table included
in § 151.006(C)(4).



         (b)   Front yard fences inside the Historic District of
not more than 42 inches in height may be allowed in front yards, subject to
review and approval of the Historic District Commission and as noted in the
table included in § 151.006(C)(4).



      (8)   Opacity.



         (a)   For the purposes of this section, OPACITY shall
mean the degree of openness to which light or views are blocked measured
perpendicular to the fence for each fence section between supports



         (b)   Opacity limitations are meant to maintain an open
appearance along public streets and to prevent crime.



         (c)   Except where specifically permitted otherwise, the
body of a fence located between a street and a principal structure shall have
a maximum opacity of 75%.



         (d)   Exceptions. The following fences are exempt from
opacity limitations, subject to the review and approval of the Design Review
Commission, or if located in the Historic District, the Historic District
Commission:



            1.   A perimeter common open space or reversed
frontage fence or wall abutting an arterial street or a four-lane or greater
collector street as designated by the Collierville Major Road Plan;



            2.   A screening fence or wall required by the
Design Guidelines;



            3.   A screening fence or wall required as a
condition of approval;



            4.   An opaque fence on a corner lot as
specifically exempted by § 151.006(C)(9);



            5.   Masonry walls subject to the review and
approval of the Design Review Commission or the Historic District Commission
(if located in the Collierville Historic District);



            6.   A retaining wall;



            7.   A pool barrier as required by the Swimming
Pool Code adopted by the Town of Collierville;



            8.   Vegetation growing adjacent to or on a fence
will not be considered in determining compliance with the opacity
requirements for fences; and



            9.   For the purposes of fence opacity
limitations, an alley is not considered a street.



      (9)   Corner lots. On corner lots, fences, walls and hedges
shall be permitted in side and rear yards. Fences and walls exceeding 48
inches in height shall not be permitted beyond the front face of the primary
structure or the front yard setback line, whichever distance from the
property line is greater, on the street side on which the house faces.
However, on the street side on which the house does not face, an opaque fence
or wall not exceeding six feet in height may extend no more than ten feet
into the front yard setback. In no case shall a fence or wall greater than 48
inches in height be located closer than 20 feet from the back edge of the
curb (or edge of pavement for a rural road cross section).



      (10)   Finished side of fence facing public areas. All fences,
regardless of type or material, shall have the finished side facing public
rights-of-way, common open areas, parkland or greenbelt areas and other
public areas.



      (11)   Transition height between adjoining fences.  A fence
or wall being installed that varies in height with other fences shall
transition the height of the fence to match the adjoining fence. The
transition shall be provided over a minimum distance of eight feet or 4:1
ratio. Abrupt changes in height between fences shall not be permitted.



      (12)   Prohibited locations. No fence or wall shall be
installed that:



         (a)   Encroaches into an alley (except for temporary
fencing necessary for public safety);



         (b)   In the opinion of the Town Engineer, blocks or
diverts drainage within a drainage easement per § 151.006(C)(13);



         (c)   Compromises safety by blocking vision at street
intersections or obstructs the visibility of vehicles entering or leaving
driveways or alleys (see also § 151.006(B));



         (d)   Blocks access to any above ground or pad-mounted
electrical transformer, equipment vault, or similar device. A 15 foot clear
access must be provided for maintenance of Memphis Light, Gas, and Water pad
mounted transformers;



         (e)   Removes, as determined by the Development Director
or his/her designee, or significantly damages a tree located within a Tree
Protection Zone;



         (f)   Is located within six feet of a fire hydrant; or



         (g)   Is located on a portion of the property that is
subject to road widening by the Collierville Major Road Plan.



      (13)   Drainage flow.  Fences and walls must be installed to
provide sufficient clearance from the bottom of the fence to the ground so
drainage will flow freely and not negatively impact any adjacent property
owner. Sufficient clearance shall be defined by the Town Engineer. Fences
located in or along drainage easements shall have a minimum ground clearance
of two inches.



      (14)   Reverse and double-frontage lots. Fences on double
frontage lots and reverse frontage lots where the rear or side yards face a
public right-of-way shall be maintained by the property owner or by an
established homeowner’s association. In subdivisions where there is no
homeowner’s association, access gates shall be installed on all properties
which abut the public right-of-way. All landscaped area from the fence line
to the pavement edge shall be maintained by the property owner in accordance
with Town regulations. All fences on double frontage lots must have the
finished side of the fence facing the public right-of-way.



      (15)   Maintenance. Fences shall be maintained and kept in
good repair by the property owner and/or homeowner association. Examples of a
lack of proper maintenance include, but are not be limited to, rotten or
deteriorated structural members, missing or broken components, excessive
sagging of structural members or warping or distortion of planks and fence or
wall materials. Lack of proper maintenance and upkeep of a fence or wall
shall constitute a violation of these regulations.



      (16)   Double fences. Double fences shall be allowed in the
side and rear yards with the exception of double frontage or reverse frontage
lots where rear property lines face a public right-of-way. A fence permit
shall be required prior to the installation of a double fence. A double fence
may be installed on the opposite side of a common property line where a fence
has been installed that does not provide adequate screening measures,
including, but not limited to, height of opposing fence installed below the
prescribed maximum height or the use of transparent materials such as
chain-link fencing. Double fences shall be installed against the property
line so as to prevent non-maintainable land between fences.



      (17)   Swimming pools. In accordance with the Swimming Pool
Code adopted by the Town of Collierville, as amended, fencing for pools shall
be a minimum of 48 inches in height as measured from the finished grade. All
other fence provisions in the currently-adopted Swimming Pool Code as amended
shall apply.



      (18)   Public easements. Fences, walls and hedges installed in
or along public easements (utility, drainage, pedestrian and the like) are
subject to removal at the owner’s expense in the event maintenance or
construction work is required within or along the public easement.



   (D)   Reserved.



   (E)   Reserved.



   (F)   Minimum required yard area.  Regardless of the orientation of
buildings, no less than the minimum yards required by the district
regulations in which the development is located shall be maintained along the
outer boundaries of the lot.



   (G)   Structure to have access.  Every structure shall be on a lot
adjacent to a public street, or with access to any approved private street,
and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and
convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street
parking.



   (H)   Reserved.



   (I)   Only one principal building on any lot.  Only one principal
building and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on
any lot in the R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A and T zones. This provision shall
not apply to the R-4, TN, MU, NC, MPO, SCC, CB, GC, RI and GI zones, provided
that all bulk, area, yard and other requirements of the zone are met.



   (J)   Zoning of annexed territory.  All territory which may
hereafter be annexed into the Town of Collierville shall be zoned and
classified as a part of that zoning district of the Town specified by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen by ordinance at the time of annexation thereof.
The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen on proposed zoning for areas in the process of being annexed. The
Board, before adopting any ordinance zoning the property, shall first hold a
public hearing in accordance with § 151.311(F). Upon annexation, the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen shall, by separate ordinance, zone such annexed
territory consistent with the public health, safety, convenience and welfare
of the inhabitants of the Town of Collierville.



   (K)   Reserved.



   (L)   Reserved.



   (M)   Reserved.



(`83 Code, § 11-205)  (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 00-35, passed - -;
Am. Ord. passed 5- -02; Am. Ord. 2003-34, passed 11-24-03; Am. Ord. 2005-10,
passed 8-22-05; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10- 08; Am. 2008-21, passed
11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord. 2011-06, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord.
2015-10, passed 10-126-15; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.007  CHAPTER AMENDED AND RESTATED.



   Chapter 151 and each section in the chapter was amended and restated by
Ordinance 2003-35, passed 11-24-2003.



ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS



§ 151.020  DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Regular districts.  In order to implement all purposes and
provisions of the chapter, the land within the corporate limits of the Town
of Collierville, Tennessee, are divided into districts designated as follows.



      (1)   Residential Districts.



         (a)   R-1:      Low Density Residential;



         (b)   R-1A:      Low Density Residential;



         (c)   R-2:      Medium Density Residential;



         (d)   R-2A:      Medium Density Residential;



         (e)   R-3:      High Density Residential;



         (f)   R-3A:      High Density Residential;



         (g)   R-4:      Multi-Family Residential;



         (h)   T:      Mobile Home Park;



         (i)   R-TH:      Residential Townhouse;



         (j)   RL:      Large Lot Residential;



         (k)   R-25:      Low Density Residential;



         (l)   R-L1      Large Lot Residential (1 acre
minimum);



         (m)   FAR:      Forest-Agricultural Residential.



      (2)   Commercial Districts.



         (a)   NC:      Neighborhood Commercial;



         (b)   MPO:      Medical-Professional Office;



         (c)   SCC:      Shopping Center Commercial;



         (d)   CB:      Central Business;



         (e)   GC:      General Commercial.



      (3)   Industrial Districts.



         (a)   RI:      Restricted Industrial;



         (b)   GI:      General Industrial.



   (B)   Special districts.  In order to address special problems and
circumstances which may exist throughout the Town, the special flood hazard
(FH) district is established.



(Ord. passed 5- -02; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.021  USES PERMITTED IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Organization of table. The table below organizes the principal
uses by use classifications and principal uses.



      (1)   Use classifications. The use classifications provide a
systematic basis for assigning present and future land uses into broad
general classifications (e.g., detached residential, institutional, general
merchandise). The use classifications then organize land uses and activities
into specific principal uses based on common functional, product, or physical
characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, the type of
customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, and site
conditions.



      (2)   Listed principal uses. The table below lists the allowed
types of principal uses. If a specific principal use is allowed “by
right” in a district, the column underneath the district is marked with
either an “X” or a number indexed to any applicable special conditions to
the specific principal use found in the footnote to the table below or in §
151.024. If the principal use is not allowed in a district, the column is
left blank.  If there is a reference contained in a column entitled
“CUP”, a conditional use permit is required for the principal use per the
procedures outlined in § 151.310.



      (3)   Unlisted uses. The listing of permitted principal uses
in a zoning district is not meant to be all-inclusive, nor is the list of
uses that are not permitted intended to be all-inclusive. Uses not
specifically listed shall be reviewed by the Town Planner to determine if the
proposed use is similar in nature and character to others listed in the
zoning district. The North American Industry Classification System manual, as
amended, shall serve as a general guideline in making this determination.
Based on the determination, the proposed use shall be classified in the same
manner as those similar uses listed in terms of it being permitted “by
right” or via a conditional use permit (CUP). The Town Planner may also
determine that other uses are not permitted on the basis that they are not
similar in nature or character to the other uses listed in the zoning
district. Determinations by the Town Planner may be appealed to the Board of
Zoning Appeals (BZA) in accordance with § 151.308.



   (B)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from the regulations of
§ 151.021, as they are regulated by other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.



      (1)   Accessory uses.



      (2)   Temporary uses.



Click here to view the table in PDF



 




 

Conventional Zoning Districts

 

Traditional Zoning Districts




Use Classifications/ Principal Uses

 

FAR

 

R-L

 

R-L1

 

R-25

 

R-1

 

R-1A

 

R-2

 

R- 2A

 

R-3

 

R-3A

 

R-4

 

R-TH

 

T

 

MPO

 

SCC

 

GC

 

RI

 

GI

 

CB

 

NC

 

MU

 

TN





Detached Residential Dwellings


Single family detached
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(30)


Mobile home park
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Attached Residential Dwellings


Two family (duplex)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (31)
 
CUP (31)
 
CUP (31)
 
(31)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (31)
 
 
 
(31)
 
CUP (31)


Multiple family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(31)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (31)
 
 
 
(31)
 
CUP (31)


Townhouses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (31)
 
(31)
 
(31)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (31)
 
 
 
(31)
 
CUP (31)


Other Housing


Bed & breakfast homestays
 
CUP (8)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (8)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (8)
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (8)
 
 
 
CUP (8)
 
CUP (8)


Boarding house or rooming house
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 


Hotel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 


Accessory residential (in conjunction with a principal residential use)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (29)
 
CUP (29)
 
CUP (29)
 
CUP (29)


Accessory residential (above a nonresidential use)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(21)
 
 
 
(21)
 
 


Short-term rental
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)
 
(13)


Institutional


Adult care center
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
CUP


Assisted living facility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Cemetery- mausoleum
 
CUP (6)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


College, junior college or university (excluding businesses operating as
profit-making enterprises)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
CUP
 
 


Community center
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP


Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Country club and related golf, tennis or swimming facilities
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP


Day care center (children only)
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
CUP


Family day care home (children only)
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X


Funeral homes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Golf courses
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP


Health clinic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Heliports or other aeronautical devices in relation to a hospital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Hospital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Independent Living Senior Housing Complex
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(18)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Lodge, club
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 


Major mail processing center
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Nursing home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Observation rehabilitation center
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
(18)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Park, playground or playfield
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Place of public assembly (including places of worship)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
CUP (22)
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
CUP (22)


Police or fire station
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Post office (excluding major processing center)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Public, parochial & private non-profit museum, art gallery, library or
observatory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Schools, public or private, grades K-12
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Stables
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Stadium, sports arena, auditorium or bandstand not associated with a school
or church
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Utility administrative office
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Public Utilities


Alleys
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )


Communications installations or exchanges
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Electric or gas substations
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Electric transmission lines or major fuel transmission lines
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Electric, communication or telephone dist. lines, poles, transformers or
splice boxes
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)


Gas or electric production or treatment facility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Radio or television transmission station
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Railroad yard or other equipment marshaling & storage area
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Railroad, bus or transit terminals
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
CUP
 
 


Rights-of-way to all modes of transportation
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Service drives
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )
 
(17 )


Sewer disposal treatment plant
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Small landscaped, scenically significant open areas or natural reserves
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Utility corporation or truck yards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Water production or treatment facility
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Water, storm drainage, sewer or gas distribution lines with incidental
appurtenances
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)
 
(2)


Wireless communication facilities
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )
 
CUP (24 )
 
CUP (24 )
 
CUP (24 )
 
CUP (24 )
 
CUP (24 )
 
CUP (24 )
 
CUP (24 )
 
CUP (24 )
 
CUP (10 ) (24 )


Lumber, Hardware, Building Materials


Agricultural equipment, sales or service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Building materials
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (7)
 
CUP (7)
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Electrical supplies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Greenhouse or nursery products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
CUP
 
 


Hardware
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Heating or plumbing equipment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Home improvement center
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Lawnmower sales or service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP
 
 
 
CUP
 
 


Lumber yard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Paint, glass or wallpaper
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Welding supplies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


General Merchandise


Department store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Variety store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Foods, Drugs, Beverages


Retail bakery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (16 )
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Candy, confectionery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Convenience store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Delicatessen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Drugs or pharmaceuticals
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Farmers market
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )
 
CUP (32 )


Fruit or vegetable store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Package liquor store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 


Supermarket
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Auto Dealers & Service Stations


Auto dealership
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (26 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Auto parts (new)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Auto parts (used)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Auto rental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Boat, marine sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Car wash not associated with a service station or convenience store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Mobile home/prefabricat ed home sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Motorcycle sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (9)
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Moving equipment rental store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Service station
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 


Tire sales and servicing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Heavy equipment sales & rental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Apparel & Accessories


Apparel & accessories store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Children’s shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Shoe store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Furniture & home furnishings


Appliances
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Draperies and upholstery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Floor coverings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Furniture
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Interior decorating shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Piano & musical instruments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Radio or TV sales, phonographs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Eating & Drinking Places


Dairy bars, ice cream parlor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
(14 )
 
(14 )
 
(14 )
 
 


Drive-in restaurants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 


Microbrewery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Restaurants, cafes, cafeterias
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (16 )
 
X
 
X
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
(14 )
 
(14 )
 
(14 )
 
 


Taverns, bars
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Tea room
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (16 )
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Art, Antiques, Jewelry


Antique store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
(12 )
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Art gallery or studio
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
(12 )
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Arts & crafts store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
(12 )
 
X
 
 


Flowershop, florist
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
(12 )
 
X
 
 


Gift shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
(12 )
 
X
 
 


Glasses & china
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
(12 )
 
X
 
 


Jewelry, watches
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
(12 )
 
X
 
 


Optical goods
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
(12 )
 
X
 
 


General Retail


Books and periodicals
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (16 )
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Greeting cards and stationary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Salvage clothing, thrift store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Hobby, toys, pets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Aquariums, birds, pet store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Camera shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Hobby shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Sporting goods, bicycles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Toys
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Finance, Insurance, Real Estate


Banks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
(15 )
 
X
 
 


Insurance carrier
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Real estate agent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Savings & loan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Other finance, insurance or real estate services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Personal Services


Barber shop [4]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Beauty shop [4]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Dry cleaning pick-up station
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Laundry, dry cleaning equipment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Photography retail store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Pipe & tobacco shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Self-service laundry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Shoe repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Tailoring or dressmaking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Professional Services


Accountants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Animal hospital and clinic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (25 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Architects, designers and contractors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Attorneys
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Dentists
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Engineers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Hospital services or supplies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Medical clinic - out patient
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )


Optometrists
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Physicians
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Planners
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Veterinarians - animal clinic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Executive, management or administrative services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (11 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP (11 )


Recreation & Entertainment


Billiard parlor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Bowling alley
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 


Electronic amusement devices, arcade
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
X
 
 


Golf driving range
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Health spa
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (16 )
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Indoor shooting range
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Miniature golf
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Motion picture theater
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Roller skating rink
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Business Services


Advertising services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Animal boarding facility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Central laundry or dry clean services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Clerical services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Consulting service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Custom printing (excluding the printing of books other than small pamphlets
or small reports)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Data processing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Detective or protective
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Disinfecting or exterminating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 


Duplicating, mailing or stenographic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Employment agencies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Equipment rental/leasing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 


Freight handling facility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Metal or wood fencing, ornamental grill work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Monument sales
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Photofinishing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Research & development services (private)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Taxidermy services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (27 )
 
(27 )
 
(27 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Truck terminal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Warehousing & storage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Window cleaning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 


Repair Services


Armature rewinding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Auto body repair & paint shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (1)
 
CUP(1 )
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Auto repair, garage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Electrical repair, small appliances
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Furniture & large household appliance repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (5)
 
CUP (5)
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Radio, computer & TV repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Re-upholstery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
CUP
 
 
 
CUP
 
 


Watch, cloth & jewelry repair
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Welding shop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Educational Services


Art & music school
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Barber & beauty school
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Business & steno school
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Driving school
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Vocational school
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Other special training & schooling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


Contract Construction Services


Building contractor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (5)
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Carpentering & wood flooring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (5)
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Electrical construction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Masonry, stonework, tile setting, plastering & concrete
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (5)
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Plumbing, heating & decorating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (5)
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Roofing & sheet metal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (5)
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Water well drilling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (5)
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Other general construction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (5)
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Wholesale Trade


Drug products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Electrical goods
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Gravel & gravel products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Groceries & related products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Hardware, plumbing & cooling equipment & supplies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Metals
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Paper & paper products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Apparel & finishing products made from fabrics and similar materials (not to
include dying or bleaching)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Metal finishing limited polishing operations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Professional, scientific & controlling instruments manufacturing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Small articles manufacturing such as pens, pencils, plaques & trophies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Other light manufacturing uses which are similar in character & operation to
the above listed uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Industrial. Manufacturing, assembly, processing, storage or distribution of:


Book binding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Brewery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Chemicals, drugs & abrasive products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Electronic components, communications, engineering, scientific & photographic
equipment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Electrical machinery & equipment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Fabricated metal products and machinery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Food & beverage products (except animal slaughter, stockyard & rendering)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Furniture & fixtures
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Lumber & wood products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Leather products (not including tanning)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Platedware, jewelry, silverware, toys, sporting goods, musical instruments,
office & art supplies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Paperboard containers & boxes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Printing & publishing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Rubber & plastic products (except rubber manufacture)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Sign manufacturer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Stone, clay, glass & related mineral products, mortar, plaster, paving
materials
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Textile & apparel products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Tobacco products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Miscellaneous Services


Sexually oriented business
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP (23 )
 
CUP (23 )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Undeveloped and Vacant


Agriculture and forestry
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Erosion & sedimentation control measures, facilities & districts
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Flood proofing & flood hazard reduction structures
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Open water, including ponds, lakes, reservoirs, streams & water ways (all man
made)
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
CUP


Yard areas, greenbelt, open spaces, wildlife habitat refuge, hiking, nature &
bike trails & related uses
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


X - Permitted by right  CUP - Conditional use permit is required for the
principal use per the procedures outlined in § 151.310




 



FOOTNOTES AND CONDITIONS:



   1   This use is limited to:



      (a)   An accessory use related to an automobile dealership; or



      (b)   In the GC District, a stand-alone auto body repair and
paint shops may be permitted as a conditional use with additional special
conditions and specific standards established in § 151.024.



   2   But not including electric transmission lines and major fuel
transmission lines.



   3   In the GI District, no exterior storage, display, or activity,
except for customer parking and signage, is allowed.



   4   Beauty or barber shops as home occupations are only permitted in
the areas as regulated by § 151.025(D) and if a conditional use permit (CUP)
is approved for the location.



   5   All merchandise and equipment shall be stored or displayed
within a completely enclosed building unless specifically authorized by §
151.025.



   6   Not in conjunction with a place of worship.



   7   All building materials must be stored in an enclosed structure
or in a screened pursuant to § 151.025.



   8   Bed and breakfast homestay uses are not considered customary
home occupations as regulated by § 151.025; however, special conditions and
specific standards are still applicable to this use as established in §
151.024.



   9   All merchandise and motorcycle equipment shall either be
displayed within a completely enclosed building or outdoors pursuant to §
151.025. No test-driving of motorcycles shall be permitted under any
circumstances.



   10   Within residential zone districts, support structures and
associated appurtenances shall be restricted to municipal owned and/or leased
properties, public/private utility owned properties, properties with a
primary use that is institutional, or properties with a primary use as a
landfill. Within institutional use or landfill use properties, support
structures and associated appurtenances shall be restricted to
self-supporting stealth design or camouflaged alternative designs that are
mounted on or concealed within the principal structure subject to all
requirements as provided in § 151.024(G). Within residential zone districts,
attached antenna arrays may be permitted on previously approved institutional
structures, municipal owned structures, public/private utility owned towers,
and existing support structures, subject to all requirements as provided in
§ 151.024(G).  Antennas on existing towers and structures may be approved
administratively as provided in § 151.024(G)(6).



   11   Within the TN or R-1 Zoning Districts, this use is only
appropriate within Special Area 1 of the Downtown Collierville Small Area
Plan. Although new contextual construction is possible, the primary purposing
of allowing limited nonresidential uses in residential areas is to promote
the adaptive reuse of existing historic structures and to buffer adjacent
residential neighborhoods from more intensive nonresidential areas.



   12   No outdoor display except as expressly permitted pursuant to §
151.025.



   13   The transient occupancy of short-term rentals, as those terms
are defined in § 151.003, are prohibited in each Zoning District noted
above, including FAR, R-L, R-L1, R-25, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-TH,
T, MPO, SCC, GC, RI, GI, CB, NC, MU, and TN.



   14   No drive-through permitted.



   15   Limited to ATM facilities located within a primary structure.



   16   In the MPO District, no exterior activity is allowed and
accessory uses cannot be a free-standing building.



   17   Alleys and service drives shall be approved through the
appropriate site plan or subdivision plat process prior to construction.



   18   This use is only permitted for lots within an approved planned
development.



   19   Reserved.



   20   Reserved.



   21   (a)   Mixed use required.  Residential uses shall be
permitted only when part of a mixed use development (residential and
permitted non-residential uses are located within the same structure).



      (b)   Location of dwelling units.  Dwelling units shall be
limited to the floor (or floors) above the ground floor.  The ground floor,
for the purposes hereof, shall mean the first floor or floor level of any
structure above or on the same plane as the surface of the sidewalk and shall
exclude basements or cellars, the floors of which are below the plane of the
surface of the sidewalk.  This standard is intended to reserve storefront
space at the ground floor for permitted commercial and public/institutional
uses.



   22   Places of public assembly (including places of worship) in
residential zoning districts also have additional special conditions and
specific standards established in § 151.024.



   23   Sexually oriented businesses also have additional special
conditions and specific standards established in § 151.024.



   24   Wireless communication facilities also have additional special
conditions and specific standards established in § 151.024.



   25   Animal hospitals and clinics in MPO Zone Districts also have
additional special conditions and specific standards established in §
151.024.



   26   Auto dealerships also have additional special conditions and
specific standards established in § 151.024.



   27   Taxidermy services in GC: General Commercial Districts also
have additional special conditions and specific standards established in §
151.024.



   28   Reserved.



   29   Accessory residential uses (in conjunction with a principal
residential use) also have additional special conditions and specific
standards established in § 151.024.



   30   Single family design standards, reviewed administratively by
the Development Department, are applicable in the TN Zoning District per §
151.210.



   31   For residential uses, site plan review per § 151.311 is
required and design review shall be in accordance with the HDC or DRC Design
Guidelines, as applicable.



   32   Farmers markets have additional special conditions and specific
standards established in § 151.024.



(`00 Code, § 11-302)  (Ord. 97-33, passed 10-13-97; Am. Ord. passed 5- -02;
Am. Ord. 2002-11, passed 7-2-02; Am. Ord. 2003-15, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord.
2005-12, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. 2006-12, passed 7-10-06; Am. Ord. 2008-20,
passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. 2009-05, passed
6-22-09; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord. 2011-06, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord.
2013-07, passed 7-8-13; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16 ; Am. Ord. 2017-10,
passed 7-10-17 ; Am. Ord. 2018-02, passed 8-14-18)



§ 151.022  PROVISIONS FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   (A)   Incorporation of Map. The boundaries of districts established
by this chapter are shown on the Official Zoning Map which is incorporated
into the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Map in its entirety,
including all amendments, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully
set forth and described herein.



   (B)   Identification and alteration of the Official Zoning Map. 



      (1)   The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the
signature of the Mayor, attested by the Town Clerk and bearing the seal of
the Town under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the
Official Zoning Map referred to in § 151.023 of the Code of Collierville,
Tennessee.”.



      (2)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and Tenn. Code Ann. § 13-7-204, changes are made in district boundaries or
other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be
entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been
approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.  A statement shall be included,
“By official action of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, the following
change(s) was made in the Official Zoning Map; (brief description of nature
of change),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the
Town Clerk.



      (3)   No amendment to this chapter which involves matter
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall become effective until after such
change and entry has been made on the Map.



      (4)   No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official
Zoning Map or matters shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures
set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any
person shall be considered a violation of this chapter.



      (5)   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the
Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the
Official Zoning Map which shall be located in the office of the Building
Official shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land
and water areas, buildings and other structures in the Town.



   (C)   Replacement of Official Zoning Map. 



      (1)   In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes
damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or
number of changes and additions, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may by
resolution adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior
Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting and
other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such
corrections shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning
Map or any subsequent amendment thereof.  The new Official Zoning Map shall
be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the Town Clerk and
bearing the seal of the Town under the following words: “This is to certify
that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map
adopted                                     as part of
Ordinance Number         of the Town of Collierville, Tennessee.”



      (2)   Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or
has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof
remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining
to its adoption or amendment.



(`00 Code, § 11-303)



§ 151.023  RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following shall apply:



   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center
lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines;



   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;



   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits
shall be construed as following such city limits;



   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks;



   (E)   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be
construed to follow such shore lines and in the event of change in the shore
line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries
indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers,
canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
center lines;



   (F)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in divisions (A)  through (E) above shall be so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be
determined by the scale of map;



   (G)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by divisions (A) through (F) above, the Board of
Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries;



   (H)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in
single ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the Board of Appeals
may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not
to exceed 500 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the
lot.



(`00 Code, § 11-304)



§ 151.024  SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Conditional use permit criteria. Conditional use permits shall
be considered based on the following criteria and finding of fact as to
whether the proposed use:



      (1)   Conforms to all applicable provisions of the zoning
district in which it is to be located, unless modified as part of the
conditional use application per § 151.310.



      (2)   Conforms to the Footnotes of § 151.021 and the Specific
Provisions for Conditional Uses as set forth in § 151.024.



      (3)   Is consistent with the overall character of existing
development in the immediate vicinity of the subject property, and will not
materially adversely affect other property in the area in which it is located.



      (4)   Is generally consistent with the policies of the
Collierville Land Use Plan for the parcel or surrounding neighborhood,
including any applicable small area plans;



      (5)    Will not adversely affect a known archaeological,
environmental, historical or cultural resource; and



      (6)   Will be adequately served by public facilities and
services intended to serve the subject property, including but not limited to
roadways, transit service, parks and recreational facilities, police and fire
protection, hospitals and medical services, schools, storm water drainage
systems, water supplies, and wastewater and refuse disposal.



   (B)   Special conditions and specific standards for auto body repair
and paint shop uses.  Stand-alone auto body repair uses in GC Districts are
subject to the following supplemental provisions:



      (1)   With the exception of the screened storage of vehicles,
activities and the storage or materials and goods shall take place within an
enclosed structure;



      (2)   The use shall not generate noise, odors, dust, or
vibrations that can be detected from the closest public right-of-way or
residential property;



      (3)   Vehicle service bays and areas used for the outdoor
storage or vehicles in need of repair shall be screened from view from:



         (a)   Public streets by a site design that orients the
bays away from the area to be screened; and



         (b)   Adjacent properties and public streets through an
eight foot high masonry screen wall or wooden fence shall be constructed to
screen the vehicle bays/outdoor storage area from the area to be screened. 
The wall and landscaping shall be designed as follows:



            1.   The wall or fence shall have columns
approximately 50 feet on-center or less.



            2.   Within eight feet of the exterior of the
screen wall or fence the following shall be provided:



               a.   A single row evergreen trees shall be
provided and spaced at a distance to create a completely opaque screen upon
maturity.



               b.   Evergreen or deciduous shrubs with a
height of at least 30 inches at installation shall be planted no farther than
five feet on-center.



         (c)   Exiting vegetation may be used to meet the intent
of this provision if the applicant can demonstrate a comparable level of
opacity.



   (C)   Reserved.



   (D)   Reserved.



   (E)   Reserved.



   (F)   Special conditions and specific standards for Places of Public
Assembly (including places of worship) in residential zoning districts. Uses,
structures, and sites for Places of Public Assembly (including places of
worship) within residential districts shall be:



      (1)   Prohibited on residentially-zoned lots of less than two
acres; however, no minimum lot size shall apply where the use is part of a
Planned Unit Development where the use was specifically approved on the
approved outline plan, or other regulating document.



      (2)   Designed to respect residential character by reflecting
similar design elements of the surrounding residential uses including:



         (a)   Height of structures, excluding steeples and other
exempt structures;



         (b)   Rooflines;



         (c)   Building materials;



         (d)   Setbacks;



         (e)   Lighting;



         (f)   Noise; and



         (g)   Thirty percent green space for properties located
outside of the Historic District and inside the Historic District, the
minimum green space shall be determined by the HDC on the context of the site
and neighborhood.



      (3)   Located on the parcel or site which fronts a
thoroughfare or collector roadway; and



      (4)   Any subsequent principal or accessory use associated
with an existing Place of Public Assembly (including places of worship) that
would increase the intensity of the facility shall also be required to obtain
a conditional use permit. For the purposes of this section, increases in
intensity shall be measured as increases in vehicular trips generated and/or
increases in impervious surface. 



   (G)   Special conditions and specific standards for wireless
communications facilities.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of this division is to establish
guidelines for the siting, design and operation of wireless communications
facilities (WCF).  Due to the unique characteristics or potential impacts of
these facilities on surrounding property, WCF require individual
consideration of their design, appearance, and/or configuration at the
particular location proposed.  Such individual consideration may also call
for the imposition of individualized conditions in order to ensure that the
facility is appropriate at a particular location.



      (2)   Goals.  The goals of this division are to:



         (a)   Establish clear and objective standards for the
placement, design, and continuing maintenance of WCF;



         (b)   Promote the availability of universal wireless
communications to all town residents, businesses, and visitors;



         (c)    Minimize the adverse visual, aesthetic and
structural safety impacts of WCF on the community;



         (d)   Encourage the design of WCF to be as aesthetically
and architecturally compatible as possible with the surrounding natural and
built environments;



         (e)   Encourage co-location of WCF on existing support
structures to minimize the number of new facilities required;



         (f)   Encourage users of antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, on existing structures, such as lighting towers, power
transmission line towers, water towers, or buildings, and encourage users of
towers to locate them, to the extent possible, in nonresidential areas where
the adverse impact on the community is reduced;



         (g)   When it is determined by substantial data that no
alternate location of a tower is possible other than in a residential area,
require that an applicant employ alternate tower (sometimes referred to as
“stealth design”) designs or locations, such as modified clock towers,
church spires, flag poles or building modifications;



         (h)   Comply with applicable federal and state rules and
regulations as to accommodate the provision of a broad range of wireless
communications in a safe, effective, and efficient manner; and



         (i)   Ensure that regulations do not constitute a
barrier to entry and apply to wireless communications providers on a
competitively neutral basis.



      (3)   Site selection policies.  In order to accomplish the
above goals and to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare,
the town will use the following order of preference in siting wireless
communications antennas and towers:



         (a)   Within any district, sites should be located in
the following order of preference:



            1.   Co-location of antennas on, or replacement
of, existing towers and, in the process, adding additional co-locaters to the
tower.



            2.   On existing structures such as buildings,
power transmission line towers, communications towers, water towers, and
athletic or street light standards.



            3.   Using stealth designs involving mounting
antennas within existing buildings or structures in the form of bell towers,
clock towers, or other architectural modification of buildings provided that
such installation preserves the character and integrity of those structures,
or by mounting antennas on artificial trees.



            4.   In locations where the existing topography,
vegetation, buildings, or other structures provide the greatest amount of
screening.



         (b)   Certain types of WCF are more appropriate in some
districts than others.  The provisions contained in §§ 151.021 and
151.024(G) provide additional information concerning the suitability of
districts to accommodate the various types of WCF.  In addition to the Uses
Permitted Table (§ 151.021), the ordinance codified herein has established a
set of uniform standards for visual impact applicable to the various types of
facilities and districts.



         (c)   The policies balance WCF provider and town citizen
concerns and are based on the impacts of the different types of wireless
communications in relation to the character of land uses found in the town.



      (4)   General provisions. 



         (a)   New towers and antennas.  New towers or antennas
shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in division (b).



         (b)   Preexisting towers or antennas.  Preexisting
towers and antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
section, other than the requirements of §§ 151.024(G)(5)(f), 
151.024(G)(5)(g), and 151.024(G)(10).



      (5)   General requirements.



         (a)   Principal or accessory use.  For purposes of
determining compliance with area requirements, antennas and towers may be
considered either principal or accessory uses.  An existing use or an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of
antennas or towers on such lot.  For purposes of determining whether the
installation of a tower or antenna complies with district regulations, the
dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or
towers may be located on leased area within such lots. Towers that are
constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of
a non-conforming use or structure.



         (b)   Inventory of existing sites.  An applicant for a
tower and/or an antenna shall provide an inventory of its existing towers,
antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas that are within the town,
and towers outside of the town which serve areas within the town, as well as
within the coverage area of the proposed tower or antenna, whether within the
town or outside its jurisdiction, including specific information about the
design, height, and location of each tower. The Planning Division may share
this information, provided that the Planning Division is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that these sites are
available or suitable for tower or antenna construction.



         (c)   Prohibited support structures.  Prohibited
support structures include guyed, lattice, crows nest and other similar more
intrusive structures. Co-location of new WCF antennas on existing lattice
tower support structures, or guyed tower support structures is allowed.



         (d)   Aesthetics.  Towers and antennas shall meet the
following requirements:



            1.   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized
steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), be painted a neutral color to reduce visual
obtrusiveness.



            2.   The design of the buildings and related
structures shall use colors, landscaping, materials, screening, and textures
that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.



            3.   If an antenna is installed on a structure
other than a tower, then the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment shall be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the
antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.



         (e)   Lighting.  Towers shall not be artificially
lighted unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority.  If
lighting is required, then the lighting alternatives and design chosen shall
cause the least disturbance to surrounding views.



         (f)   Federal or state requirements.  Towers and
antennas shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA,
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and any other agency of the
federal or state government with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas.  If those standards and regulations are changed, then the owners
of the towers and antennas shall bring them into compliance within the time
mandated by the controlling federal or state agency.  Failure to bring
towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner’s expense.



         (g)   Building codes and safety standards.  To ensure
the structural integrity of towers and antennas, owners shall ensure that
they are maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable
state and/or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers and
antennas that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as may
be revised.  If, upon inspection, the tower or antenna fails to comply with
such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then, upon notice being given, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such
tower or antenna into compliance.  Failure to do so shall constitute grounds
for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.



         (h)   Maintenance.



            1.   Facilities must be maintained.  Maintenance
shall include, but not be limited to, painting, assurance of structural
integrity of towers, antennas, facility perimeter fencing and care of
landscaping and any planted vegetative screening.



            2.   Failure to maintain facility will result in
punitive action, which may include fines, removal, and potential demolition.



         (i)   Measurement.  For purposes of measurement, tower
and antenna setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied
to facilities located in the town, irrespective of municipal, county, and
state jurisdictional boundaries.



         (j)   Franchises.  Owners or operators of towers and
antennas shall certify that all franchises required by law for constructing
or operating a WCF in the town have been obtained and shall file a copy of
all required franchises with the town.



         (k)   Public notice.  For purposes of this section, any
conditional use request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively
approved use or conditional use shall require public notice to all property
owners of properties that are located within 1,000 feet of the subject
property and to any neighborhood organization registered with the town, in
addition to any notice otherwise required by the Zoning Ordinance.  The
subject property shall include the dimensions of the entire lot, even though
an antenna or tower may be located on a smaller leased area within such lot.



         (l)   Independent consultants.  Upon submission of an
application for a WCF, the Town Planner may retain independent consultants
whose services shall be paid for by the applicant.  These consultants shall
be qualified professionals in telecommunications engineering, structural
engineering, monitoring of electromagnetic fields and such other fields as
determined by the Town Planner.  The consultant(s) shall work at the Town
Planner’s direction and shall provide the Town Planner such reports and
assistance, as the Town Planner deems necessary to review an application.



         (m)   Signs.  Signs on towers or antennas shall be
prohibited, except for those required by regulatory agencies.



         (n)   Buildings and support equipment.  Buildings and
support equipment associated with towers or antennas shall comply with the
requirements of § 151.024(G)(8), buildings, cabinets, or equipment storage
associated with towers.



         (o)   Towers in the Historic District (H-1) or on
National Register Properties.  New towers shall not be permitted within the
Historic District (H-1) or on National Register Properties.  However,
concealed WCF devices meeting the conditions of § 151.024(G)(6),
administratively approved uses, may be permitted within the Historic District
(H-1) or on National Register Properties.



      (6)   Administratively approved uses.



         (a)   The following provisions shall govern the issuance
of administrative approvals for towers and antennas:



            1.   The Development Director may administratively
approve the uses listed in this division.



            2.   Applicants for administrative approval shall
apply to the Development Department by providing the information as may be
required in accordance with § 151.024(G)(7)(i), application requirements.



            3.   The Development Department shall review the
application for administrative approval and determine if the proposed use
complies with § 151.024(G)(5), general requirements; § 151.024(G)(6),
administratively approved uses; § 151.024(G)(8), buildings, cabinets, or
equipment storage; and § 151.024(G)(9), removal of abandoned towers and
antennas.



            4.   The Development Department shall respond
within 30 days after receiving applications by either approving, approving
with conditions, or disapproving the application.



            5.   In order to encourage the use of monopoles,
the Development Department may permit the reconstruction of an existing guyed
or lattice tower to monopole construction.



            6.   If an administrative approval is disapproved,
then the applicant may file an application for an appeal to the Planning
Commission for a recommendation, to be followed by a decision by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.



         (b)   The following uses may be approved by the
Development Department after conducting an administrative review:



            1.   Antennas on existing structures.  An antenna
not attached to a tower may be approved by the Development Department as:



               a.   An antenna attached to or located
within any commercial, industrial, institutional, office, or attached
residential structure of eight or more dwelling units, provided that the
antenna extends no more than 30 feet above the highest point of the
structure, it complies with applicable FAA and FCC regulations, it preserves
the character and integrity of the existing structure, and it complies with
applicable building codes.  If not a concealed device, documentation shall
be provided justifying why the antenna cannot be concealed.



               b.   An antenna incorporated within an
existing power transmission line tower provided that the antenna extends no
more than 20 feet above the highest point of the existing power transmission
line tower structure.



               c.   An antenna located on an existing light
standard, such as athletic field lighting, provided:



                  i.   Antennas, including any mounting
device, shall extend no more than 15 feet above the existing height of the
structure.



                  ii.   Antennas shall be flush-mounted
or otherwise not exceed the existing diameter of the structure at the
mounting point for the antennas.  No mounted arm antennas are permitted.



                  iii.   Antennas shall be painted to
match the color of the structure.



                  iv.   No more than ten antenna(s)
shall be located on lighting structures within any single athletic field
facility.



            2.   Antennas on existing structures within public
road rights-of-way.  The following standards are specific to the
installation of WCF on street lights in public collector or arterial road
rights-of-way, excluding traffic signal lights, and power transmission line
tower structures:



               a.   Installation shall not jeopardize the
physical integrity of existing structures.



               b.   Installation is prohibited in
rights-of-way designated as a local street(s) or other types of right of way
other than designated collector or arterial road rights-of-way.



               c.   Antennas shall be flush-mounted or
otherwise not exceed the existing diameter of the structure at the mounting
point for the antennas.  No mounted arm antennas are permitted.



               d.   Antennas mounted on a structure shall
not extend beyond the permitted height of the underlying zoning district.



               e.   Antennas, including any mounting
devices, shall extend no more than ten feet above the existing height of the
structure.



               f.   Antennas shall be painted to match the
color of the structure.



               g.   Replacement of the existing structure
may be authorized, provided that such replacement is the same diameter as the
original structure, that the replacement structure is intended to fully
contain antennas and associated equipment, and that the height of the
replacement structure is no greater than ten additional feet in height than
the original structure.



               h.   Equipment cabinets shall be placed
underground, unless it can be demonstrated that there is a physical
obstruction to such placement.  Physical obstructions include, but are not
limited to, existing underground utilities, and too narrow right-of-way.  In
those instances, where a physical obstruction is demonstrated by the
applicant to exist, the town may allow above-ground mounting of equipment to
the structure, however, no at-grade equipment cabinet or equipment in the
public road right-of-way, or on private property abutting the structure is
permitted.  The mounting of equipment to the structures shall conform to the
following:



                  i.   The smallest antennas, equipment,
and equipment cabinets to satisfy engineering requirements and service
objectives shall be utilized.



                  ii.    All cabling, mounting hardware,
and equipment shall be painted to match the color of the structure.



            3.   Antennas on existing towers.  Antennas to be
attached to an existing tower may be approved by the Development Department
and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and
clustering of towers, co-location of antennas by more than one carrier on
existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers,
provided such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with the
following:



               a.   A tower that is modified or
reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of additional antennas shall be
of the same tower type as the existing tower, unless the Development
Department permits reconstruction as a monopole, or otherwise determines that
a different tower type would enhance collocation possibilities.



               b.   A tower that is being rebuilt to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna may be moved within 50
feet of its existing location, or elsewhere on the site, in the reasonable
discretion of the Development Department.  After the tower is rebuilt to
accommodate collocation, only one tower may remain on the site.  The
relocation of a tower shall in no way be deemed to cause a violation of §
151.024(G)(7)(f).



            4.   Cable micro-cell network.  The installation
of a cable micro-cell network through the use of multiple low powered
transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as
conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not
require the use of towers.



      (7)   Towers subject to conditional use permit review.



         (a)   General.  The following provisions shall govern
the approval of conditional use permits for towers or antennas approved by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen:



            1.   Except for WCF approved administratively in
accordance with § 151.024(G)(6), all other towers or antennas shall obtain
conditional use permit approval.



            2.   Applications for conditional use permit
approval under this division shall be subject to the procedures and
requirements of § 151.310, Conditional Use Permits, except as modified in
this section.



            3.   In granting conditional use permit approval,
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may impose conditions necessary to minimize
adverse effects of proposed towers or antennas on adjoining properties.



            4.   Submitted information of an engineering
nature, whether civil, electrical, or mechanical, shall be certified by a
licensed professional engineer under the guidelines of the State of Tennessee
for such certifications.



            5.   Pre-application conference required.  Before
submitting an application for conditional use permit approval, the applicant
shall schedule a pre-application conference with the Town Planner or designee
to discuss the procedures and standards required for approval in accordance
with this section.



            6.   Balloon test.



               a.   The Town Planner may require the
applicant to fly a four-foot diameter brightly colored balloon at the
location and maximum elevation of any proposed tower.  If a balloon test is
required, the town shall advertise the date, time, and location of this
balloon test at least 15 days in advance of the test in a newspaper with a
general circulation in the town.  The Town Planner shall also inform the
Planning Commission, Design Review Commission, and Board of Mayor and
Aldermen, in writing, of the date, time and location, in advance of the test.



               b.   The balloon shall be flown for at least
eight consecutive daylight hours on two days.  If visibility and weather
conditions are inadequate for observers to be able to clearly see the balloon
test, further tests may be required by the Town Planner.



         (b)   Factors considered in granting conditional use
permit approval for towers.  The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall consider
the following factors in approving applications for towers and antennas and
may attach conditions consistent with these factors:



            1.   Tower or antenna height;



            2.   Proximity of the tower or antenna to
residential structures and residential district boundaries;



            3.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby
properties;



            4.   Surrounding topography;



            5.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;



            6.   Tower or antenna design, with particular
reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;



            7.   Proposed ingress and egress;



            8.   The number of co-location commitments for the
proposed tower; and



            9.   Availability of suitable existing towers,
other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the construction
of new towers or structures.



         (c)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other
structures, or alternative technology.  No new tower shall be permitted
unless the applicant demonstrates, to the reasonable satisfaction of the
town, that no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant’s
proposed antenna.  An applicant shall submit information requested by the
town related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other
structures, or alternative technology.  Evidence, signed and sealed by
appropriate licensed professionals, shall be submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower, structure, or alternative technology can accommodate the
proposed antenna shall include at least one of the following:



            1.   No existing tower or structure is located
within the geographic area that meets the applicant’s engineering
requirements;



            2.   Existing towers or structures are of
insufficient height to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements, or
they have insufficient structural strength to support the applicant’s
proposed antenna and related equipment;



            3.   The applicant’s proposed antenna would
cause significant electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or
structures would cause significant interference with the applicant’s
proposed antenna;



            4.   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions
required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure, or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing, are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable;



            5.   The applicant demonstrates that there are
other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable;
or



            6.   The applicant demonstrates that an
alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures
is unsuitable.  Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or
antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.



         (d)   Setbacks.  Towers shall be located so that there
is sufficient radius of land around the tower so that its collapse will be
contained on the property where located.  A professional engineer licensed
under the guidelines of the State of Tennessee shall sign and certify
technical documentation concerning the tower fall radius.  Accessory
buildings shall satisfy minimum setback requirements of the applicable base
district.



         (e)   Maximum tower height by zoning district.  The
following maximum height requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas,
except alternate design (“stealth design”) towers when the latter towers
are installed within or on a building or structure (See Footnote 1).



 


MAXIMUM TOWER HEIGHT BY ZONING DISTRICT




Zoning District Category

 

Maximum Tower Height [1] [4]



All residential districts [2] [3]
 

100 feet



All commercial and industrial districts
 

150 feet



Notes:


[1]   Maximum height shall be measured from finished grade of base to
highest point of the tower, including antenna and/or lightning rod, and shall
not exceed FAA regulations; alternate design (“stealth design”)
facilities are excluded from these height regulations when sited within an
existing building or structure and do not increase the height of the
applicable building or structure by more than 20 feet.


[2]   Includes FAR: Forest-Agricultural Districts

[3]   Towers may be permitted in some residential districts. See §
151.021 and this section for additional regulations.

[4]   Ancillary appurtenances, such as lightning rods, shall not be
calculated towards the maximum tower height if six feet tall or less.









         (f)   Separation.  The following separation
requirements shall apply to towers for which a conditional use permit is
required:



            1.   Tower separation shall be measured from the
base of the tower to the lot line of off-site uses or designated areas as
specified in the table below (“Separation Distances Between Towers And
Off-Site Uses”).  Separation requirements shall comply with the minimum
standards established in the table below (“Separation Distances Between
Towers And Off-Site Uses”).



 


Separation Distances Between Towers and Off-site Uses




Off-Site/Designated Area

 

Separation Distance



Detached residential dwelling units, or vacant and zoned or otherwise
approved for detached residential dwelling units [2]
 
250 feet or 300 percent of Tower height, whichever is greater [1]


Existing attached residential units
 
250 feet or 200 percent of Tower height, whichever is greater [1]


Nonresidentially-zoned land or nonresidential uses
 
None; only setbacks apply (per underlying zoning district requirements)


Notes:

[1]   Separation distance shall be measured by drawing or following a
straight line between the base of the proposed tower and the closest property
line of an off-site use.

[2]   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen can reduce the minimum setback if
the applicant demonstrates that the adjacent residentially-zoned property has
limited or no development potential.  Examples include, but are not limited
to, restrictive easements, environmental constraints, or ownership.



 



            2.   Separation distances between towers shall be
measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers.  Separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between
the base of the existing tower and the base of the proposed tower. The
separation distances (measured in linear feet) shall be as shown in following
table (“Required Separation Between Existing Tower By Height”).



 


Required Separation Between Existing Tower(s) by Height [1]




Type

 

Existing Stealth Design Support Structure

 

Existing Tower [2] Less Than 100 Feet in Height

 

Existing Tower [2] 100 Feet in Height or Greater



Proposed monopole - less than 100 feet in height
 

1,500

 

1,500

 

3,000



Proposed monopole - 101 to 150 feet in height
 

1,500

 

3,000

 

3,000



Proposed stealth design support structure
 

750

 

1,500

 

1,500



Notes:


[1]   Required separation distances are measured in linear feet from the
base of the existing tower to the base of the proposed tower.


[2]   Includes any type of existing, free-standing WCF tower, except
stealth design support structures.









         (g)   Security fencing.  A sight-obscuring fence that
is a minimum of eight feet high shall prohibit public access to WCF, or shall
screen all at-grade equipment shelters, or both.  Sight-obscuring fencing
shall consist of wood or brick.  Alternative fence materials may be approved
by the Design Review Commission.



         (h)   Landscaping.



            1.   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with
plant materials that effectively screen the view of the tower compound and
ground-based equipment from adjacent property and/or public view. For the
purposes of this section, public view is considered as visible from streets
or public spaces from ground level.



            2.   Existing mature tree growth and natural
landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth
around the property perimeter may be accepted as effective screening.



         (i)   Application requirements.  The application for
conditional use approval of a new communications tower must be accompanied by
the following documents.



            1.   Specifications.  Provide specifications for
proposed structures and antenna, including description of design
characteristics and material.



            2.    Site plan.  A scaled site plan and a scaled
elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other
documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals,
showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including
information concerning topography, on-site land uses and zoning, land use
plan classification of the site, and all properties within the applicable
separation distances set forth in § 151.024(G)(7)(f), adjacent roadways,
proposed means of access, radio frequency coverage, tower height
requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping and adjacent
uses.  The Town Planner may require other information to be necessary to
assess compliance with this section.



            3.   Visual impact analysis.  The applicant shall
provide photo-simulated post-construction renderings of the completed
proposed WCF tower, equipment cabinets, and ancillary structures from
locations to be determined during a pre-application conference with the Town
Planner. The renderings shall, at a minimum, include renderings from the
vantage point of any adjacent roadways and occupied or proposed
non-residential or residential structures, proposed exterior paint and stain
samples for any items to be painted or stained, exterior building material
and roof samples (if applicable), all mounted on color board no larger than
11" × 17".



            4.   Landscape plan.  A landscape plan showing
specific landscape materials.



            5.   Fencing plan.  Location and method of
fencing, and finished color, and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and
illumination.



            6.   Tower location map.  A current map, or
update for an existing map on file, showing locations of applicant’s
antenna, facilities, existing towers, and proposed towers which are reflected
in public records, serving any property within the town per §
151.024(G)(5)(b).



            7.   Co-location.  An affidavit by the support
structure owner committing the owner and his or her successors to allow
shared use of the structure if an applicant agrees in writing to pay any
reasonable charge for shared use.  In cases where the height of a tower is
below the mandatory height standard for co-location, this requirement may be
waived.



            8.   Propagation maps.  The applicant shall
provide copies of color propagation maps demonstrating that antennas and
sites for possible co-locator antennas are no higher in elevation than
necessary.



            9.   Antenna capacity wind load/ice load. A report
from a structural engineer registered in Tennessee showing that the tower
antenna capacity by type and number, and a certification that the tower is
designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI EIA/TIA 222 (latest
revision) standards.



            10.   Separation distance.  The separation
distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites
submitted (pursuant to division 6 above) shall be shown on an updated map.
The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of existing
tower(s) and owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.



            11.   Antenna owners.  Identification of the
owners of all antenna and equipment to be located at the site as of the date
of application.



            12.   Proof of ownership/owner authorization. 
Legal description of the subject property and leased parcel (if different). 
Proof of ownership (deed or title documentation) or a letter of authorization
for the application from the owner of the property on which the WCF is
proposed to be located.



            13.   FAA and FCC information.  All applications
for permits in Collierville shall be accompanied by a ‘determination of no
hazard’ from the FAA as well as all required FCC permit information.



            14.   Reduction of visual impact.  Evidence that
the applicant has taken reasonable measures to assure that the proposed
tower, antenna or accessory structure will be placed in a reasonably
available location that will minimize the visual impact on the surrounding
area in accordance with minimum standards of applicable federal and other
regulations.  Additionally, the applicant shall describe the proposed
methods for minimizing the visibility of the proposed facility, including but
not limited to all screening, landscaping, cladding materials, and paint
color or other treatment samples.



            15.   Safety codes.  Applicant must show that all
applicable health, nuisance, fire, and safety codes are met.



            16.   Removal of WCF. 



               a.   Evidence acceptable to the town that
the property owner and the WCF owner shall remove, at the property owner’s
and the WCF owner’s cost and expense, the WCF and all equipment and restore
the property to a condition substantially similar to that existing before the
installation following abandonment of the facility or non-use for a period of
30 months.  Such removal shall not, however, include removal of installed
landscaping unless approved by the town.



               b.   Such evidence may be in the form of an
executed agreement between the WCF owner and the property owner that is
approved by the Town Attorney.  Such an agreement shall provide that the
agreement may not be terminated without the town’s written consent and the
agreement shall be enforceable by the town against the property owner and the
WCF owner.



            17.   Performance bond or security.  Evidence
that the WCF owner has obtained or secured a performance bond or other
security (“performance guarantee”) acceptable to the Town Attorney in an
amount of 120% of the estimated cost and expense of removing the
telecommunications facility following abandonment of the facility or non-use
of the facility for a period of 30 months.  All  performance guarantees
shall authorize the town to obtain the funds secured by the guarantee upon
the town’s determination that the WCF is abandoned or no use of the
facility has been made for a period of 30 months.  The amount of such
performance guarantee shall be based upon an estimate obtained by the WCF
owner that shall be subject to review and approval of the Town Engineer.  In
the event that the town rejects an estimate as inaccurate, incomplete, or
incorrect, the town may obtain, at its cost and expense, an estimate which
shall be used for purposes of determining the amount of the performance
guarantee.  The WCF owner shall take all action necessary to keep such
performance guarantee valid and in effect at all times.  Expiration of a
performance guarantee may, at the option of the town and following notice to
the WCF owner, result in the expiration of the town’s approval of the WCF
facility.



            18.   Proof of insurance.  The applicant shall
provide proof of insurance to insure adjacent property owners and the public
against personal and property damage resulting from negligent installation
and/or damage caused by or arising from the operation and maintenance of WCF.



            19.   Mailing labels.  The applicant shall
provide two sets of mailing labels (adhesive) including the names and mailing
addresses of all property owners as described in  § 151.024(G)(5)(k).



            20.   A description of the suitability of the use
of existing towers, other structures or alternate technology not requiring
the use of towers or structures to provide the services to be provided
through the use of the proposed new tower.



            21.   A description of the feasible location(s) of
future towers or antennas within the town based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the
proposed tower is erected.



      (8)   Buildings, cabinets, or equipment storage associated
with towers.



         (a)   Buildings, equipment cabinets, or structures shall
comply with applicable building codes.



         (b)   The design of buildings, equipment cabinets, or
structures shall use colors, materials, screening, and textures that will
blend into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.



         (c)   At-grade buildings, cabinets, or equipment shall
not be located within a required or established front yard.



         (d)    Rooftop equipment cabinets of structures shall be
screened, by parapet walls or other structure, so as to not be visible from
adjacent streets and/or property at ground level.



         (e)   In locations where the visual impact of the
buildings, equipment cabinets, or structures would be minimal as determined
by the Planning Division, the design standards and screening requirements may
be reduced or waived.



         (f)   Standards for buildings, equipment cabinets, or
structures for Antennas on existing structures within public road
rights-of-way are included in § 151.024(G)(6)(b)(2).



      (9)   Removal of abandoned towers and antennas.  Any tower or
antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of 30 months or more
shall be considered to have been abandoned, and the owner shall remove the
same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Building Official notifying
the owner of such abandonment.  Failure to remove an abandoned tower or
antenna within the 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at
the owner’s expense.  If there are two or more users of a single tower,
then this provision shall not become effective until all users abandon the
tower.



      (10)   Nonconforming towers.



         (a)   Preexisting towers.  New antennas located on any
of the following structures existing on the effective date of this section
shall be exempt from the height restrictions of this section provided that
there is no increase in height of the existing structure as a result of the
installation of a WCF: water towers, guyed towers, lattice towers, power
transmission line towers, and monopoles.



         (b)   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming
towers or antennas. Notwithstanding § 151.024(G)(9), removal of abandoned
towers and antennas, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are
damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain
administrative approval or a conditional use permit and without having to
meet separation requirements.  The height, location, and type of the tower
on site shall be a maximum of the same type and intensity as the original
facility approval.  Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply
with applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the
date the facility is damaged or destroyed.  If no permit is obtained, or if
the permit expires, then the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as
specified in § 151.024(G)(9).



   (H)   Special conditions for animal hospital and clinics in MPO Zone
Districts.



      (1)   The location, size and design of such facilities shall
be such that the proposed development shall be compatible with the
development within the surrounding area, thus reducing the impact upon the
surrounding area.



      (2)   There shall be no boarding of animals overnight, except
in conjunction with surgery or treatment. Such boarding shall be for a short
term duration not to exceed one week.



      (3)   All veterinary and associated services, including the
boarding of animals, shall be confined to the inside of the facility within
special insulated and sound proof rooms.



      (4)   The site plans for such facilities shall first be
approved by the Planning Commission, taking into account the above conditions
as well as any other pertinent factors.



   (I)   Special conditions and specific standards for sexually
oriented businesses.



      (1)   Purpose and findings.



         (a)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to
regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the citizens of the Town and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Town. The provisions
of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of
this chapter to restrict or deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.  Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution
of obscene material.



         (b)   Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse
secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in
reports made available to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen (Board) and on
findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres,
Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50
(1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies
in other communities, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona;
Tucson, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; Minneapolis, Minnesota; St. Paul,
Minnesota;  Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden
Grove, California; Newport News, Virginia; Los Angeles, California; Whittier,
California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma;
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma II; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; Seattle,
Washington; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General’s
Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6,
1989, State of Minnesota), the Board finds:



            1.   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves
to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently
uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is
presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible
for the activities that occur on their premises;



            2.   Certain employees of sexually oriented
businesses defined in this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in
higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees
of other establishments;



            3.   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral
and anal sex occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which
provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos
or live sex shows;



            4.   Offering and providing such space encourages
such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions;



            5.   Persons frequent certain adult theaters,
adult arcades and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of
engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses;



            6.   At least 50 communicable diseases may be
spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including,
but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus
infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis,
salmonella infections and shigella infections;



            7.   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been
an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States -- 600 in 1982, 2,200 in
1983, 4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 through December 31, 1992;



            8.   As of July 31, 1998, there were 7,689
reported cases of AIDS and 3,904 deaths resulting from AIDS in the State of
Tennessee. There were 2,522 reported cases of AIDS in Shelby County as of
July 31, 1998;



            9.   Since 1981 and to the present, there have
been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV
antibody test in the State of Tennessee with 9,363 reported cases of HIV.
There were 3,651 reported cases of HIV in Shelby County as of July 31, 1998;



            10.   The number of cases of early (less than one
year) syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613
cases reported in 1982 and 45,200 through November of 1990.  There were 934
reported cases of Early Syphilis in Shelby County in 1997. The number of
cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high
level, with over one-half million cases being reported in 1990. There were
4,876 reported cases of Gonorrhea in Shelby County in 1997;



            11.   The Surgeon General of the United States in
his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and
HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug
abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components and from an infected
mother to her newborn;



            12.   According to the best scientific evidence,
AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally
transmitted by sexual acts;



            13.   Sanitary conditions in some sexually
oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted
there are unhealthy, and in part, because of the unregulated nature of the
activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities
to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities;



            14.   Numerous studies and reports have determined
that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where
persons view adult oriented films;



            15.   The findings noted in subsections (1)
through (14) raise substantial governmental concerns;



            16.   Sexually oriented businesses have
operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to
protect those substantial governmental concerns;



            17.   A reasonable licensing procedure is an
appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on
the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further,
such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on
the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner
consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees,
as well as the citizens of the Town. It is appropriate to require reasonable
assurance that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented
business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities
occurring therein;



            18.   Removal of doors on adult booths and
requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a
substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary
sexual activity occurring in adult theaters;



            19.   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented
businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past
employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal
behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or
suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments;



            20.   The disclosure of certain information by
those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is
substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the
operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases;



            21.   It is desirable in the prevention of the
spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information
regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter
is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity;



            22.   The fact that an applicant for an adult use
license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational
assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of
this chapter;



            23.   The barring of such individuals from the
management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and
prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted
diseases;



            24.   The general welfare, health, morals and
safety of the citizens of the Town will be promoted by the enactment of this
chapter.



      (2)   Classification.  Sexually oriented businesses are
classified as follows:



         (a)   Adult arcades;



         (b)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult
video stores;



         (c)   Adult cabarets;



         (d)   Adult motels;



         (e)   Adult motion pictures theaters;



         (f)   Adult theaters;



         (g)   Escort agencies;



         (h)   Nude model studios; and



         (i)   Sexual encounter centers.



      (3)   License required.



         (a)   It is unlawful:



            1.   For any person to operate a sexually oriented
business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the
Town pursuant to this chapter;



            2.   For any person who operates a sexually
oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented
business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the
Town pursuant to this chapter;



            3.   For any person to obtain employment with a
sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented
business employee license pursuant to this chapter.



         (b)   An application for a license must be made on a
form provided by the Town.



         (c)   All applicants must be qualified according to the
provisions of this chapter. The application may request and the applicant
shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the Town
to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in
this chapter.



         (d)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application for
a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as
applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following section and
each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



         (e)   The completed application for a sexually oriented
business license shall contain the following information and shall be
accompanied by the following documents:



            1.   If the applicant is:



               a.   An individual, the individual shall
state his or her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he or she
is 18 years of age;



               b.   A partnership, the partnership shall
state its complete name and the names  of all partners, whether the
partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement,
if any;



               c.   A corporation, the corporation shall
state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the
corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation,
the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders
and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the
registered  office for service of process.



            2.   If the applicant intends to operate the
sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he
or she must state:



               a.   The sexually oriented business’s
fictitious name; and



               b.   Submit the required registration
documents.



            3.   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of
each.



            4.   Whether the applicant has had a previous
license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business
ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which
the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the
denial, suspension or revocation and whether the applicant has been a partner
in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a
corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose license has previously
been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.



            5.   Whether the applicant holds any other
licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business
ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of
such other licensed businesses.



            6.   The single classification of license for
which the applicant is filing.



            7.   The location of the proposed sexually
oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street
address and telephone number(s), if any, which location shall be a
permissible location under the terms of this chapter.



            8.   The applicant’s mailing address and
residential address.



            9.   The applicant’s driver’s license number,
Social Security number and/or his or her state or federally issued tax
identification number.



            10.   A sketch or diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches.



            11.   A current certificate and straight-line
drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application by a registered land
surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any
existing sexually oriented businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be
certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution/synagogue, school or public park or recreation area within 1,000
feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use
shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time
an application is submitted.



            12.   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the
premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor
space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions or live
entertainment which regularly depicts material which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified
anatomical areas, then the application shall comply with the application
requirements set forth in this section.



         (f)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually
oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to
be provided by the Town the following information:



            1.   The applicant’s name or any other name
(including “stage” names) or aliases used by the individual;



            2.   Age, date and place of birth;



            3.   Present residence address and telephone
number;



            4.   Present business address and telephone number;



            5.   Date, issuing state and number of driver’s
permit or other identification card information;



            6.   Social Security number; and



            7.   Proof that the individual is at least 18
years of age.



         (g)   Attached to the application form for a sexually
oriented business employee license as provided above shall be the following:



            1.   A statement detailing the license history of
the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing
of the application, including whether such applicant in this or any other
county, city, state or country has ever had a license, permit or
authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended or had any
professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In
the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name, the
name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reason
for the denial, revocation or suspension.  A copy of any order of denial,
revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application.



            2.   A statement whether the applicant has been
convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if
so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and
jurisdiction of each.



      (4)   Issuance of license.



         (a)   Upon the filing of the application for a sexually
oriented business employee license, the Town shall issue a temporary license
to the applicant. The applicant shall then be referred to the appropriate
city departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is
contained on the application. The application process shall be completed
within 30 days from the date the completed application is filed. After the
investigation, the Town shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is
true:



            1.   The applicant has failed to provide
information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form;



            2.   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;



            3.   The applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter;



            4.   The sexually oriented business employee
license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or
state law, statute, rule or regulation or prohibited by a particular
provision of this chapter; or



            5.   The applicant has had a sexually oriented
business employee license revoked by the Town within two years of the date of
the current application. If the sexually oriented business employee license
is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null
and void. Denial, suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to
this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in this section.



         (b)   A sexually oriented business license and sexually
oriented business employee license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a
finding by the Town that the applicant has not been convicted of  any
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act
during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny
the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject
to the payment of the fee as set forth in division (5) below of this section.



         (c)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed
sexually oriented business application, the Town shall approve or deny the
issuance of a license to an applicant. The Town shall approve the issuance of
a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:



            1.   An applicant is under 18 years of age;



            2.   An applicant is overdue in payment to the
Town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him
or her in relation to any business;



            3.   An applicant has failed to provide
information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form;



            4.   An applicant has been denied a license by the
Town to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months
or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked
within the preceding 12 months;



            5.   An applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity defined in this chapter;



            6.   The premises to be used for the sexually
oriented business have not been approved by the Health Department, Fire
Department and the Building Official as being in compliance with applicable
laws and ordinances;



            7.   The license fee required by this chapter has
not been paid;



            8.   An applicant of the proposed establishment is
in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this
chapter.



         (d)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face
the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date,
the address of the sexually oriented business and the classification for
which the license is issued pursuant to this chapter. All licenses shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time.



         (e)   The Health Department, Fire Department and the
Building Official shall complete their certification that the premises is in
compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the Town.



         (f)   A sexually oriented business license shall issue
for only one classification as found in division (2) above of this section.



      (5)   Fees; sexually oriented business license and employee
license.



         (a)   Sexually oriented business license.



            1.   Every application for a sexually oriented
business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing
license) shall be accompanied by an application fee of $1,000. In addition to
the renewal fee, a late penalty of $100 shall be assessed against the
applicant who files for a renewal less than 30 days before the license
expires. If the application is denied, one-half of the fees shall be
returned, excluding the late penalty charges.



            2.   In addition to the application and
investigation fee required above, every sexually  oriented business that is
granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the Town an annual license
fee of $500 within 30 days of license issuance or renewal. Failure to pay the
annual license fee within 30 days of license issuance or renewal shall result
in the immediate revocation of license by the Town.  If the application is
denied, one-half of the fees shall be returned.



            3.   Every application for a sexually oriented
business employer license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an
existing license) shall be accompanied by a $350 application, investigation
and license fee. In addition to the application, investigation and license
fee, a late penalty of $100 shall be assessed against the applicant who files
for renewal less than 30 days before the license expires. If the license is
denied, one-half of the fees shall be returned excluding the late penalty
charges.



            4.   All license applications and fees shall be
submitted to the Town Clerk of the Town of Collierville.



         (b)   Sexually oriented business employee license.



            1.   Every application for a sexually oriented
business employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an
existing license) shall be accompanied by an application fee of $100.



In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of $50 shall be assessed
against the applicant who files for a renewal less than 30 days before the
license expires. If the application is denied, one-half of the fees shall be
returned excluding the late penalty charges.



            2.   In addition to the application and
investigation fee required above, every sexually oriented business employee
that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the Town an annual
license fee of $100 within 30 days of license issuance or renewal. Failure to
pay the annual license fee shall, within 30 days of license issuance or
renewal, result in the immediate revocation of the license by the Town. If
the application is denied, one-half of the fees shall be returned.



            3.   All license applications and fees shall be
submitted to the Town Clerk of the Town of Collierville.



      (6)   Inspection.



         (a)   An applicant or licensee shall permit
representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department,
Development Department or other Town departments or agencies to inspect the
premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring
compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.



         (b)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business
or his or her agent or employee commits a violation of this chapter and any
other applicable laws of the State of Tennessee  if he or she refuses to
permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for
business.



      (7)   Expiration of license.



         (a)   Each license shall expire one year from the date
of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in this
chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will not be affected.



         (b)   When the Town denies renewal of a license, the
applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.
If, subsequent to the denial, the Town finds that the basis for denial of the
renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



      (8)   Suspension.  The Town shall suspend a sexually oriented
business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a
licensee or an employee of a licensee has:



         (a)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section
of this chapter; or



         (b)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually
oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; provided, however,
the provisions above relating to suspension shall not preclude revocation of
a license if grounds as set out in subsection (9) below exist.



      (9)   Revocation.



         (a)   The Town shall revoke a sexually oriented business
license if a cause of suspension in subsection (8) occurs and the license has
been suspended within the preceding 12 months.



         (b)   The Town shall revoke a sexually oriented business
license if it determines that:



            1.   A licensee gave false or misleading
information in the material submitted during the application process;



            2.   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession,
use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



            3.   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution
on the premises;



            4.   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually
oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was
suspended;



            5.   Except in the case of an adult motel, a
licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed
premises; or



            6.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the
Town, county or state for any taxes or fees past due.



         (c)   The Town shall revoke a sexually oriented business
employee license if it determines that:



            1.   A licensee gave false or misleading
information in the material submitted during the application process;



            2.   A licensee possessed, used or sold controlled
substances on the premises;



            3.   A licensee committed prostitution on the
premises;



            4.   A licensee operated  within a sexually
oriented business without proper license; or



            5.   A licensee has participated in any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act in
or on the licensed premises.



         (d)   When the Town revokes a license, the revocation
shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for
the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective.



         (e)   After denial of an application, denial of a
renewal of an application or suspension or revocation of any license, the
applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative
action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action
shall be promptly reviewed by the court.



      (10)   Transfer of license. A licensee shall not transfer his
or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented
business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address
designated in the application.



      (11)   Location of sexually oriented businesses.



         (a)   A person commits a violation of this chapter and
any other applicable laws of the state of Tennessee if that person operates
or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district
other than RI, Restrictive Industrial Districts and GI, General Industrial
Districts, as defined and described in this Zoning Code.



         (b)   A person commits a violation of this chapter and
any other applicable laws of the State of Tennessee if the person operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:



            1.   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or
building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities;



            2.   A public or private educational facility,
including but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools,
preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate
schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational
schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools,
junior colleges and universities; school includes the school grounds, but
does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only
incidentally as a school;



            3.   A boundary of any residential district as
defined in, but not limited to, the following residential zoning
classifications in §§ 151.035 through 151.047 of this Zoning Code:



               a.   RL, Large Lot/Estate Residential
Districts;



               b.   RL-1, Large Lot/One Acre Residential
Districts;



               c.   R-25, Low Density Residential Districts;



               d.   R-1, Low Density Residential Districts;



               e.   R-1A, Low Density Residential Districts;



               f.   R-2, Medium Density Residential
Districts;



               g.   R-2A, Medium Density Residential
Districts;



               h.   R-3, High Density Residential Districts;



               i.   R-3A, High Density Residential
Districts;



               j.   R-4, Multi-Family Residential Districts;



               k.   T, Mobile Home Park Residential
Districts;



               l.   R-TH, Townhouse Residential Districts;



               m.   FAR, Forest-Agricultural-Residential
Districts;



            4.   An occupied residential dwelling, as defined
in § 151.003;



            5.   A public park or recreational area which has
been designated for park or recreational activities, including, but not
limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir,
athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths,
wilderness areas or other similar public land within the city which is under
the control, operation or management of the city park and recreation
authorities;



            6.   The property line of a lot devoted to use as
a residence, as defined in § 151.003;



            7.   An entertainment business which is oriented
primarily towards children or family entertainment; or



         (c)   A person commits a violation of this chapter and
any other applicable laws of the State of Tennessee if that person causes or
permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of
ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of
another sexually oriented business.



         (d)   A person commits a violation of this chapter and
any other applicable laws of the State of Tennessee if that person causes or
permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually
oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof or the
increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building,
structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.



         (e)   For the purposes of subsection (b) of this
subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually
oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises
of a use listed in subsection (b). Presence of a city, county or other
political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of
calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.



         (f)   For purposes of subsection (c) of this subsection,
the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured
in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects
or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in
which each business is located.



         (g)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating
on February 1, 1999 that is in violation of subsection (a) through (f) of
this subsection shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use
will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless
sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of
30 days or more. The nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged,
extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a nonconforming
use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one
another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented
business which was first established and continually operating at a
particular location is the conforming use and the later- established
business(es) is/are nonconforming.



         (h)   A sexually oriented business lawfully in operation
as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location,
subsequent to the grant or renewal of a the sexually oriented business
license of a use listed in subsection (b) of this subsection within 1,000
feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the
renewal of a valid license and does not apply when an application for a
license is submitted after a license has expired or been revoked.



      (12)   Additional regulations for adult motels.



         (a)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or
a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more
times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable
presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined
in this chapter.



         (b)   A person commits a violation of this chapter and
any other applicable laws of the State of Tennessee if, as the person in
control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment that does not have a sexually oriented license, he or she rents
or subrents a sleeping room to a person and within ten hours from the time
the room is rented, he or she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.



         (c)   For purposes of subsection (b) of this subsection,
the terms RENT or SUBRENT mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied
for any form of consideration.



      (13)   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually
explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms.



         (a)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a
film, video cassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which
regularly depicts material which is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements.



            1.   Upon application for a sexually oriented
license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s
stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A
manager’s station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram
shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously
posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an
engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each
diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions
sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Town
may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant
adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.



            2.   The application shall be sworn to be true and
correct by the applicant.



            3.   No alteration in the configuration or
location of a manager’s station may be made without the prior approval of
the Town.



            4.   It is the duty of the licensee of the
premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and
situated in the manager’s station at all times that any patron is present
inside the premises.



            5.   The interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a
manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not
contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area
of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from
at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this
subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.



            6.   It shall be the duty of the licensee to
ensure that the view area specified in subsection 5. remains unobstructed by
any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection
1. of this subsection.



            7.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than
one person at any time.



            8.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot
candles as measured at the floor level.



            9.   It shall be the duty of the licensee to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that
any patron is present in the premises.



            10.   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind
to exist between viewing rooms or booths.



            11.   No person shall make or attempt to make an
opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms.



            12.   The licensee shall, during each business
day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if
any openings or holes exist.



            13.   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings
in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or
carpeting.



            14.   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces
and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently
covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of
the floor.



         (b)   A person having a duty under subsection (a)1
through 14 commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that
duty.



      (14)   Additional regulations for escort agencies.



         (a)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under
the age of 18 years.



         (b)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as
an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18
years.



      (15)   Additional regulations for nude model studios.



         (a)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person
under the age of 18 years.



         (b)   A person under the age of 18 years commits a
violation of this chapter and any other applicable laws of the State of
Tennessee if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on
the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under
this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to
public view or visible to any other person.



         (c)   A person commits a violation of this chapter and
any other applicable laws of the State of Tennessee if the person appears in
a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity
in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the
public right-of-way.



         (d)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a
bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be
placed in a reception room open to the public.



      (16)   Additional regulations concerning public nudity.



         (a)   It shall be a violation of this chapter and any
other applicable laws of the State of Tennessee for a person to knowingly and
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity
or depict specified sexual activities.



         (b)   It shall be a violation of this chapter and any
other applicable laws of the State of Tennessee for a person to knowingly or
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi- nude
condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at
least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet
from the floor.



         (c)   It shall be a violation of this chapter and any
other applicable laws of the State of Tennessee for an employee, while
semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity
from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any
gratuity to any employee, while the employee is semi-nude in a sexually
oriented business.



         (d)   It shall be a violation of this chapter and any
other applicable laws of the State of Tennessee for an employee, while semi
nude, to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.



      (17)   Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented
business. A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a
person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented
business.



      (18)   Hours of operation. No sexually oriented business,
except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and  Saturdays and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00
p.m. on Sundays.



      (19)   Exemptions.



         (a)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection
(16) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class
operated:



            1.   By a proprietary school, licensed by the
State of Tennessee; a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;



            2.   By a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or



            3.   In a structure:



               a.   Which has no sign visible from the
exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude
person is available for viewing;



               b.   Where, in order to participate in a
class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



               c.   Where no more than one nude model is on
the premises at any one time.



      (20)   Penalties and injunction.  Any violation of this
section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500. Each day a
sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business employee operates in
violation of this section is a separate offense or violation.



   (J)   Special conditions for auto dealerships.



      (1)   Front faades of buildings shall:



         (a)   Be of similar architectural style to surrounding
commercial buildings;



         (b)   Contain no more than 50% glass (i.e., glazed area);



         (c)   Minimum of a two-foot tall masonry base/bulkhead
or decorative wood panels, or DRC approved equivalent provided; and



         (d)   Utilize subdued and muted earth tone colors per
the Design Guidelines; and



         (e)   Be predominantly comprised of brick veneer
(excluding the glazed areas). Trim and accent materials other than brick may
be approved by the Design Review Commission (DRC) on a case-by- case basis as
regulated by the Design Guidelines.



      (2)   Comparable materials to the front faade shall be
installed on all sides visible from the public right-of-way.



      (3)   A landscape buffer shall be provided in accordance with
the Design Standards Manual along the front property and shall be 40 feet in
width for arterial streets and 30 feet in width for all other types of
streets. The landscape buffer shall include undulating berms that are one to
two feet in height and shall be supplemental with clusters of shrubs and the
planting of ornamental trees 20 feet on center or in clusters or groupings
and also street trees planted 40 feet on center in a straight line or
staggered pattern.



      (4)   Elevated display platforms for automobiles shall not be
permitted.



      (5)   A minimum 20-foot wide landscape buffer shall be
installed along all side and rear property lines. Within the landscape buffer
shall be undulating berms one to two feet in height supplemented with
clusters of evergreen shrubbery and trees planted along all side and rear
yards. If the enclosed parking area is completely enclosed in a solid masonry
fence, the landscape buffer may be reduced to ten feet and shall be
supplemented with the planting of deciduous and evergreen trees distributed
along the perimeter of the fencing.



      (6)   Fenced areas shall be limited to areas in the rear yard,
as defined by the Zoning Code. Fencing shall consist of solid masonry or
masonry/brick columns and ornamental wrought iron. The columns shall be
installed a minimum of 50 feet on center. No chain link fencing shall be
permitted.



      (7)   Outdoor loudspeakers shall not be permitted.



   (K)   Special conditions for taxidermy services in GC: General
Commercial Districts.



      (1)   Exterior storage of goods or materials of any kind is
prohibited.



      (2)   A detailed waste disposal plan must be presented, and
the location of waste receptacles or other equipment used in handling wastes
be designated on the site plan.  Waste products shall be kept in an
approved, covered receptacle.



      (3)   No designated parking, required parking spaces, fire
lanes or traffic lanes shall be used for storage of goods, materials, or
waste products.



   (L)   Special conditions and specific standards for bed and
breakfast homestay uses in residential districts. Bed and breakfast homestay
uses in all residential zoning districts are subject to the following
supplemental provisions:



      (1)   The bed and breakfast use shall be accessory to the
structure’s principal use as a dwelling, and the operators shall
permanently reside on the premises.



      (2)   The facility must either be located within the local
historic district of the Town or, if outside the local historic district,
within a historically significant home. Whether a home is historically
significant shall be determined by a property either on, or eligible for, the
National Historic Register.



      (3)   A maximum of three sleeping rooms, which are distinct
and separate from the innkeepers quarters, may be available for transient
occupancy by up to six guests, and in no event shall a sleeping room be
occupied by a guest for more than seven consecutive days.



      (4)   The structure shall maintain an exterior appearance that
is in character with surrounding residential uses.



      (5)   Cooking facilities shall not be permitted within
individual sleeping rooms, and food may be served only to overnight guests.



      (6)   Occupancies shall comply with International Fire
Code/Life Safety Code requirements, which may result in additional
requirements.



      (7)   Common dining or gathering areas shall not be leased for
social or business events unless expressly made part of the CUP application
and review, with maximum occupancies established and provisions for adequate
parking demonstrated.



      (8)   Except for alternative parking plans made part of the
CUP application for social or business events, all off-street parking areas
for the use shall be on the site, located within side or rear yard areas,
screened in accordance with this ordinance, and shall not use
commercial-style exterior lighting.



      (9)   The applicant shall hold a neighborhood meeting held
pursuant to § 151.160(A)(3) prior to CUP application, regardless of whether
the use is proposed as part of a planned development.



   (M)   Special conditions and specific standards for accessory
residential uses (in conjunction with a detached residential use). Accessory
residential uses (in conjunction with a principal residential use) are
subject to the following supplemental provisions:



      (1)   The use/structure must be located within Special Areas
3, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 9, of the Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan.



      (2)   Be accessory to an existing principal dwelling (nothing
shall prevent such unit from being located within or inside the principal
structure).



      (3)   Not include mobile homes, recreational vehicles, or
travel trailers.



      (4)   Be at least 400 square feet, but not exceed the lesser
of: 800 square feet or 50% of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling
unit.



      (5)   Be limited to a maximum of one per lot.



      (6)   Be served by at least one, but not more than two
off-street parking spaces (in addition to the required off-street parking
serving the principal use).



      (7)   Not be counted toward any maximum residential density
requirements; however, it shall count towards any maximum number of accessory
structures on a lot.



      (8)   Be of durable exterior building materials that are the
same or higher quality as surrounding developments, (however, when the
principal structure is predominately brick or stone, the introduction of
smooth wood or fibrous cement siding is appropriate to reinforce the
ancillary and subordinate nature of the accessory dwelling unit.)



      (9)   Not be sold apart from the principal structure. Proof of
deed restrictions to this effect shall be provided prior to the issuance of
building permits.



      (10)   Not be leased or rented for tenancies of less than 30
days or more than 11 different individuals in any calendar year. Proof of
deed restrictions to this effect shall be provided prior to the issuance of
building permits.



   (N)   Special conditions and specific standards for farmers markets.
Farmers markets are subject to the following supplemental provisions:



      (1)   The operator of the farmers market, which may be either
an individual or organization, must be the applicant for the conditional use
permit (CUP).



      (2)   The applicant shall submit the following:



         (a)   Documentation, such as vendor guidelines and/or
market rules, shall be provided that demonstrates how the market will be run
and that it will comply with the definition of a farmers market per §
151.003.



         (b)   A site plan shall be submitted in conjunction with
the conditional use permit that shows the following:



            1.   Pedestrian circulation plan;



            2.   Booth/vendor space;



            3.   Tent, awning, or structural details and
locations;



            4.   Parking and vehicular ingress/egress;



            5.   Location of storage areas;



            6.   Location of restrooms and trash receptacles;



            7.   Fencing and landscaping, including the
identification of the materials used;



            8.   Provisions for recycling and waste removal;
and



            9.   A signage plan (locations and size details).



      (3)   A CUP for a farmers market shall not expire, unless
otherwise conditioned by the BMA, and may not be transferred to another
administering individual/entity or another location unless expressly approved
by the BMA.



      (4)   Failure to comply with these CUP provisions, or any
conditions added by the BMA, after issuance of a CUP may result in the
revocation of the CUP by the BMA.



(`00 Code, § 11-305)  (Ord. passed 5- -02; Am. Ord. 2002-11, passed 7-2-02;
Am. Ord. 2003-15, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2004-12, passed 7-26-04; Am. Ord.
2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. 2009-05,
passed 6-22-09; Am. Ord. 2010-11, passed 1-11-11; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed
3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord. 2011-06, passed 4-25-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-08, passed 9-26-11; Am. Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-9-12; Am. Ord.
2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.025  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Accessory activity, use, building or structure. This section
authorizes the establishment of accessory uses that are incidental and
customarily subordinate to principal uses.  The intent of this section is to
allow a broad range of accessory uses, so long as such uses are located on
the same site as the principal use, they comply with the standards set forth
in this section, and they do not create adverse impacts on surrounding lots
or site.



   (B)   Exemptions for accessory uses. The following are exempt from
the regulations of § 151.025, as they are regulated by other provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance. These structures shall not be located within platted or
recorded easement or over underground utility; however, this requirement
shall not prevent utility installations, such as cable, telephone boxes, gas,
and sewer meters. Furthermore, the following will not be counted towards any
maximum number of accessory structures on a lot.



      (1)   Accessory residential housing.



      (2)   Fences and walls.



      (3)   Signs.



      (4)   Pools.



      (5)   Wireless communication facilities and antennas.



   (C)   General standards and limitations for accessory uses. Except
for accessory structures exempted in § 151.025(B), accessory uses or
structures shall:



      (1)   Directly serve the principal use or structure;



      (2)   Be accessory and clearly incidental to the principal use
or structure;



      (3)   Be clearly subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to
the principal use or structure;



      (4)   Be owned or operated by the same person as the principal
use or structure;



      (5)   Be located on the same lot as the principal use or
structure;



      (6)   Not exceed the height of the principal structure, except
for those structures exempt from the height requirements of this ordinance;



      (7)   Be located at least five feet from any other structures
(except fences, walls, or open-air arbors);



      (8)   Not take place within required front or side yards or
project beyond the front building line of the principal structure (except
where expressly permitted within § 151.025(D));



      (9)   Not be located within platted or recorded easements or
over underground utilities;



      (10)   Not violate the bulk, density, parking, landscaping, or
open space standards of this ordinance when taken together with the principal
use or structure;



      (11)   Not be constructed or established prior to the time the
principal use or structure is constructed or established; and



      (12)   Except for fences, walls, or hedges, no accessory
structure may be constructed except on a lot with a principal building.



   (D)   Listed accessory activities, uses, buildings, or structures.
The table below lists the allowed types of accessory uses and structures. If
a specific accessory use is allowed “by right, with conditions” in a
district, the column underneath the district is marked with a number indexed
to any applicable special conditions to the specific accessory use found in
divisions of § 151.025(D), such as “(8)” for home occupations. For
general standards and limitations that apply to all accessory uses, see §
151.025(C). If the accessory use or structure is not allowed in a district,
the column is left blank.  If there is a reference contained in a column
entitled “CUP”, a conditional use permit is required for the accessory
use per the procedures outlined in § 151.310 in addition to any conditions
applicable in § 151.025(C) and (D).



Click here to view table in PDF format



 


Accessory Use/ Structure

 

R- L

 

R- L1

 

R- 25

 

R- 1

 

R-1 A

 

R- 2

 

R- 2A

 

R- 3

 

R-3 A

 

R- 4

 

R-T H

 

T

 

T N





 

N C

 

M P O

 

M U

 

S C C

 

C B

 

G C

 

RI

 

GI

 

F A R





Accessory building (residential)
 

(1)

 

(1)

 

(1)

 

(1)

 

(1)

 

(1)

 

(1)

 

(1)

 

(1)

 

(1)

 

(1)

 



 

(1)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(1)



Accessory building (nonresidenti al or multifamily)
 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)



Accessory building or structures (agricultural)
 

(3)

 

(3)

 

(3)

 

(3)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(3)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(3)



Automated teller machine (ATM) kiosk (freestanding )
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(4)

 

(4)

 

(4)

 

(4)

 

(4)

 

(4)

 



 



 





Cart storage and cart corrals
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(5)

 



 



 

(5)

 



 

(5)

 



 



 





Flagpoles
 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)

 

(6)



Freestanding canopies
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(7)

 

(7)

 



 

(7)

 

(7)

 

(7)

 

(7)

 

(7)

 

(7)

 

(7)

 

(7)

 





Home occupation (Type 1)
 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 

(8)

 



 



 

(8)

 



 

(8)

 



 



 



 

(8)



Home occupation (Type 2)
 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P (8)

 

C U P( 8)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C U P (8)



Indoor food sales
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(9)

 

(9)

 

(9)

 

(9)

 

(9)

 

(9)

 



 



 





Outdoor dining
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(1 0)

 



 

(1 0)

 

(1 0)

 

(1 0)

 

(1 0)

 



 



 





Outdoor display (accessory)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(1 1)

 



 

(1 1)

 

(1 1)

 

(1 1)

 



 

(1 1)

 

(1 1)

 





Outdoor display (customary)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C U P (1 2)

 



 

C U P (1 2)

 

C U P (1 2)

 

C U P (1 2)

 

C U P (1 2)

 

C U P (1 2)

 

C U P (1 2)

 

C U P (1 2)



Outdoor storage

 
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C U P (1 3)

 



 

C U P (1 3)

 

C U P (1 3)

 

C U P (1 3)

 

C U P (1 3)

 

C U P (1 3)

 

C U P (1 3)

 

C U P (1 3)



Parking, storage or use of major recreation equipment
 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 

(1 4)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(1 4)



Private recreation facilities (residential)
 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 

(1 5)

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(1 5)



Retail sales of goods (as part of a freight or warehouse use)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(1 6)

 

(1 6)

 

(1 6)



Satellite dish receiving antennas
 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)

 

(1 7)



Security or caretaker quarters
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(1 8)

 

(1 8)

 

(1 8)

 

(1 8)

 

(1 8)

 

(1 8)

 

(1 8)

 





Stand-alone drive-throug h uses
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(1 9)

 



 

(1 9)

 



 

(1 9)

 



 



 





Unidentified accessory uses/structur e
 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)

 

(2 0)





 



      (1)   Residential accessory structures. Any building, such as
a detached garage or storage shed, accessory to a principal single family
detached, two family (duplex), or mobile home use, shall comply with the
following:



         (a)   A maximum of two accessory structures may be
constructed on each lot.  Children’s play structures, animal shelters,
open-air arbors, concrete slabs, swimming pools, below-grade structures (e.g.
underground shelter), or any accessory structure with a height less than 18
inches shall not be counted towards the maximum number.



         (b)   Location of residential accessory structures.



            1.   Accessory structures must not be erected in
any required front yard or between a principal building and a street, except
for reversed frontage lots.  On reversed frontage lots, accessory structures
may be located between the principal structure and the non-accessible street
upon which it fronts, provided a minimum setback of 20 feet is provided from
the right-of-way of the non-accessible street and all other applicable
provisions are met.



            2.   Accessory structures must not be erected
within any required side yard, except for a corner lot, where accessory
structures may be placed in a required side yard provided all other
applicable provisions are met.



            3.   The required setback for accessory structures
depends upon the type of zoning district:



               a.   Within conventional zoning districts,
accessory structures must have a setback from a property line that is equal
to or greater than its height, but in no case shall an accessory structure be
located closer than five feet from a property line or other building or
structure.



               b.   Within traditional zoning districts,
accessory structures must be located at least five feet from all lot lines
and five feet from any other structures (except fences, walls, and open-air
arbors).



         (c)   Height of residential accessory structures.



            1.   Accessory structures must not exceed 14 feet
or one story in height, except for on those lots of record that are either
one acre in size or greater or within one of the traditional zoning districts.



            2.   On lots either one acre in size or greater or
within one of the traditional zoning districts, accessory structures must not
exceed 25 feet or two stories in height.



            3.   No accessory structure shall exceed the
height of the principal structure, except as provided otherwise in the code
of ordinances.



         (d)   Size and lot coverage.



            1.   On residential lots, the combined gross floor
area of all accessory structures shall be no more than 30% of the total gross
floor area of the principal building.



            2.   On residential lots less than one acre in
size, accessory structures greater than 800 square feet in gross floor area
require the approval of the Planning Commission. On residential lots one acre
in size or greater, accessory structures greater than 1,200 square feet in
gross floor area require the approval of the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall base its determination on the following:



               a.   The accessory structure is consistent
with the overall character of existing development in the immediate vicinity
of the subject property, and will not materially adversely affect other
property in the area in which it is located; and



               b.   The accessory structure will not
adversely affect a known archaeological, environmental, historical, or
cultural resource.



         (e)   Architectural style and materials.



            1.   For single-family residential lots, accessory
structures greater than 150 square feet in gross floor area must be
constructed in a like manner to the principal building in terms of
architectural style, roof style, and building materials.  The intent of this
requirement is not to require an accessory structure to exactly match the
principal structure, but to ensure compatibility with the principal structure.



            2.   Metal and plastic are prohibited as primary
siding materials for accessory structures greater than 150 square feet in
gross floor area except where the material is the primary material on the
principal structure.



      (2)   Nonresidential or multifamily accessory building.  Any
building accessory to a principal nonresidential use, or residential unit or
other housing type, not otherwise listed in the table in § 151.025(D), shall
comply with the following:



         (a)   Be subject to the Design Guidelines.



         (b)   Be located at least five feet from all lot lines
and five feet from any other structures (except fences, walls, and open-air
arbors).



         (c)   Not take place within required front or side yards
or project beyond the front building line of the principal structures, except
for:



            1.   Signs;



            2.   Fences or walls;



            3.   Freestanding canopies.



         (d)   In commercial districts where maximum floor area
ratio limits are applicable, the total gross floor area of all accessory
structures shall be included as part of the total gross floor area of the lot.



         (e)   In industrial districts, the total maximum area of
all accessory structures shall not exceed 20% of the maximum lot coverage
permitted within the zoning district.



      (3)   Agricultural accessory buildings or structures.
Accessory buildings or structures essential to general farming activities
conducted on the property, including, but not limited to, those that house
livestock, protect farm equipment, or for harvesting crops, shall be
regulated as follows:



         (a)   When an accessory structure houses livestock, a
minimum lot size of two acres is required.



         (b)   Agricultural accessory structures are permitted in
any required front, side, or rear yard, and may be between a principal
building and a street; however, any accessory structure shall be located no
closer than 30 feet from a property line at any point.



         (c)   Agricultural accessory structures shall not apply
towards the maximum number of accessory structures for a principal use.



         (d)   Building structures not exempted by § 151.005 may
exceed the maximum building height as required by § 151.027 if the Planning
Commission finds that:



            1.   The accessory structure is consistent with
the overall character of existing development in the immediate vicinity of
the subject property, and will not materially adversely affect other property
in the area in which it is located; and



            2.   The accessory structure will not adversely
affect a known archaeological, environmental, historical, or cultural
resource.



      (4)   Automated teller machines/kiosks.



         (a)   Structures accommodating stand-alone automated
teller machines or kiosks that are not inside or attached to a principal
structure shall meet the design standards applied to the principal structure
and shall use the same exterior materials, colors, and architectural style as
the principal structure.



         (b)   Drive-up or drive-through automated teller
machines shall be prohibited in the CB District unless they are located
internal to the block and do not result in stacking of vehicles in a public
right-of-way.



      (5)   Cart storage and cart corrals. The storage of carts and
placement of cart corrals in a parking lot shall be subject to the following
provisions:



         (a)   The location of cart storage shall be delineated
on a site plan.



         (b)   Cart corrals located in parking lots for the
purpose of drop-off by customers shall be located next to a landscape island,
with the landscape island being on the street side, in order to provide some
screening. Masonry walls may be used in lieu of landscaping.



         (c)   Carts stored outside and in front or to the side
of a building shall be located and screened behind an opaque wall constructed
of building materials and colors to match the building.



         (d)   Cart corrals shall not be provided in required
parking areas or parking lot landscaping islands.



      (6)   Flags and flagpoles.



         (a)   For flags and flagpoles on multifamily
nonresidential properties, see § 151.180; as they are regulated as signs.



         (b)   Flags and flagpoles on single family residential
properties:



            1.   In all residential districts, flagpoles shall
be located a distance equal to or greater than their own height above grade
from the nearest property line; but, in no event shall a flagpole in a
residential district exceed a height of 20 feet above grade. 



            2.   There shall be a maximum of one flagpole per
lot in all residential districts.



      (7)   Freestanding canopies. Canopies not attached to a
building shall be designed as follows:



         (a)   Canopies shall be located to prevent the stacking
of vehicles in a public right-of-way.



         (b)   Canopies covering a drive-through shall use a
similar roof form, pitch, and materials in order to appear as an extension of
the roof covering the principal structure.



         (c)   Canopies accessible by vehicles shall have a
maximum height of 15 feet measured from the finished grade to the underside
of the canopy.



         (d)   The design of the canopy, including any columns,
shall match the design and exterior building materials of the principal
building.



         (e)   Any lighting associated with a canopy shall be
shielded so that the source of illumination is not visible from off-site
areas.



      (8)   Home occupations.



         (a)   Applicability. Home occupations (sometimes called
home-based-businesses), which are businesses, professions, occupations, and
trades as defined by § 151.003, are categorized into two distinct types and
permitted only in the zoning districts identified in the table in §
151.025(D).



         (b)   Exemptions. The limitations of this division apply
only to activities at the home and are not intended to regulate business
activities that occur off-site. Agricultural uses are not considered home
occupations and shall instead be regulated as principal uses per § 151.021.



         (c)   Home occupation performance standards,
requirements, and prohibitions. Type 1 and 2 Home Occupations are limited in
accordance with the following performance standards.



 


PERFORMANCE STANDARD LIMITATIONS FOR HOME OCCUPATIONS




Type of Regulation to Mitigate Adverse Neighborhood Impacts

 

Aspect of the Business Operation

 

Type 1 Home Occupations/ Home-Based-Businesses [1]

 

Type 2 Home Occupations/ Home-Based-Businesses [2]






Extent of the residential property used and process

 

Procedure

 
Any residential dwelling may be used for a Type 1 Home Occupation use, but
only when such use is in conformance to the provisions of this subchapter.
 
Type 2 Home Occupations are allowed only via conditional use permit (CUP) in
zoning districts as identified by § 151.025(D), but only when such use is in
conformance to the provisions of this subchapter.



Minimum lot size and type of dwelling unit

 
Any dwelling unit is permitted to have a Type 1 Home Occupation/
Home-Based-Business.
 
Only single family detached dwellings on lots 2 acres in size or larger are
eligible for a Type 2 Home Occupation/Home-Based-Busine ss via the
conditional use permit process.



Use of dwelling unit

 
The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants and not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall
be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
 
The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants and not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall
be used in the conduct of the home occupation.



Use of accessory structure(s)

 
No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory structure (excludes
the storage of equipment or materials related to the home occupation).
 
A home occupation may be conducted in an accessory structure.



Traffic generation

 

Customers or clients

 
Max. of two per week (by appointment only).
 
Max. of ten per week permitted to come to the residence.



Deliveries associated with the home business

 
Max. of two deliveries per week above and beyond normal household parcel
delivery.
 
Max. of ten per week above and beyond normal household parcel delivery.



Employees - working out of the home

 
Limited to residents of the home. No outside employees are permitted to work
at the home for business related purposes.
 
Limited to residents of the home. No outside employees are permitted to work
at the home for business related purposes.



Other business trips

 
Max. of two per day related to the business above normal single family home
traffic generation (ten trips per day).
 
Max. of ten per day above normal single family home traffic generation (ten
trips per day).



Solid waste generation

 

Quantity

 
Max. of one 32-gallon residential waste container per week.
 
Max. of two 32-gallon residential waste containers per week.



Hazardous

 
None may be disposed of at home. The home occupation shall not adversely
affect public safety through the storage or generation of explosive,
flammable or hazardous materials in quantities which could constitute a
neighborhood danger based on the determination of the Town Fire Marshal.
 
None may be disposed of at home. The home occupation shall not adversely
affect public safety through the storage or generation of explosive,
flammable or hazardous materials in quantities which could constitute a
neighborhood danger based on the determination of the Town Fire Marshal.



Special limitations on home occupation uses

 

Repair, assembly, and fabrication

 
Minor assembly, fabrication, and repairs are permitted on a limited basis
provided they are in no way detectable off the lot. Examples include gift
basket assembly; tailoring; watches, clocks, or jewelry repair; or, other
home businesses that are at a scale similar to arts and crafts activities.
 
Assembly, fabrication, and repair activities permitted, with the limitations
below on noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, and the like. Examples
include furniture refinishing or repair, upholstery, appliance repair,
commercial catering or bakeries, or small engine repair.



Sales and services

 
There shall be no sales of merchandise directly to customers at the physical
home/business address; however, telephone and internet sales are permitted.
Provision of services directly to customers at the physical home/business
address is permitted by appointment only.
 
There shall be no sales of merchandise directly to customers at the physical
home/business address; however, telephone and internet sales are permitted.
Provision of services directly to customers at the physical home/business
address is permitted by appointment only.



Detectable evidence of the conduct of such home occupation

 

Exterior storage

 
None permitted.
 
Permitted, but must be in a rear yard and completely screened from view off
of the property.



Changes to principal dwelling or premise

 
There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling or
premises.
 
There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling; however,
changes are permitted to accessory structure(s) or for screening of outdoor
activity associated with the home occupation.



Noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, and the like

 
No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable
to the normal senses off the lot.

The home occupation shall not use equipment which creates off-premises line
voltage fluctuations or visual or audible interference with off-premises
radio or television receivers.
 
Machinery that creates noise or vibration, may be operated only periods of
short duration defined as a no longer than ten minutes per hour with
cumulative maximum not to exceed one hour per day.

No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which glare,
fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off
the lot. The home occupation shall not use equipment which creates
off-premises line voltage fluctuations or visual or audible interference with
off-premises radio or television receivers.



Additional Conditions

 

Good standing

 

Operators of a home occupation/home-based-business must have a valid business
license and all applicable Town of Collierville taxes current or the use
shall become null and void. The Town of Collierville Development Department
staff shall have the right to inspect the premise to determine compliance
with the applicable performance standard limitations.




Discontinuan ce

 

A home occupation/home-based-business that ceases to operate for a period of
6 continuous months shall be null and void.




Transferabi lity

 

A home occupation/home-based-business use shall be specific to only one
residential address and not transferable to another residential address.



[1]   A Type 1 Home Occupation is allowed “by right, with conditions”
in all residential zoning districts but must comply with certain regulations
contained in this table intended to limit the impacts on the surrounding
residential neighborhood. See § 151.025(D).

[2]   A Type 2 Home Occupation is not allowed “by right” and requires
approval by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen through the conditional use
permit process pursuant to § 151.310 Conditional Use Permits. See §
151.025(D).




 



      (9)   Indoor food sales. Indoor food sales occurring as an
accessory use shall comply with the following standards:



         (a)   The square footage used by food sales operations,
including preparation, sales, and storage, but not including dining, shall
not exceed 30% of the principal use.



         (b)   To the maximum extent practicable, food sales
areas shall be internal to the principal use they serve.



         (c)   Entrances to the food sales area shall be via the
principal use it serves and shall not have dedicated off-street parking areas
or signage unless such signage is permitted by § 151.180.



      (10)   Outdoor dining/seating. Outdoor dining means that
portion of the exterior of a building, which in the CB and MU Districts may
include limited portions of sidewalks within the public right-of-way, kept,
used, maintained and held out to the public as a place for sidewalk dining,
where food, beverages or other refreshments are served for consumption on the
premises. Includes the placing, locating, or permitting of the placing or
locating of furniture on sidewalks or patios adjacent to a business licensed
to operate as an eating and/or refreshment establishment.



         (a)   The location of outdoor dining shall be delineated
on the site plan and reviewed and approved per § 151.311.



         (b)   Approved outdoor dining areas are not intended to
authorize displays by organizations, establishments or businesses for vending
goods, for distributing information or for displaying goods.



         (c)   Adequate off-street parking for the additional
seating capacity of the use in accordance with §§ 151.115 to 151.117.



         (d)   The outdoor dining activity shall not block or
restrict a paved portion of the passageway to less than 48 inches in width or
block the ingress/egress to any building. Also, no items shall be placed so
as to block any doorway, driveway, crosswalk, or counter service window.



         (e)   Cafe furniture, and any other objects provided in
the outdoor dining area, shall be:



            1.   Maintained with a clean and attractive
appearance, and shall be kept safe and in good repair at all times.



            2.   Of a quality design, materials, and
workmanship, be consistent with the applicable Design Guidelines, and must be
approved or otherwise authorized by the Development Department.  The
following are examples of prohibited cafe furniture or objects in dining
areas:



               a.   Umbrellas or other decorative materials
that are not fire retardant, pressure treated, properly secured to withstand
strong winds or manufactured of fire resistant material.



               b.   Umbrellas, tablecloths, chairs or
tables with advertising, signage or other writing on them.



               c.   Furniture made of plastic.



      (11)   Accessory outdoor display (ancillary and nonessential).
The following regulations shall apply to outdoor display that is considered
to be an ancillary and nonessential part of the business operation for any
zoning district in which such display is permitted.



         (a)   General requirements. The following shall apply to
all forms of accessory outdoor display, regardless of zoning district.



            1.   The locations of outdoor display shall be
delineated on the site plan and reviewed and approved per § 151.311.



            2.   Outdoor display shall be conducted only by
the business licensed on the property, and shall only include merchandise
that is regularly offered for sale inside such business.



            3.   If the outdoor display area occupies a
sidewalk or other walkway, provide a walkway for pedestrians a minimum of
four feet in width.



            4.   In no event shall such items be:



               a.   Placed in the landscaped areas;



               b.   Placed so as to block any doorway,
driveway, crosswalk, or counter service window;



               c.   Be placed on elevated pads, ramps or
similar structures that serve primarily to increase the visibility of the
items;



               d.   Stacked in excess of six feet in
height; or



               e.   Extend beyond the bounds of the
business or the borders unless approved by the Development Department. For
the purposes of this chapter, the “bounds of the business” means that the
display must be located alongside, but not beyond, the corners or ends of the
permitted establishment’s outside walls. This prohibition shall create a
zone that keeps sidewalk and street corners clear for pedestrian travel.



            5.   Outdoor display furniture, such as racks and
displays, shall be:



               a.   Maintained with a clean and attractive
appearance, and shall be kept safe and in good repair at all times.



               b.   Of a quality design, materials, and
workmanship, be consistent with the applicable Design Guidelines, and must be
approved or otherwise authorized by the Development Department.



            6.   Vending equipment including, but not limited
to, food or rental vending machines, ice machines and propane gas exchanges,
permitted as part of a service station or convenience store use, and shall be:



               a.   Delineated on the site plan;



               b.   Counted as part of the maximum outdoor
display area;



               c.   Located to the side or the rear of the
building;



               d.   Located under a covered portion of the
principal building; and



               e.   Not located under a fuel canopy.



         (b)   Accessory outdoor display within the SCC, GI, and
RI Districts. In addition to the general requirements of § 151.025(11)(a),
accessory outdoor display in the SCC District shall be regulated as follows:



            1.   Accessory outdoor display areas shall be
limited to the following locations:



               a.   Contiguous to the front facade plane of
the building, to the side of the building, or under the covered portion of
the principal building;



               b.   Comprise no more than an area 40 feet
wide by 20 deep, or a width of no more than 25% of the linear building
frontage if the display is located at the front of the building, whichever is
less; and



               c.   A single street frontage for corner
lots or lots with double frontage.



            2.   Any accessory outdoor display/outdoor display
areas shall:



               a.   Be paved or dust free.



               b.   Be contained within an area defined by
a fence, wall, change in pavement, or other similar demarcation.



               c.   Not be located outside of the minimum
building setbacks.



               d.   Not occupy designated or required
parking spaces, fire lanes, internal traffic lanes, required landscape
buffers, public rights-of-way, or private access roads for display of
merchandise.



         (c)   Accessory outdoor display within CB, MU, and NC
Districts. In addition to the general requirements of § 151.025(11)(a),
accessory outdoor display in the CB, MU, and NC Districts may have limited
encroachment into the public right-of-way, sidewalk or common area on public
property to place, display, or sell food or nonfood merchandise to the
patrons of the establishment so long as the locations of outdoor display are
clearly delineated a site plan and reviewed and approved per § 151.311.



      (12)   Customary outdoor display (to principal use).



         (a)   Applicability. Regardless of the zoning district,
outdoor display associated with the following principal uses is considered to
be an integral and inseparable part of the business operation, and is
considered to be customary outdoor display:



            1.   Agricultural equipment, sales or service.



            2.   ATV, RV, trailer, or other similar businesses.



            3.   Auto dealership.



            4.   Auto rental.



            5.   Boat, marine sales.



            6.   Farmers market (private property).



            7.   Fruit or vegetable store.



            8.   Greenhouse or nursery products.



            9.   Heavy equipment sales and rental.



            10.   Mobile home/pre-fabricated home sales.



            11.   Motorcycle sales.



            12.   Moving equipment rental store.



            13.   Used car sales.



         (b)   General requirements. The following shall apply to
all forms of customary outdoor display, regardless of zoning district.



            1.   The locations of major outdoor display area
shall be delineated on the site plan and reviewed and approved per § 151.311.



            2.   The display area shall be outside of the
required building setbacks.



            3.   The display area shall be screened and
landscaped per the Design Guidelines the same as a commercial parking lot.



            4.   Outdoor display shall be conducted only by
the business licensed on the property, and shall only include merchandise
that is regularly offered for sale inside such business.



            5.   Outdoor display shall not be placed on
elevated pads, ramps or similar structures that serve primarily to increase
the visibility of the items.



            6.   If the outdoor display area occupies a
sidewalk or other walkway, provide a walkway for pedestrians a minimum of
four feet in width.



            7.   No items shall be placed so as to block any
doorway, driveway, crosswalk, or counter service window.



            8.   For stacked outdoor display items, be limited
to a maximum of six feet in stacking height.



            9.   Outdoor display furniture used in the outdoor
storage areas shall be:



               a.   Maintained with a clean and attractive
appearance, and shall be kept safe and in good repair at all times.



               b.   Of a quality design, materials, and
workmanship, be consistent with the applicable Design Guidelines, and must be
approved or otherwise authorized by the Development Department.



      (13)   Outdoor storage. The following regulations shall apply
to outdoor storage in any nonresidential zoning district in which such
storage is permitted.



         (a)   The locations of outdoor storage shall be
delineated on the site plan and reviewed and approved per § 151.311.



         (b)   Any outdoor storage of goods or merchandise shall:



            1.   Be located to the side or rear of the
principal structure;



            2.   Comply with the minimum building setback
requirements;



            3.   Be placed on paved or dust free areas;



            4.   Be stacked no higher than two feet below the
height of the fence used to screen the storage area;



            5.   Not occupy designated or required parking
spaces, fire lanes, internal traffic lanes, required landscape buffers,
public rights-of-way, or private access roads;



            6.   Not comprise no more than 10% of the gross
site area for sites within the NC, CB, GC, MU, or SCC Districts; and



            7.   Not be placed on elevated pads, ramps or
similar structures that serve primarily to increase the visibility of the
items; however, outdoor storage may be elevated off the ground, not more than
six inches, to allow for better maintenance and upkeep.



         (c)   Screening requirements. Outdoor storage areas
shall be fully screened from view off-site or from public rights-of-way with
an opaque material (fencing, walls, landscaping, or combination thereof) with
the following exceptions:



            1.   Live vegetative products are except from the
screening requirement and may be unscreened.



            2.   Fleet storage of vehicles used in the
operation of the business is not required to be fully screened, but such
parking areas must be screened and landscaped per the Design Guidelines the
same as a commercial parking lot.



         (d)   Covering requirements. Storage shall be located
inside of the principal building, within an accessory building, or be fully
covered by a canopy, open shed, awning, or similar open air structure;
however, the following are uses may be uncovered:



            1.   Automobiles, boats, motorcycles, ATVs, RVs,
trailers, and similar vehicles;



            2.   Dumpsters or recycling containers;



            3.   Mobile homes/pre-fabricated homes;



            4.   Moving equipment;



            5.   Agricultural equipment;



            6.   Heavy equipment;



            7.   Fruit, vegetables, or nursery products;



            8.   Rock, gravel, dirt, and sand; and



            9.   Certain items within the RI, GI, or FAR
Districts, that, by their nature, are customarily stored outdoors that, in
the opinion of the Town Planner, would be impractical to cover.



         (e)   Prohibited storage. The following forms of outdoor
storage shall be prohibited:



            1.   Storage within a truck, trailer, covered
container, or similar container, whether on wheels or stationary, except
temporarily used during construction per § 151.026 ;



            2.   Outdoor storage of trash or other debris;



            3.   Outdoor storage of wood or other attractive
nuisances; and



            4.   The unscreened storage of vehicles, trailers,
or similar equipment awaiting repair, whether operable, licensed, or
otherwise. The intent of this provision is not to regulate the normal
drop-offs for on-site repair in a timely manner, but instead to prohibit
unscreened storage on a property for extended periods of time.



      (14)   Parking, storage or use of major recreation
equipment.  For purposes of these regulations, major recreational equipment
is defined to include boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, tent
trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive
vehicles), motorized dwellings and the like. No major recreational equipment
shall be parked or stored in any front yard of any lot in a residential
district. However, such equipment may park anywhere on residential premises
for not to exceed 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment
shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or
stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use.



      (15)   Private recreation facilities. Private recreation
facilities associated with residential uses, including, but not limited to,
swimming pools and tennis courts, shall be exclusively for the use of the
residents or their guests.



      (16)   Retail sales of goods (as part of freight or warehouse
use). Retail sale of goods as part of permitted freight or warehouse uses
shall:



      (16)   Retail sales of goods (as part of freight or warehouse
use). Retail sale of goods as part of permitted freight or warehouse uses
shall:



         (a)   Be conducted within the same structure housing the
principal warehouse or freight use;



         (b)   Include only sales items manufactured by the
principal use or part of the principal warehouse’s stock;



         (c)   Be limited to 10% of the total gross floor area of
the principal use; and



         (d)   Provide adequate off-street parking for the retail
portion of the use in accordance with §§ 151.115 to 151.117.



      (17)   Satellite dish receiving antennas. Satellite dish
receiving antennas shall comply with the following:



         (a)   Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this
section is to promote communication within the Town in a manner which will
properly safeguard the public health, safety and welfare, by permitting the
use, within certain guidelines, of satellite dishes and antennas for all
single family uses.



For duplex, multifamily, and nonresidential uses, satellite dishes and
antennas shall be screened and/or painted per the applicable design
guidelines.



         (b)   Small dishes. A “dish” antenna one meter
(39.37") or less in diameter shall be installed in an unobtrusive manner. To
accomplish this, installation or construction of satellite dish antenna shall
be subject to the following minimum requirements:



            1.   Portable mounted satellite dish antennae are
prohibited.



            2.   A satellite dish antenna may not be placed on
any lot which does not contain a principal structure.



            3.   To the greatest extent possible, all
satellite dish antennae associated with single family uses should blend with
the dwelling and the immediate surrounding area. To meet this requirement,
the following guidelines are provided; however, the Town shall not require a
satellite dish antennae to be installed or constructed in a manner so to
interfere with television, radio or similar reception or contrary to state
and federal requirements:



               a.   Satellite dish antennae should be
installed at the side or rear of structures or yards whenever possible.



               b.   When installation to the side or rear
of structures or yards is not practicable, satellite dish antennae should be:



                  i.   Painted black, dark brown, or
dark green, or other color to match the roof if roof-mounted; or



                  ii.   Screened from adjacent
properties to the extent possible and practical with non-deciduous plantings,
if ground mounted.



         (c)   Large dishes. A “dish” antenna that is greater
than one meter (39.37") in diameter shall be subject to following:



            1.   A satellite dish antenna shall not exceed 12
feet in diameter and, unless impracticable, shall be of aluminum mesh type.



            2.   Shall be ground mounted, self-supporting
without wires, and be located on a permanent concrete base at grade, in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.



            3.   No more than one satellite dish shall be
permitted per lot, and such dish shall only service a receiver located on the
same lot.



            4.   The maximum height of the satellite dish,
including any supporting structure, shall not exceed 15 feet above ground
level.



            5.   In any residential zoning district, satellite
dishes and associated structures and equipment shall only be located in the
rear yard of the lot, and such dish and associated structures and equipment
shall be located no closer than five feet to any side or rear property line.



            6.   The dish shall not be visible to the general
public from the street fronting the property. Fences, walls, and/or
landscaping may be required to screen the dish.



            7.   Such satellite dish and base shall be
designed to withstand the equivalent of a 70 mile per hour wind. All
structures supporting the satellite dish shall be of galvanized, or
equivalent construction. All wiring servicing the satellite dish shall be
installed underground.



         (d)   Other antennas. Other forms of antennas for the
receiving or transmitting of electromagnetic waves not classified as a
“dish” antenna or otherwise regulated by § 151.024 shall be permitted as
an accessory use to a single family residence in any residential zoning
district. Such antenna and any support structures shall not be located in any
required front or side yard area and shall be located no closer than five
feet to any rear lot line. No antenna, whether freestanding or attached to
another structure, shall exceed 35 feet in height above grade.



      (18)   Security or caretaker quarters. A dwelling unit for
security or caretaker quarters shall:



         (a)   Be limited to one such dwelling unit per allowed
principal use.



         (b)   Be inside the principal building (detached
dwelling units or mobile homes are prohibited).



         (c)   Not exceed 1,500 square feet of gross floor area.



         (d)   Provide at least one off-street parking space for
each bedroom, in addition to the required parking for the principal use or
business.



         (e)   Be occupied only by the owner, operator,
caretaker, or an employee of the principal building, plus that person’s
immediate family.



      (19)   Stand-alone drive-through. Stand-alone drive-through
structures not attached to a principal structure shall:



         (a)   Be prohibited within the Historic District unless
they are placed internal to the block and do not cause stacking of vehicles
in a public right-of-way;



         (b)   Be a permanent structure with a fixed foundation;



         (c)   Be limited in size to 30% of floor area of the
principal structure or 600 square feet, whichever is less;



         (d)   Use the same exterior materials, colors, and
building style as the principal use;



         (e)   Be oriented so that stacking lanes do not extend
into primary drive aisles;



         (f)   Not be located in private drives, landscaping
areas, required yards, or setbacks; and



         (g)   Not be entitled to additional freestanding signs.



      (20)   Interpretation of unidentified accessory uses. The Town
Planner shall evaluate applications for accessory uses that are not
identified in § 151.025(D) on a case-by-case basis, based on the following
standards:



         (a)   The definition of accessory use in § 151.003, and
the general accessory use standards and limitations established in §
151.025(C):



         (b)   The additional standards for comparable accessory
uses, if applicable, established in § 151.025(D);



         (c)   The purpose and intent of the base district,
overlay district, or planned development in which the accessory use is
located;



         (d)   Potential adverse impacts the accessory use or
structure may have on other lots, compared with other accessory uses
permitted in the district; and



         (e)   The compatibility of the accessory use with other
principal and accessory uses permitted in the district.



(Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord.
2011-05, passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord. 2013-07, passed 7-8-13; Am. Ord. 2015-07,
passed 9-28-15; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.026  TEMPORARY USES, ACTIVITIES, AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Purpose and applicability. This section allows for the
establishment of certain temporary uses of limited duration and special
events, provided that such uses comply with the standards in this section and
are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period. Temporary uses and
special events are different from principal or accessory uses as they do not
involve permanent alterations to the site or the construction or alteration
of any permanent building or structure. The Development Director shall
exercise the authority as established herein to determine whether a use,
activity, or structure is temporary or permanent, with any appeals of
decisions being heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals. This section shall have
no application to mobile homes utilized for principal residential purposes
pursuant to § 151.021.



   (B)   Table of allowed temporary uses, activities, and structures.
The table below summarizes allowed temporary uses, activities, and structures
and any specific regulations that apply in § 151.026(D) or in other portions
of the Town Code. Temporary uses or structures not listed in the table are
prohibited.



 


Temporary Structure

 

Permit Required?

 

Duration Limits?

 

Specific Regulations



Construction dumpster
 

No

 

Yes

 

§ 151.026(D)(1)



Construction trailer
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

§ 151.026(D)(2)



Real estate sales office/model sales home
 

No

 

Yes

 

§ 151.026(D)(3)



Tent
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

§ 151.026(D)(4)



Temporary storage in a portable container
 

Yes (nonresidential)



No (residential)

 

Yes

 

§ 151.026(D)(5)



Temporary structure (as part of an educational facility or institutional use)
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

§ 151.026(D)(6)




 



 


Temporary Uses or Activities

 

Permit Required?

 

Duration Limits?

 

Specific Regulations





Garage, yard, or rummage sales
 

No

 

Yes

 

§ 110.02



Charitable solicitations
 

Yes

 

No

 

Chapter 111



Farmers markets
 

Yes

 

No

 

§ 151.024



Peddlers and itinerant vendors
 

No

 

No

 

§§ 110.20 to 110.25



Special events
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

§ 151.026(D)(7)



Sidewalk sales and display events
 

No

 

Yes

 

§ 111.05



Town square produce vending
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

§ 151.026(D)(8)





 



   (C)   General regulations for temporary uses and structures. All
temporary uses, structures, or events shall:



      (1)   Obtain the appropriate permit(s) from the Town (as
required);



      (2)   Not include permanent alterations to the site, a
permanent building, or structure;



      (3)   Not violate the applicable conditions of approval from a
Town board or commission that apply to a principal or accessory use on the
site;



      (4)   Not be used to circumvent the outdoor display or storage
regulations of § 151.025 that pertain to a principal or accessory use on the
site;



      (5)   Not interfere with the normal operations of any
permanent use (principal or accessory) located on the property;



      (6)   Be compatible with the principal uses taking place on
the site;



      (7)   Not be detrimental to property or improvements in the
surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare;



      (8)   Not have substantial adverse effects or noise impacts on
nearby residential neighborhoods;



      (9)   Contain sufficient land area to allow the temporary use,
structure, or event to occur, as well as adequate land to accommodate the
parking and traffic movement associated with the temporary use, without
disturbing environmentally sensitive lands.



   (D)   Specific regulations for certain temporary uses and
structures. In addition to the general regulations for temporary uses and
structures, the following shall also apply, as applicable:



      (1)   Construction dumpster.



         (a)   The placement of a temporary construction dumpster
or other trash receptacle within a public right-of-way, or other site owned
by the Town, shall be subject to applicable standards in the Town Code.



         (b)   Temporary trash receptacles or dumpsters located
outside of public rights-of-way on private property shall comply with the
following standards:



            1.   Be associated with development for which a
valid building permit has been issued, or applied for, from the Codes
Division;



            2.   Be located to the side or the rear of the
site, to the maximum extent practicable;



            3.   Be located on the same site, or in the same
development, as the related construction;



            4.   When located within residential developments,
be located as far as possible from developed lots containing existing
residential dwellings;



            5.   Not be located within a floodplain or
otherwise obstruct drainage flow;



            6.   Not be placed within 15 feet of a fire
hydrant or within a required landscaping area;



            7.   Be located outside of any required tree
protection fencing and the dripline of existing trees; and



            8.   Be located in a place where the delivery or
pickup vehicle can access the dumpster via a permanent temporary gravel
construction driveway.



      (2)   Construction trailer. Construction trailers may be
permitted on a construction site without site plan approval, provided that
the trailer is:



         (a)   Associated with development for which a valid
building permit has been issued, or applied for, from the Codes Division.
Construction trailers shall be removed from a construction site prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy or if the building permit becomes
otherwise void.



         (b)   Located to the side or the rear of the site, to
the maximum extent practicable.



         (c)   Located on the same site, or in the same
development, as the related construction.



         (d)   Located outside of any required tree protection
fencing and the dripline of existing tree.



         (e)   Sales, leasing, hiring for the principal use under
construction, and residential uses are expressly prohibited in construction
trailers.



      (3)   Real estate sales office/model sales home. One temporary
real estate sales office or model sales home per builder or developer shall
be permitted in a section or phase of a new residential or nonresidential
development, provided that the use:



         (a)   Is located on a lot approved as part of a
development.



         (b)   Is aesthetically compatible with the character of
surrounding development in terms of exterior color, predominant exterior
building materials, and landscape.



         (c)   Is operated by a developer or builder active in
the same phase or section where the use is located. Common real estate home
office functions include marketing, displaying interior or exterior finishes
or options, and real estate transactions.



         (d)   Not used simultaneously as a residence and a real
estate sales office/model sales home.



         (e)   The model home should be converted into a
permanent residential use upon the substantial build-out of in section or
phase of the development; however, the use of a residential structure as a
real estate sales office/model sales home shall cease prior to the release of
the development agreement for the section or phase of the development.



      (4)   Tents. Except for tents used exclusively for camping
purposes, tents and membrane structures having an area in excess of 200
square feet, and canopies in excess of 400 square feet, shall:



         (a)   Obtain a permit from the Fire Marshal.



         (b)   Maintain a minimum clearance of 20 feet from all
other structures and tents.



         (c)   A tent (or tents) shall not be erected on a lot in
excess of 30 days within a calendar year, whether separate occurrences or a
single occurrence.



         (d)   Not obstruct emergency vehicle access to adjacent
lots or disrupt pedestrian circulation; and structures.



         (e)   The lot or site shall be restored to its original
condition within two days of removal of the tent.



         (f)   Except where part of an approved special event
pursuant to § 151.026 (D)(8), a farmers market per § 151.025, or a site
approved for vehicular leasing or sales, sale of merchandise, leasing,
storage, and hiring, uses are expressly prohibited within tents.



      (5)   Temporary storage in a portable shipping container.
Temporary storage in a portable shipping container shall be permitted to
serve an existing principal or accessory use, subject to the following
standards:



         (a)   Residential uses. The overnight placement of any
moving and/or storage structure, whether temporary or permanent and
regardless of size, type or nature, in the paved or unpaved portion of any
driveway, or any location on a lot, or in or on any road right-of-way is
prohibited and unlawful. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a temporary moving
and/or storage structure may be placed on the paved driveway portion of a
parcel in conjunction with a bona fide move to or from the parcel resulting
from a change in occupancy provided that, in no event, may the moving and/or
storage structure remain on the premises for a period exceeding seven
consecutive days. Only one placement of such a structure may occur on a
parcel during each calendar year absent written proof being provided in
advance to the Development Director or his/her designee that a bona fide
additional move will occur during the same calendar year relative to the same
premises.  The Development Director or his/her designee may extend the
maximum duration to 30 days if the temporary structure is being used in
conjunction with a bona fide home remodeling project associated with an
active building permit or other evidence requested by the Development
Director.



         (b)   Nonresidential uses. A portable shipping container
shall be located as follows:



            1.   Prior approval from the Codes Division is
required prior to the containers being placed on the lot;



            2.   Containers shall not be within the front yard;



            3.   Containers shall not be within ten feet of
any lot line or structure;



            4.   Containers shall not be placed in a manner
that impedes ingress, egress, or emergency access; and



            5.   A container shall not be on an individual lot
for more than 12 consecutive months. If the containers need to be on site for
more than one year, or a frequently traded out that effectively leaves an
area of a site dedicated to the storage of portable shipping containers, a
conditional use permit (CUP) is needed to approve longer durations, or a
permanent location devoted to portable shipping containers, and the location
shall be shown on the site plan for the use.



      (6)   Temporary structures (as part of institutional uses).
Temporary structures serving institutional uses shall comply with the
following standards:



         (a)   Location.



            1.   Be located to the side or rear of the
principal structure(s) and at least five feet from any other structure.



            2.   Be permitted within the building envelope but
not within required off-street parking, open space set-aside, or required
landscaping areas.



         (b)   Standards.



            1.   Use under skirting or other methods to
prevent unauthorized access underneath the structure(s).



            2.   Incorporate evergreen shrubs planted around
the base of the structure, each located at least five feet on-center, when
visible from other developed lots or public rights-of-way.



            3.   Comply with the parking standards for the
corresponding use type in §§ 151.115 to 151.117.



            4.   Not be required to be compatible with the
existing principal structure exterior colors or materials.



            5.   Sales, leasing, hiring, and residential uses
are expressly prohibited in temporary structures associated with
institutional uses.



         (c)   Approval and duration.



            1.   This use is permitted, if approved by the
Development Director, and may remain on the site for no more than three
years. This three year period may be renewed for up to two additional one
year periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request,
submitted to the Codes Division at least 30 days prior to the expiration of
the permit. In no event, however, shall such extensions allow the temporary
structure to remain on the site for more than five years.



            2.   Following removal of a temporary structure,
the area shall be restored to its original condition, including required
trees and shrubs, unless the area is intended to accommodate new construction.



         (d)   Performance guarantee.



            1.   A development agreement or other form of
performance guarantee may be required for any required screening or to
guarantee that the structure is removed and the site is restored to its
original condition.



      (7)   Special events. The intent of this is to assist the Town
in providing and coordinating year-round gatherings for the public, known as
special events, by ensuring events are both safe and meet the basic needs of
participants.  An event may be required to obtain Town approvals and permits
for the purpose of determining compliance with the Zoning Code and to make
provisions for adequate parking and traffic flow, sanitation, security,
police, fire and safety protection. Special events have been divided into two
classifications based upon their impact to Town property and services and
their potential impact on the community.



         (a)   Class I Special Events.



            1.   A permit from the Special Events Committee is
required in any of the following circumstances when a special event either:



               a.   Involves the use of Town property
(parks, facilities, greenways, trails, public rights-of-way, and the like); or



               b.   Requires Town services that are deemed
“non-basic” as defined in this section.



            2.   Applications shall be submitted to the Parks
and Recreation Department no later than 60 days prior to the event.  In
these instances, notices shall be given to all affected departments so that
they may determine their level of sponsorship.  Events in which the Town
participates as one of the organizers are not exempt from the requirement of
obtaining applicable permits.



         (b)   Class II Special Events. Any special event that is
on private property and does not require Town services (non-basic) shall be
considered a Class II Special Event.  Examples may include, but are not
necessarily limited to, outdoor musicals, concerts, festivals, fairs,
carnivals; outdoor races and other forms of competition and athletic events;
air shows; equipment shows and promotional events; religious services,
classes; meetings; and, parties, not otherwise exempted by this section.



            1.   Conditional use permit (CUP) required. A
conditional use permit (CUP) per § 151.310  permit shall be required for
any Class II Special Event which is expected to have over 250 people at any
one time attending the event on private property (final attendance estimates
may be determined by the Town); or is comprised of any series of related
events held at a location on consecutive days, weekends, or dates that is
expected to have a cumulative total of over 500 people attending during the
course of a calendar year.



               a.   Exemptions. Regardless of attendance,
the following special events are not classified as Class II Special Events
and are not required to obtain a conditional use permit:



                  i.   An event that is to be held
within a permanent facility specifically approved and permitted for the
proposed use or activity. Examples include, but are not limited to, church
sanctuaries, country clubs, gymnasiums, assembly or performance halls, and
conference centers.



                  ii.   Funeral processions.



                  iii.   Company picnics for nonprofit
organization or business.



                  iv.   Private outdoor events on the
grounds of existing institutional properties, such as schools or churches
that do not block driveways or required parking spaces. In such instances,
the applicant may be asked to demonstrate an appropriate physical area for
fire protection purposes, as well as appropriate sanitation facilities and
road access.



                  v.   An event, such as a
neighborhood-wide garage sale or social gathering, that is to be conducted by
a duly authorized residential property owner’s association, occurs entirely
within the area of its jurisdiction, is arranged primarily for the benefit of
association members and does not benefit any outside organization.



                  vi.   An event, or recurring events,
held at an outdoor place of public assembly specifically designed for the
gathering together of persons for commercial, civic, or social functions, or
recreation for food or drink consumption. Examples include, but are not
limited to, sports stadiums, pools, athletic fields, outdoor amphitheaters or
stages, outdoor dining areas or patios. To be eligible for this exception,
the outdoor place of public assembly must be shown on a site plan approved by
the Town.



                  vii.   An event wholly contained on
property owned by the state or Shelby County that does not have off-site
impacts.



               b.   Applications. Shall be submitted to the
Development Department no later than 60 days prior to the event.



         (c)   “Non-basic” Town services.



            1.   Special events often require Town services
that are considered “non-basic” and beyond normal municipal services.
When these non-basic services are required, the event shall automatically be
classified as a Class I Special Event and reviewed by the Special Events
Committee. If during the review process for a Class II Special Event it is
discovered that “non-basic” Town services are needed, the event shall be
reclassified as a Class I Special Event and referred to the Special Events
Committee. In its review of a Class I Event, the Special Events Committee
shall provide notices to all affected Town departments to determine their
level of sponsorship.  Fees shall be applicable for such services, which may
include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:



               a.   Electrical service;



               b.   Onsite custodial support;



               c.   Garbage removal;



               d.   Traffic control/public safety presence;



               e.   Police security - after event hours;



               f.   Onsite stand-by fire personnel, and/or
Fire Safety Inspectors; or



               g.   Onsite staff (for electrical or other
problems after regular working hours).



            2.   Any Class II Special Event that does not meet
the attendance threshold of a conditional use permit may still require one or
more of the services listed above and therefore be reclassified as a Class I
Event.  Sponsors of these special events are responsible to notify the
affected Town departments and pay appropriate fees.



         (d)   Permits may be required. In addition to special
event permits or conditional use permits required by this section, other Town
permits, inspections or other approvals may be required if the special event
includes:



            1.   Structures to be built, such as booths,
stands, and the like;



            2.   The use of a tent or canopy;



            3.   Any electrical hook up;



            4.   Amusement rides;



            5.   Charitable solicitations;



            6.   Signage that is visible off site;



            7.   The outdoor display or storage of goods; or



            8.   The sale of alcoholic beverages.



      (8)   Town square produce vendor. The sale of vegetables,
fruit, and produce on the south side (North Rowlett) of the Town square shall
be permitted, with the approval of the Development Director or his/her
designee, pursuant to the following:



         (a)   Each growing season, a maximum of six Town square
produce vendor permits shall be valid at any one time for the south side of
the square/North Rowlett.



         (b)   The Development Department shall promulgate
administrative procedures forms, and guidelines for Town square produce
vendor permits, and shall annually track the permits issued and keep
permanent public records.



(Ord. 2011-06, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-9-12)



§ 151.027  BULK REGULATIONS AND YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Residential zoning districts.



 




 

Zone District

 

Description

 

Minimum Lot Size

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

Maximum Height [2]

 

Setbacks






FAR

 

Forest Agriculture Residential

 

Single-family detached

 

5 acres

 

350 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1][3]:   100 ft.



Rear:      75 ft.



Side:      150 ft. total, neither side less than 75 ft.




R-L

 

Large Lot/Estate

 

Single-family detached

 

2 acres

 

250 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1][3]:   60 ft.



Rear:      50 ft.



Side:      100 ft. total, neither side less than 50 ft.




R-L1

 

Large Lot

 

Single-family detached

 

1 acre

 

150 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1][3]:   50 ft.



Rear:      40 ft.



Side:      25 ft.




R-25

 

Low Density

 

Single-family detached

 

25,000 sq. ft.

 

125 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1][3]:   50 ft.



Rear:      35 ft.



Side:      15 ft.




R-1

 

Low Density

 

Single-family detached

 

15,000 sq. ft.

 

100 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1][3]:   40 ft.



Rear:      30 ft.



Side:      25 ft. total, neither side less than 10 ft.




R-1A

 

Low Density

 

Single-family detached

 

12,600 sq. ft.

 

90 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1][3]:   40 ft.



Rear:      30 ft.



Side:      25 ft. total, neither side less than 10 ft.




R-2

 

Medium Density

 

Single-family detached

 

11,250 sq. ft.

 

90 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1][3]:   30 ft.



Rear:      30 ft.



Side:      20 ft. total, neither side less than 7.5 ft.




R- 2A

 

Medium Density

 

Single- family detached

 

10,000 sq. ft.

 

80 ft.

 

35 ft.

 
Front [1][3]:   30 ft.

Rear:      30 ft.


Side:      15 ft. total, neither side less than 7.5 ft.




R-3

 

High Density

 

Single-family detached and duplex

 

Single-family detached:  9,000 sq. ft.

 

Single-family dwelling: 75 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1][3]:   30 ft.



Rear:      30 ft.


Side:


Single-family:   7.5 ft. on each side



Duplexes:   10 ft. on each side




Two-family dwelling: 12,000 sq. ft.

 

Two-family dwelling: 90 ft.




R-3A

 

High Density

 

Single-family detached and duplex

 

Single-family detached:  6,000 sq. ft.

 

Single-family dwelling: 60 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1][3]:   25 ft.



Rear:      20 ft.


Side:


Single-family:   12 ft. total, neither side less than 5 ft.*



Duplexes:   10 ft. on each side




Two-family dwelling: 7,500 sq. ft.

 

Two-family dwelling: 75 ft.




R-4

 

Multi-Family

 

Single-family detached and Multi-family

 

Greater of 9,000 sq. ft. or 5,445 sq. ft. per dwelling unit

 

None stated

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1]:      30 ft.



Rear:      30 ft.



Side:      10 ft.




T

 

Mobile Home Park

 

Mobile home parks

 

5 acres for a park 4,500 sq. ft. plot size

 

None stated

 

35 ft.

 
For individual mobile home plots:


Front [1][3]:   25 ft.



Rear:      15 ft.



Side:      10 ft.


Perimeter


buffer:      [4]




R-TH

 

Townhouse

 

Townhomes

 

Lot area may correspond to ground floor area of unit, Density: 1 unit per
5,445 sq. ft. of parcel area

 

100 ft.



Dwelling unit: 20 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

Front [1][3]:   30 ft.



Rear:      30 ft.



Side:      20 ft. total, neither side less than 10 ft.


Separation

between


buildings:   20 ft.



[1] On double frontage lots and corner lots, there shall be a front yard on
each street.


[2] Maximum building height, as defined by § 151.003 measured at the front
wall or other portion of a building facing the street; however, this
limitation shall not apply to structures identified in § 151.005(D).


[3] The front yard requirement for dwellings may be reduced according to §
151.005(A) in certain circumstances.


[4] Around all mobile home parks there shall be provided a 20 foot wide
buffer area in addition to the yard requirements above. Landscaping and
screening shall be provided.


[5] Bay windows, porches, balconies, fire escapes, and steps projecting not
more than 36 inches from an exterior wall for a distance not more than
one-third of the length of such wall, are permitted encroachments in required
“Yards” per § 151.003.




 



   (B)   Commercial/office zoning districts.



 




 

Zone District

 

Description

 

Area/Lot Size

 

Maximum Height [2]

 

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

 

Setbacks




NC

 

Neighborhood Commercial

 

Serve the immediate residential neighborhood

 

Maximum area: 1.5 acres

 

25 ft.

 

None

 

Front [1]:   40 ft. with no parking in front yard 



60 ft. with parking in front yard 



Rear:   30 ft.



Side:   20 ft. adjoining residential [6], otherwise 10 ft.




SCC

 

Shopping Center Commercial

 

Shopping and commercial centers

 

Minimum area: 6 acres, but internal divisions are permitted [3]

 

70 ft. [4]

 

0.25

 

Front [1]:   50 ft.



Rear:   30 ft. rear yard, service court, or combination thereof  Side: 20
ft. adjoining residential [6], otherwise 15 ft.




 



 




 

Zone District

 

Description

 

Area/Lot Size

 

Maximum Height [2]

 

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

 

Setbacks






GC

 

General Commercial

 

Wide variety of uses generating a large volume of traffic

 

Minimum lot area: 15,000 sq. ft.

 

50 ft. [5]

 

0.25

 

Front [1]:   50 ft. abutting arterial streets, otherwise 40 ft.



Rear:   30 ft.



Side:   20 ft. adjoining residential [6], otherwise 10 ft.




MPO

 

Medical Professional Office

 

Professional and business offices

 

No minimum lot size

 

25 ft.[7][8]

 

None

 

Front [1]:   40 ft.



Rear:   30 ft.



Side:    20 ft. adjoining residential [6], otherwise 10 ft.



[1] On double frontage lots and corner lots, there shall be a front yard on
each street.


[2] Maximum building height, as defined by § 151.003 measured at the front
wall or other portion of a building facing the street; however, this
limitation shall not apply to structures identified in § 151.005(D).


[3] All developments shall meet the minimum site area. However, within the
development, internal divisions of property may be allowed which are in
conformity with an approved site plan designed as a unified development as
defined by § 151.003. There shall be no minimum lot area for these internal
divisions of the development, provided that within the entire approved
development all requirements of this section are met.


[4] A building, or portion thereof, that extends more than 35 feet above
finished grade shall be set back from the required front, side and rear
building setback requirement an additional two feet for every one foot of
height above 35 feet in height from the finished grade, not to exceed 70 feet
in height.


[5] A building, or portion thereof, that extends more than 35 feet above
finished grade shall be set back from the required front, side and rear
building setback requirement an additional two feet for every one foot of
height above 35 feet in height from finished grade, not to exceed 50 feet in
height.


[6] The larger setback shall be apply when the nonresidential lot is adjacent
to either a residential use or residential zoning district.


[7] A building, or portion thereof, on a property within 1,000 feet of the
right-of-way line of Houston Levee Road from Winchester Boulevard southward
to SR 385 shall be permitted to exceed 25 feet above finished grade not to
exceed 70 feet in height; however, the building shall be set back from the
required front, side and rear building setback requirement and additional two
feet for every one foot of height above 25 feet from finished grade.


[8] Structures in Seniors Housing Planned Developments may exceed 25 feet
above finished grade pursuant to § 151.159.




 



   (C)   Industrial zoning districts.



 




 

Zone District

 

Description

 

Area/Lot Size

 

Maximum Height [2]

 

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

 

Maximu m Lot Coverage

 

Setbacks




RI

 

Restrictive Industrial

 

Least objectionable characteristics

 

No minimum lot size

 

60 ft.

 

None specified

 

50% of total lot area

 

Front [1]:   40 ft.



Rear:   30 ft. adjoining residential [3], otherwise 25 ft.



Side:   25 ft.




 



 




 

Zone District

 

Description

 

Area/Lot Size

 

Maximum Height [2]

 

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

 

Maximu m Lot Coverage

 

Setbacks




GI

 

General Industrial

 

Well segregated from other industrial uses

 

2 acres

 

60 ft.

 

None specified

 

50% of total lot area

 

Front [1]:   40 ft.



Rear:   50 ft. adjoining residential [6], otherwise 25 ft.



Side:   40 ft. adjoining residential [3], otherwise 25 ft.



[1] On double frontage lots and corner lots, there shall be a front yard on
each street.


[2] Maximum building height, as defined by § 151.003 measured at the front
wall or other portion of a building facing the street; however, this
limitation shall not apply to structures identified in § 151.005(D). In the
RI and GI Districts, the Planning Commission, during the site plan review
process, may allow for a greater building height provided that no fire hazard
is created in the opinion of the Fire Marshal.


[3] The larger setback shall be apply when the nonresidential lot is adjacent
to either a residential use or residential zoning district.



 



   (D)   Site development standards for traditional zoning districts
(TN, MU, NC and CB) [1] [11].



 




 

Building/Lot Type




Standard

 

Residential Detached (Street Loaded)

 

Residential Detached (Alley Loaded)

 

Residential Attached

 

Mixed Use

 

Non-Residential





Front facade zone [2] [3] [6] [10]
 

10 - 30 feet [4]

 

10 - 30 feet [4]

 

0 - 25 feet [4]

 

0 - 15 feet

 

0 - 20 feet



Side yard setback [6] [9]
 

5 feet

 

5 feet

 

[5]

 

0

 

0 feet



Rear yard setback [6] [9] [10]
 

20 feet

 

5 or 20 feet [10]

 

5 feet

 

0 feet

 

0 feet



Maximum height
 

[8]

 

[8]

 

[8]

 

[7] [8]

 

[7] [8]



Minimum lot size [4]
 

6,000 square feet

 

3,000 square feet

 

[12]

 

None

 

None



Minimum lot width
 

50 feet

 

30 feet

 

None

 

None

 

None





 



 




 

Building/Lot Type




Standard

 

Residential Detached (Street Loaded)

 

Residential Detached (Alley Loaded)

 

Residential Attached

 

Mixed Use

 

Non-Residential





Floor area ratio (FAR)
 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None



Maximum residential density
 

--

 

--

 

[12]

 

[12]

 

--



NOTES:



[1]   For lots in recorded subdivisions or approved planned developments
(PDs) approved prior to (adoption date of 2011-05), the setbacks and lot
sizes, and maximum densities shown in this table shall not apply, and the
requirements shown on the final plat, outline plan, or conditions on existing
lots shall govern.




[2]   The front facade of a structure should be placed within the front
facade zone. Numbers shown as a range indicate a minimum and maximum (e.g.,
10 - 30) front facade setback. Appurtenances are permitted to encroach up to
6 feet past the minimum front facade setback line.




[3]   For mixed use and single use nonresidential building types, the
front building setback shall be measured from the back edge of the sidewalk,
not the right-of-way line.




[4]   To ensure infill compatibility, where the average front yard for
existing adjacent residential buildings is outside of the ranges indicated,
the minimum and maximum front yard setbacks shall instead be between 85 and
115% of the average front setback distance from the street established by the
existing adjacent homes, unless otherwise modified by the PC or BMA, as
applicable.




[5]   There shall be a minimum of 0 feet each side, with a minimum of 10
feet between detached buildings.




[6]   Within a side yard setback bay windows, porches, balconies, fire
escapes, and steps projecting not more than 36 inches from an exterior wall
for a distance not more than one-third if the length of such wall, provided a
minimum of 10 feet between buildings is maintained.




[7]   All floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed use building
shall have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of 11 feet.




[8]   The maximum height of buildings within traditional zoning districts
shall be based on the special areas in the Downtown Collierville Small Area
Plan as follows, and measured in stories from the average grade of the front
facade to the eave of the highest story, not including a basement or an
attic. Height limitations shall not apply to those elements as regulated in
§ 151.005(D).


   Special
Area                           Maximum Height

   4                              2.5 stories

   2, Part of 3 on the south side of Washington
St.               4 stories

   1, Part of 3 on the north side of Washington St., 5 -
20            3 stories



[9]   In the NC Neighborhood Commercial District, a 10 foot landscape
buffer yard shall be provided where the lot adjoins a residential
use/district.  The buffer yard shall contain a mixture of evergreen trees,
evergreen shrubs and an opaque masonry wall or fence to be approved by the
Historic District Commission or Design Review Commission, as applicable.




[10]   See § 151.210(C)(13) and the Design Guidelines for proper garage
placement and setback from an alley or road.





 



 




 

Building/Lot Type




Standard

 

Residential Detached (Street Loaded)

 

Residential Detached (Alley Loaded)

 

Residential Attached

 

Mixed Use

 

Non-Residential




[11]   Setbacks, lot widths, or lot sizes beyond the ranges presented in
this table or its footnotes, may be modified through the site plan process by
the BMA, or the subdivision platting process by the PC, in cases where
topographical or natural constraints exist, or where a particular design
approach recommended by the Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan warrants a
different setback, lot width, or lot size.




[12]   1,200 square feet is the minimum lot size for vertically attached
units on a fee simple lot. There is no minimum lot size for other forms of
attached residential units (such as stacked flats, apartments, lofts and
condominiums) or mixed use structures; however, these forms shall instead be
regulated by the maximum residential density based upon the applicable
special areas in the Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan.


   Special Area               Maximum Number of Dwelling
Units Per Acre (DU/A)

   1                  15 DU/A

   2 and 3                  18 DU/A

   5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 18            12 DU/A

   All other special areas            N/A


The BMA may approve density levels for attached dwellings and mixed use
building types above the maximum residential on a case-by-case basis provided
that following criteria are met:



   (a)   Sufficient infrastructure exists to serve the proposed
development, including, but not limited to, water and sewer systems, streets
and traffic signalization, and stormwater management systems; and no
excessive burden is placed on parks, recreation areas, schools, police and
fire protection and other public facilities which serve or are proposed to
serve the development;



   (b)   The proposed development is consistent with the applicable
special area and character area policies and recommendations, and character
studies found in the adopted Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan; and



   (c)   The proposed development is consistent with the traditional
design principles found in Chapter 6 of the adopted Downtown Collierville
Small Area Plan are met.




 



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord.
2015-19, passed 11-9-15; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16; Am. Ord. 2018-02,
passed 8-14-18)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 151.035  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (A)   The residential districts established in this chapter are
designed to promote and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience,
order, prosperity and other aspects of the general welfare.



   (B)   These general goals include, among others, the following more
specific purposes:



      (1)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for
residential developments to meet adequately the housing needs of the present
and expected future population for a variety of choices in site selections;



      (2)   To permit improved movement on the public ways and to
utilize effectively existing public ways, and, as far as possible, to
mitigate the effects of heavy traffic and more particularly, all through
traffic, in residential areas;



      (3)   To protect residential areas against undue congestion,
as far as possible, by regulating the density of population, the intensity of
activity, the bulk of buildings in relation to the surrounding land and to
one another and by providing for off-street parking spaces for automotive
vehicles;



      (4)   To require the provision of open space in residential
areas wherever practicable; and to encourage the provision of better
standards of open space by permitting moderately larger bulk, higher density
and greater intensity with better standards of open space in order to open up
residential areas to light and air, to provide open areas for rest and
recreation and to break the monotony of continuous building bulk and thereby
to provide a desirable environment for urban living;



      (5)   To provide for access of light and air to windows and
for privacy, as far as possible, by controls over the height of buildings and
structures;



      (6)   To provide appropriate space for public and private
educational, religious, recreational and similar facilities and public
utilities which serve the needs of nearby residents and which do not create
objectionable influences and to coordinate the intensity of residential land
use with the appropriate community facilities;



      (7)   To provide a zoning framework conducive to freedom of
architectural design in order to encourage the development of more attractive
and economical building forms;



      (8)   To promote the most desirable use of land and direction
of building development in accordance with a well considered land use plan,
to promote stability of residential development, to protect the character of
the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve
the value of land and buildings and to protect the community’s tax revenues;



      (9)   To exclude from these districts all buildings and other
structures and uses having commercial characteristics whether operated for
profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations
specifically provided for in these regulations shall be considered as not
having such characteristics if they otherwise conform to the provisions of
this chapter.



(`00 Code, § 11-401)



§ 151.036  R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  These districts are designed to provide
suitable areas for low density residential development characterized by an
open appearance. The residential development will consist of single family
detached dwellings and accessory structures. These districts also include
community facilities, public utilities and open uses which serve specifically
the residents of these districts. Further, it is the intent of this chapter
that these districts be located so that the provision of appropriate urban
services will be physically and economically feasible and so that provision
is made for the orderly expansion and maintenance of urban residential
development.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



         (a)   Within the H-1 Historic Zoning District, the
following conditional uses will be permitted within existing institutional
structures only, subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
re: change in use; the Historic Zoning Commission re: certificate of
appropriateness, ie: modification of the exterior portions of the structure
except in instances where the Development Director has authority to approve
same; and site plan review by the Planning Commission and Board of Mayor and
Aldermen. The change in use shall preserve and enhance the best elements and
character of certain properties by site design, architecture, landscaping,
access and have no detrimental impact on the surrounding area including, but
not limited to, lights, noise, smell and visual pollution.



            1.   Antique store.



            2.   Art gallery, studio.



            3.   Interior decorating shop.



            4.   Tea room.



         (b)   Undeveloped and vacant.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-1 Low Density
Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions.  General provisions applicable to
all residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



   (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



(`00 Code, § 11-402)  (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11)



§ 151.037  R-1A LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  These districts are designed to provide
suitable areas for low density residential development characterized by an
open appearance. The residential development will consist of single family
detached dwellings and accessory structures. These districts also include
community facilities, public utilities and open uses which serve specifically
the residents of these districts. Further, it is the intent of this chapter
that these districts be located so that the provision of appropriate urban
services will be physically and economically feasible and so that provision
is made for the orderly expansion and maintenance of urban residential
development.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed in
undeveloped and vacant properties, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-1A Low Density
Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



      (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include
minimum lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height,
refer to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



(`00 Code, § 11-402A)  (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11)



§ 151.038  R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   These districts are designed to provide suitable areas
for medium density residential development where appropriate urban services
and facilities are provided or where the extension of such services and
facilities will be physically and economically feasible. Generally, these
districts will be characterized by single family detached dwellings.



      (2)   These districts may also include community facilities,
public utilities and open uses which serve the residents of these districts.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-2 Medium Density
Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



(`00 Code, § 11-403) (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11)



§ 151.039  R-2A MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   These districts are designed to provide suitable areas
for medium density residential development where appropriate urban services
and facilities are provided or where the extension of such services and
facilities will be physically and economically feasible. These districts will
be characterized by single family detached dwellings but with slightly
smaller lot sizes, lot widths, and side yard setbacks than R-2 to provide a
variety of medium density lot types.



      (2)   These districts may also include community facilities,
public utilities and open uses which serve the residents of these districts.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-2A Medium Density
Residential District. (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



(Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.040  R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   These districts are designed to provide suitable areas
for high density residential development where appropriate urban services and
facilities are provided or where the extension of such services and
facilities will be physically and economically feasible. Generally, these
districts will be characterized by single family detached dwellings and
duplexes.



      (2)   These districts also include community facilities,
public utilities and open uses which serve the residents of these districts.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-3 High Density
Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



(`00 Code, § 11-404)  (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.041  R-3A HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. These districts are designed to provide
suitable areas for high density residential development where appropriate
urban services and facilities will be physically and economically feasible.
These districts also include community facilities, public utilities and open
uses which serve the residents of these districts. This district is designed
to provide smaller, more affordable lots within the Town for the lower income
residents of Collierville who otherwise would be excluded by price from the
single family housing market.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-3A High Density
Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



(`00 Code, § 11-405)  (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.042  R-4 MULTI FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. These districts are designed to provide
suitable areas for multi family  residential developments where sufficient
urban facilities are available or where the extension of such facilities will
be physically and economically feasible. It is not the intent of this
district to restrict in number the dwelling units contained in a building
provided there is sufficient area of zone lot and open space on the lot
relative to the number of dwelling units. These districts are intended to
permit community facility and public utility installations which are
necessary to service the residents of these districts.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-4 Multi Family
Residential District.  (See § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



   (E)   Design standards for multi family dwellings.



      (1)   Purpose. It is the express purpose of these provisions
to establish design criteria to regulate proposed development and to guide
the Planning Commission in its review of the site plan.



      (2)   Open space requirements. Common open space must be
suitably improved for its intended use, but common open space containing
natural features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. Any
buildings, structures and improvements which are permitted in the common open
space must be appropriated to the uses which are authorized for the common
open space having regard for its topography and unimproved condition.



      (3)   Access.



         (a)   Every structure shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street or with access to an approved private street.



         (b)   Access and circulation shall provide adequately
for fire fighting equipment, service deliveries, furniture, moving vans and
refuse collection.



         (c)   Pedestrian access shall be provided at the rear of
each dwelling.



      (4)   Grouped parking facilities. Off-street parking may be
grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. The
parking areas shall generally be located in close proximity to the dwelling
units they are designed to serve. At least one parking space per dwelling
shall be located so as to provide a maximum walking distance of 200 feet from
the nearest entrance of the dwelling unit which the space is to serve. Where
appropriate, common driveways, parking areas, walks and steps shall be
provided, maintained and lighted for night use. Screening of parking and
service areas shall be encouraged through ample use of trees, shrubs, hedges
and screening walls.



      (5)   Privacy. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with
reasonable visual and acoustical privacy.  Fences, walls and landscaping
shall be provided for the protection and privacy of the occupants and as a
means of screening objectionable views or uses and of reducing noise.



      (6)   Walks. Street sidewalks and on-site walks shall be
provided for convenient and safe access to all living units from streets,
driveways, parking courts or garages and for convenient circulation and
access to all facilities.



      (7)   Recreation areas.



         (a)   Adequate recreational facilities for the residents
of the project shall be provided in a location which is accessible to the
living units and which does not impair the view and privacy of the living
units.



         (b)   Attractive outdoor sitting areas shall be
provided, appropriate in size, type and number to the needs of the residents.
Active recreation areas shall be provided which are appropriate for the needs
of the residents. Well-equipped playgrounds of adequate size shall be
provided where it is anticipated that children will occupy the premises.



      (8)   Planting. The appeal and character of the site shall be
preserved and enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other
site features; and additional new plant material shall be added for privacy,
shade and beauty of buildings and grounds and to screen out objectionable
features. Existing trees, shrubs, evergreens and ground cover shall be
retained to the extent that they enhance the project, are effective as a
screen planting or are useful in protecting slopes.



(`00 Code, § 11-406) (Ord. 95-01, passed 2-27-95; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.043  T-MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. These districts are designed to provide
suitable areas for mobile home park residential development where appropriate
urban services and facilities will be physically and economically feasible.
These districts will be characterized by single family mobile home dwellings
in mobile home parks and accessory structures. These districts also include
community facilities, public utilities and open uses which serve the
residents of these districts.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the T Mobile Home Park
Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.005.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



   (E)   Special provisions for mobile homes. Due to the unique
characteristics of mobile homes, the following restrictions are applied in
order to eliminate the adverse effects of such structures and at the same
time permit such structures as an alternative form of housing.



      (1)   Mobile homes shall be permitted only in those locations
designed on the Collierville Zoning Map as T Mobile Home Park Residential
Districts. No traditional housing units shall be permitted in these districts
in order to prevent a mixture of the two types of structures.



      (2)   All mobile homes permitted under this section shall be
set upon concrete blocks or steel piers which are constructed upon a concrete
footing, and each mobile home shall be anchored with approved anchors.



      (3)   The Board of Appeals may require other conditions as
needed in order to protect the inhabitants of the mobile home and preserve
the character of the district.



   (F)   Regulations for establishment of mobile home parks.



      (1)   Licenses and license fees.



         (a)   No mobile home may be located in the Town of
Collierville unless the same shall be in an approved and duly licensed mobile
home park.



         (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or
operate within the corporate limits of the Town of Collierville any mobile
home park unless such person shall first obtain a license for that park.



         (c)   Licenses shall not be transferable.



         (d)   The annual license fee for each mobile home park
shall be equal to but not greater than the amount allowed by the state
business tax.



         (e)   The license shall be conspicuously posted in the
office of or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times.



      (2)   Application for license. Applications for a mobile home
license shall be filed with and issued by the Building Inspector.
Applications shall be in writing signed by the applicant and shall contain
the following:



         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;



         (b)   The location and legal description of the mobile
home park;



         (c)   A complete plan of the park showing compliance
with division (E) and (G)(4) of this section.



         (d)   Plans and specifications of all buildings and
other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home
park. The sketch shall be drawn to scale showing the number and arrangement
of mobile home lots, roadways, water supply, water outlets, location and type
of sewage, liquid and garbage disposal and location of other facilities.



         (e)   Such further information as may be requested by
the Building Inspector to enable him or her to determine if the proposed park
will comply with legal requirements. The application and all accompanying
plans and specifications shall be filed in triplicate. The Building
Inspector, the Health Office and the Mayor shall investigate the applicant
and inspect the proposed plans and specifications.  If the proposed mobile
home park will be in compliance with all provisions of this chapter, the
Building Inspector shall approve the application and upon completion of the
park according to the plans shall issue the license. 



      (3)   Revocation of license. The Health Officer shall make
periodic inspection of the park to insure compliance with this chapter. In
case of noncompliance with any provisions of this chapter, the Health Officer
shall serve warning to the licensee. Thereafter, upon failure of the licensee
to remove the violation, the Health Officer shall recommend to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen revocation of the license. The Town Board shall hold a
hearing on the matter, and upon determination of noncompliance, revoke the
license. The license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to
revocation have been remedied and the park can be maintained and operated in
full compliance with the law.



      (4)   Specification for Mobile Home Park Plan. The mobile home
park shall conform to the following requirements:



         (a)   The park shall be located on a well drained site,
properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of
water;



         (b)   The minimum required lot area for a mobile home
park shall be five acres;



         (c)   Mobile home spaces shall be clearly defined and
mobile homes parked so that there will be at least 15 feet of clear space
between mobile homes or any accessory structure, such as a garage or 15 feet
between mobile homes and any buildings or structures, and at least five feet
from any mobile home park property line. No mobile home shall be located
closer than 30 feet to any public street or highway.



         (d)   The minimum plot size for an individual mobile
home in the mobile home park shall be 4,500 square feet.



         (e)   The minimum yard requirements for all individual
mobile home plots in the mobile home park are:



            1.   Front yards for individual mobile home plots
shall be a minimum of 25 feet;



            2.   Side yards for individual mobile home plots
shall be a minimum of ten feet;



            3.   Rear yards for individual mobile home plots
shall be a minimum of 15 feet.



         (f)   All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a driveway
of not less than 30 feet in width which shall have unobstructed access to a
public street. All driveways shall be lighted at night with 25 candle power
per square foot.



         (g)   Paved walkways not less than four feet wide shall
be provided from the mobile home spaces to the service buildings. The
walkways shall be lighted at night with 60 watt lamps at intervals of 100
feet approximately 15 feet from the ground.



         (h)   An electric outlet supplying at least 100 - 220
volts shall be provided for each mobile home space and shall be weatherproof
and accessible to the parked mobile home. All electrical installations shall
be in compliance with the National Electrical Code and Tennessee Department
of Insurance and Banking Regulations No. 15, entitled “Regulations Relating
to Electrical Installations in the State of Tennessee,” and shall satisfy
all requirements of the electric service organization.



         (i)   An adequate supply of water under pressure from a
source and of a quality approved by the Tennessee Department of Public Health
shall be provided; where possible, approved municipal water supplies shall be
used. Water shall be piped to each mobile home lot. Adequate water supply for
fire protection must be provided.



         (j)   Liquified petroleum gas for cooking purposes shall
not be used at individual mobile home spaces unless the containers are
properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing.  Liquified
petroleum gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and adequately
protected from the weather. No cylinder containing liquified petroleum gas
shall be located in a mobile home, nor within five feet of a door thereof.



         (k)   Waste from laundries shall be discharged into a
public sewer in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer
disposal plant in such manner to conform to the specifications of the Health
Officer. All kitchen sinks, washbasins, bath or shower tubs in any mobile
home in any park shall empty into the sanitary sink drain located on the
mobile home space. Mobile home parks within 300 feet of the municipal sewer
shall connect to it, with approved and properly sized lines.



         (l)   Refuse storage, collection and disposal shall be
in accordance with other regulations and ordinances of the Town of
Collierville.



         (m)   The mobile home park shall be subject to the rules
and regulations of the fire prevention authorities having jurisdiction.



         (n)   No permanent additions of any kind shall be built
onto, nor become a part of, any mobile home. All mobile homes shall be set
upon concrete blocks or steel piers which are constructed upon a concrete
footing, and each mobile home shall be anchored with approved anchors.



         (o)   All service buildings, mobile homes, mobile home
spaces and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly
condition and kept free of any conditions that will menace the health of any
occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance.



      (5)   Register of occupants. It shall be the duty of the
licensee to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home owners and
occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following
information:



         (a)   Name and address of each occupant;



         (b)   The make, model and year of all mobile homes;



         (c)   License number and owner of each mobile home;



         (d)   The state issuing such license;



         (e)   The dates of arrival and departure of each mobile
home. The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times
by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials
whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the
register. The register records shall not be destroyed for a period of three
years following the date of registration.



(`00 Code, § 11-407)  (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.044  R-TH TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the R-TH District is to
increase the variety of available housing choices in Collierville by
providing for Townhouse districts in which individual units can be sold on
individually deeded lots in fee simple or as condominium units or can be
rented. The higher density development reduces purchase and maintenance costs
for the owner and makes it possible for the Town to more efficiently provide
public utilities, streets and services while increasing its tax base.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-TH Townhouse
Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations.



      (1)   For bulk regulations, which include minimum lot area,
minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer to the
table in § 151.027.



      (2)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be
provided as required in §§ 151.115 through 151.117 at two spaces per
dwelling unit, and it shall be further stipulated for R-TH zones, required
off-street parking shall be located on the same lot as the principal building
and shall be within the rear yard area.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. The basic yard regulations appearing
below apply to all Townhouse developments located within the R-TH Districts.



         (a)   For yard requirements, which include setbacks for
front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



         (b)   Landscape screen.



            1.   A landscape screen shall be provided along
all rear and side property lines of the tract area. Such screen may take one
of two forms, either:



               a.   A strip at least ten feet wide, densely
planted with shrubs or trees at least four feet high at the time of planting
and which  are of a type which may be expected to form a year round dense
screen at least six feet high within three years; or



               b.   A wall or barrier or uniformly painted
fence at least six feet in  height. Such wall, barrier or fence may be
opaque or perforated, provided that not more than 50% of the fence is open. 



            2.   Such screening shall be maintained in good
condition at all times, shall not be placed within 15 feet of the normal
vehicular entrances and exits and shall not obstruct the visibility of
motorists at street intersections. The landscape screen shall not extend into
or beyond the required front yard. The landscaping detailed plan shall be
submitted for approval concurrent with initial site plan review by the
Planning Commission and Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (E)   Maximum number of dwelling units per building. The maximum
number of dwelling units per building shall be eight.



   (F)   Reserved.



   (G)   Design standard for Townhouse development.



      (1)   Purpose.  It is the express purpose of these provisions
to establish design criteria to regulate proposed development and to guide
the Planning Commission in its review of the site plan.



      (2)   Open space requirements. Common open space must be
suitably improved for its intended use, but common open space containing
natural features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. Any
buildings, structures and improvements which are permitted in the common open
space must be appropriated to the uses which are authorized for the common
open space, having regard for its topography and unimproved condition.



      (3)   Access.



         (a)   Every structure shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street or with access to an approved private street.



         (b)   Access and circulation shall provide adequately
for fire fighting equipment, service deliveries, furniture, moving vans and
refuse collection.



      (4)   Privacy. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with
reasonable visual and acoustical privacy.  Fences, walls and landscaping
shall be provided for the protection and privacy of the occupants and as a
means of screening objectionable views or uses and of reducing noise.



      (5)   Recreation areas. Adequate recreational facilities for
the residents of the project shall be provided in a location which is
accessible to the living units and which does not impair the view and privacy
of the living units. Attractive outdoor sitting areas shall be provided,
appropriate in size, type and number to the needs of the residents. Active
recreation areas shall be provided which are appropriate for the needs of the
residents. Well-equipped playgrounds of adequate size shall be provided where
it is anticipated that children will occupy the premises.



      (6)   Planting. The appeal and character of the site shall be
preserved and enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other
site features; and additional new plant material shall be added for privacy,
shade and beauty of buildings and grounds and to screen out objectionable
features. Existing trees, shrubs, evergreens and ground cover shall be
retained to the extent that they enhance the project, are effective as a
screen planting or are useful in protecting slopes.



   (H)   Subdivision plat requirement. A subdivision plat for Townhouse
development shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and
approval according to the subdivision plat review procedures of the Town of
Collierville prior to site plan consideration by the Planning Commission. The
subdivision plat shall be separate and apart from an approved site plan but
shall conform in lot layout, public improvement dedications, lot shape and
lot size to the proposed site plan for the development. The proposed site
plan and subdivision plat for a development may be approved at the same time,
providing that the above requirements are met.



(`00 Code, § 11-408)  (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.045  R-L LARGE LOT/ESTATE DEVELOPMENT RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. These districts are designed to provide
suitable areas for large lot, low density residential development
characterized by an open and country type appearance. The residential
development will consist of single family detached dwellings and accessory
structures. These districts also may include community facilities, public
utilities and open uses which serve specifically the residents of these
districts. Further, it is the intent of this chapter that these districts be
located and developed so that the provision of appropriate urban services
will be physically and economically feasible and so that provision is made
for the orderly expansion and maintenance.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-L Large Lot/Estate
Development Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



(`00 Code, § 11-409)  (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.046  R-L1 LARGE LOT/ONE ACRE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. This district is designed to provide
suitable transition areas between large lot estate residential areas and low
density residential areas characterized by an open and spacious type
appearance.  The residential development will consist of single family
detached dwellings and accessory structures on lots containing at least one
acre of land area. This district also may include community facilities,
public utilities and open uses which serve specifically the residents of
residential districts.  Further, it is the intent of this residential
classification to be located and developed so that the provision of
appropriate urban services will be physically and economically feasible and
provide for the orderly expansion of the community and cost efficient
maintenance of public infrastructure installed to serve this residential
classification.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-L1 Large Lot/One Acre
Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



(`00 Code, § 11-409A)  (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 99-26, passed - -;
Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed 4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord.
2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06,
passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.047  R-25 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. These districts are designed to provide
suitable areas for low-density residential development characterized by an
open and country type appearance. The residential development will consist of
single-family detached dwellings and accessory structures. These districts
also may include community facilities, public utilities and open uses which
serve specifically the residents of these districts. Further, it is the
intent of this chapter that these districts be located and developed so that
the provision of appropriate urban services will be physically and
economically feasible and so that provision is made for the orderly expansion
and maintenance.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the R-25 Low Density
Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



(`00 Code, § 11-409B) (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed
4-9-01; Am. Ord. 2001-09, passed 4-23-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08;
Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord.
2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.048  FAR FOREST - AGRICULTURAL - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. These districts are designed to provide
areas for very low density residential development in areas characterized
primarily by agricultural, forestry, open space and undeveloped land.  It is
the intent of these districts to limit development and to maintain the rural
character of these areas until such time as adequate plans have been made for
the orderly expansion of urban development and the economical provision of
urban services and community facilities. It is further intended that FAR
Districts shall be used to regulate the location and timing of those areas
shown as future development on the Land Use Plan.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. For specific
accessory uses allowed, refer to the table in § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific uses allowed, refer to
the table in § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the FAR Forest -
Agricultural - Residential District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



(`00 Code, § 11-410)  (Ord. 95-11, passed - -; Am. Ord. 99-26, passed - -;
Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed 4-23-01; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord.
2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06,
passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.049  TN TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. This district is designed to provide for
both detached and attached residential dwellings, allowing for a variety of
housing options and densities, while encouraging compact development to
protect open spaces within the Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan Study
Area.  Institutional uses, such as churches and schools, are allowed, by
right or conditionally, to sustain the residential neighborhoods. 
Conditions and standards are provided to help ensure the compatibility of new
development with surrounding neighborhoods.  This district is intended to
provide for infill development compatible with the existing character of
downtown Collierville and to preserve the historic fabric of the Town. 
Commercial development is inappropriate in the Traditional Neighborhood (TN)
District, except for office uses and limited personal services to promote
adaptive reuse of historic structures, where appropriate, according to the
special area recommendations of the Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
permitted uses allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures.



         (a)   Accessory off-street parking and loading
facilities as required in §§ 151.115et seq.



         (b)   Accessory facilities and buildings customarily
incidental to a permitted use as regulated by § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses. For specific conditional uses allowed
in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the TN Traditional
Neighborhood District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
and maximum lot size, lot width at the building line, maximum height, and
maximum primary facade width, refer to the table in § 151.027(D).



   (D)   Yard requirements. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027(D).



   (E)   Site plan review process, where applicable.  The site plan
review and approval process is outlined in § 151.311.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.050  MU MIXED USE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. This district is designed to provide
appropriate areas for quality mixed-use development that will link uses for
living, working, shopping, educating and recreating within the limits of the
Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan.  It is intended to facilitate the
implementation of the Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan.  The
facilitation of mixed-use development reduces vehicle trips, improves
pedestrian mobility, relieves traffic congestion and improves the overall
quality of life in the Town.  The provision of a variety of residential
housing types and densities assures activity in the district, supports a mix
of uses and enhances the housing choices of residents.  The integration of
mixed use development with its surroundings encourages connections for
pedestrians and vehicles and assures the sensitive, compatible use, scale and
operational transitions of neighboring uses.  The Mixed-Use (MU) District is
intended to accommodate neighborhood uses that will serve the surrounding
residents and neighborhoods with convenience retail and services. The MU
District is intended to accommodate some automotive-oriented uses, but an
emphasis shall be placed on the pedestrian and walkability.  The mix of uses
meets the need for professional and business services, personal services,
specialty shops, restaurants, public and semipublic uses, and attached and
detached residential dwellings.  Infill development compatible with the
existing character of downtown is encouraged.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures. For specific
permitted uses allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures.



         (a)   Accessory off-street parking and loading
facilities as required in §§ 151.115et seq.



         (b)   Accessory facilities and buildings customarily
incidental to a permitted use as regulated by § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  For specific conditional uses
allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the MU Mixed Use District. 
(See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations.  For bulk regulations, which include
minimum and maximum lot size, lot width at the building line, maximum height,
maximum, refer to the table in § 151.027(D).



   (D)   Yard requirements.  For yard requirements refer to the table
in § 151.027(D).



   (E)   Use of open space.  Within the MU Mixed Use District, all
open areas not occupied by driveways, sidewalks, and parking, or loading
areas, shall be devoted to landscaping as defined in § 151.002.



   (F)   Access. All mixed use buildings in the MU Mixed Use District
shall be readily accessible from the rear in order to provide for off-street
loading or delivery.



   (G)   Site plan review process.  The site plan review and approval
process is outlined in § 151.311.



   (H)   Enclosure requirements.  All uses in the MU Mixed Use
District shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except for
parking, loading and other accessory uses, as regulated by § 151.025, which
by their nature exist outside a building.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS



§ 151.060  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The commercial districts established by this chapter are designed to
promote and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience, order,
prosperity and other aspects of the general welfare. These general goals
include, among others, the following purposes:



   (A)   To provide space for the many and diverse types of commercial
activity needed to serve the people and industry of Collierville;



   (B)   To promote the constructive improvement and orderly growth of
the existing well located commercial centers;



   (C)   To prevent indiscriminate mixture of commercial activity
within commercial area;



   (D)   To protect adjacent residential areas from offensive and
detrimental influences;



   (E)   To promote the most efficient and desirable land use.



(`00 Code, § 11-501) 



§ 151.061  NC NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. Within the limits of the Downtown
Collierville Small Area Plan Study Area, these districts are designed to
provide a variety of goods and services for immediate residential
neighborhoods. It is not intended that these districts permit uses which
generate large volumes of truck traffic. Adequate landscape buffers, fencing
or walls and appropriate open spaces between non-residential and residential
areas are required to protect the integrity of residential neighborhoods. 
Non-residential buildings should be designed to reflect the residential form,
limited to one- to two-stories, to blend with the adjacent residential
neighborhood with parking typically to the side or rear of the building. 
Emphasis is on a pedestrian scale, designed for walkability with the nearby
neighborhoods.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures.  For specific
permitted uses allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures.



         (a)   Accessory off-street parking and loading
facilities as required in §§ 151.115et seq.



         (b)   Accessory facilities and buildings customarily
incidental to a permitted use as regulated by § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  For specific conditional uses
allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses.  Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional uses is prohibited in the NC Neighborhood
Commercial District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027(D).



   (D)   Yard requirements. For yard requirements in the NC
Neighborhood Commercial District, including setbacks for front, side and rear
yards, refer to the table in § 151.027(D).



   (E)   Use of required yard area. All open areas not occupied by
sidewalks, driveways, and parking or loading areas shall also be devoted to
landscaping as defined in § 151.003.



   (F)   Site plan review process.  This site plan review and approval
process is outlined in § 151.311.



   (G)   Enclosure requirements. All uses in the NC Neighborhood
Commercial District shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings
except for parking, loading and other accessory uses, as regulated by §
151.025, which by their nature exist outside a building.



(`00 Code, § 11-502)  (Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 2003-34,
passed 11-24-03; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed
3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-23-11)



§ 151.062  MPO MEDICAL - PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. These districts are designed to provide
adequate space in appropriate locations suitable for accommodating medical,
dental or similar personal services and to provide for professional and
business offices. In addition, certain commercial trade and service uses are
permitted if necessary to serve the frequent and recurring needs of persons
working in this district. Bulk limitations are designed to maximize
compatibility with less intensive land uses when adjacent to residential
districts.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures.  For specific
permitted uses allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures.



         (a)   Accessory off-street parking and loading
facilities as required in §§ 151.115et seq.



         (b)   Accessory facilities and buildings customarily
incidental to a permitted use as regulated by § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  For specific conditional uses
allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional uses is prohibited in the MPO Medical
Professional Office District.  (See also § 151.021.)



      (5)   Restriction on the amount of space devoted to
conditional uses.  In order to maintain the office and professional
character of the MPO Districts, at least 75% of the gross floor area of any
structure on a lot in an MPO District shall be occupied by uses permitted by
right (for example, principal permitted uses and structures).



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
commercial districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



   (E)   Use of required yard area. The following uses may be made of
yard areas in the MPO Districts.



      (1)   Landscaping. The first ten feet of any required yard
adjacent to a street shall be devoted to landscaping (as defined in §
151.003). All other required yard areas not occupied by sidewalks and
driveways shall also be devoted to landscaping.



      (2)   Driveways and accessory off-street parking. No driveway
or parking area shall occupy more than half of any required yard.



      (3)   Sidewalks.



   (F)   Site plan review process.  This site plan review and approval
process is outlined in § 151.311.



   (G)   Enclosure requirements.  All uses shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings except for parking, loading and other accessory
uses, as regulated by § 151.025, which by their nature exist outside a
building.



(`00 Code, § 11-503)  (Ord. 97-33, passed 10-13-97; Am. Ord. 2002-13,
passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 2003-34, passed 11-24-03; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11;
Am. Ord. 2015-19, passed 11-9-15)



§ 151.063  SCC SHOPPING CENTER COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. These districts are designed to provide
for the development of shopping and commercial centers of integrated design
of various sizes to serve the community. In these coordinated commercial
developments a variety of uses are permitted, including commercial trade and
service uses, entertainment facilities and offices. These districts are
intended to be designed to accommodate safely a high volume of automotive
traffic, so ease of automotive access is essential. Appropriate open space
between commercial and residential areas is required.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures.  For specific
permitted uses allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures.



         (a)   Accessory off-street parking and loading
facilities as required in §§ 151.115et seq.



         (b)   Accessory facilities and buildings customarily
incidental to a permitted use as regulated by § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  For specific conditional uses
allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional uses is prohibited in the SCC Shopping Center
Commercial District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
commercial districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



   (E)   Use of required yard area. The following uses may be made of
yard areas in the SCC Districts.



      (1)   Landscaping. The first ten feet of any required yard
adjacent to a street shall be devoted to landscaping (as defined in §
151.003). All other required yard areas not occupied by sidewalks and
driveways shall also be devoted to landscaping.



      (2)   Driveways and accessory off-street parking.  The
maximum number of permitted parking spaces shall be based upon a ratio of one
parking space per 200 square feet of gross building area with the exception
of auto dealerships, places of assembly and those permitted and conditional
land uses that have a minimum parking space requirement that is less, in
which case the minimum parking space requirement shall also serve as the
maximum parking space requirement. Auto dealerships shall be permitted one
additional parking space per 125 square feet of gross building area for
customer parking and vehicle storage areas completely concealed from public
view with a masonry brick wall. All parking areas shall be striped and all
vehicles shall be parked within designated parking spaces. The maximum number
of spaces for places of assembly, including, but not limited to, churches,
auditoriums, theaters and restaurants shall not exceed one space for every
two seats provided for within the assembly occupancy.



   (F)   Site plan review process.  This site plan review and approval
process is outlined in § 151.311.



   (G)   Enclosure requirements.  All uses shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings except for parking, loading and other accessory
uses, as regulated by § 151.025, which by their nature exist outside a
building.



(`00 Code, § 11-504)  (Ord. 94-19, passed - -; Am. Ord. 96-04, passed - -;
Am. Ord. 97-27, passed - -; Am. Ord. 98-15, passed - -; Am. Ord. 00-01,
passed - -; Am. Ord. 00-05, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-12-02; Am.
Ord. 2003-34, passed 11-24-03; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord.
2011-02, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11)



§ 151.064  CB CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. This district is designed to provide for a
wide range of retail, office, amusement, accessory residential, attached
residential, institutional and service uses within the limits of the Downtown
Collierville Small Area Plan Study Area.  High intensity of use is permitted
in this district and increased building bulk is provided as a means of
encouraging such development. This district is intended to be designed in a
manner conducive to and safe for a high volume of pedestrian traffic. The CB
District is intended to accommodate some automotive-oriented uses, but an
emphasis shall be placed on the pedestrian and walkability.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures.  For specific
permitted uses allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures.



         (a)   Accessory off-street parking and loading
facilities as required in §§ 151.115et seq.



         (b)   Accessory facilities and buildings customarily
incidental to a permitted use as regulated by § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  For specific conditional uses
allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional uses is prohibited in the CB Central Business
District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D) Yard requirements.  For yard requirements, which include setbacks
for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027(D).



   (E)   Use of open space. Within the CB Central Business District,
all open areas not occupied by driveways, sidewalks, and parking or loading
areas, shall be devoted to landscaping as defined in § 151.003.



   (F)   Access.  All buildings in the CB District shall be readily
accessible from the rear on order to provide for off-street loading or
delivery.



   (G)   Site plan review process.  This site plan review and approval
process is outlined in § 151.311.



   (H)   Enclosure requirements. All uses in the CB Central Business
District shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except for
parking, loading and other accessory uses, as regulated by § 151.025, which
by their nature exist outside a building.



(`00 Code, § 11-505) (Ord. 94-19, passed - - ; Am. Ord. passed 5- -02; Am.
Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 2003-34, passed 11-24-03; Am. Ord.
2006-12, passed 7-10-06; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-02,
passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed
5-23-11)



§ 151.065  GC GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent and purpose. These districts are designed to provide
adequate space in appropriate locations for the establishment of a wide
variety of uses, including commercial trade and service uses, entertainment
facilities, offices and establishments engaged in wholesale trade. Since
these activities tend to generate relatively large volumes of traffic and
have other characteristics detrimental to residential districts, their
locations should be removed from the proximity of residential districts as
much as possible.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures.  For specific
permitted uses allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures.



         (a)   Accessory off-street parking and loading
facilities as required in §§ 151.115et seq.



         (b)   Accessory facilities and buildings customarily
incidental to a permitted use as regulated by § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  For specific conditional uses
allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory or by conditional use is prohibited in the GC District.



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



      (3)   Maximum gross floor area ratio. The maximum gross floor
area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.25.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
commercial districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



   (E)   Use of required use of requires yard area.



      (1)   Landscaping. The first ten feet of any required yard
adjacent to a street shall be devoted to landscaping (as defined in §
151.003). All other required yard areas not occupied by sidewalks and
driveways shall also be devoted to landscaping.



      (2)   Driveways and accessory off-street parking. The maximum
number of permitted parking spaces shall be based upon a ratio of one parking
space per 200 square feet of gross building area with the exception of auto
dealerships, places of assembly and those permitted and conditional land uses
that have a minimum parking space requirement that is less in which case the
minimum parking space requirement shall also serve as the maximum parking
space requirement. Auto dealerships shall be permitted one additional parking
space per 125 square feet of gross building area for customer parking and
vehicle storage areas completely concealed from public view with a masonry
brick wall. All parking areas shall be striped and all vehicles shall be
parked within designated parking spaces. The maximum number of spaces for
places of assembly, including, but not limited to, churches, auditoriums,
theatres and restaurants shall not exceed one space for every two seats
provided for within the assembly occupancy.



   (F)   Site plan review process.  This site plan review and approval
process is outlined in § 151.311.



   (G)   Enclosure requirements.  All uses shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings except for parking, loading and other accessory
uses, as regulated by § 151.025, which by their nature exist outside a
building.



(`00 Code, § 11-506)  (Ord. 94-19, passed - -; Am. Ord. 98-15, passed - -;
Am. Ord. 00-01, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord.
2003-34, passed 11-24-03; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-02,
passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11)



INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS



§ 151.075  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (A)   The industrial districts established in this subchapter are
designed to promote and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience,
order, prosperity and other aspects of the general welfare.



   (B)   These general goals include, among others, the following more
specific purposes:



      (1)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to
meet the needs for industrial expansion within Collierville;



      (2)   To encourage industrial development which is free from
hazards to the public health and which is environmentally safe and
non-polluting;



      (3)   To protect industrial activities against congestion,
encroachment from incompatible land uses and other adverse characteristics;



      (4)   To protect adjacent residential and commercial areas
from offensive influences; and



      (5)   To promote the most efficient and desirable use of land.



(`00 Code, § 11-600)



§ 151.076  RI - RESTRICTIVE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. These districts are designed to provide
space for a wide range of industrial and related uses which conform to a high
level of performance standards and have the least objectionable
characteristics. It is required that all operation of such establishments be
carried on within completely enclosed buildings, thus preventing any adverse
characteristics from affecting neighboring properties.  These districts may
provide a buffer between other districts and other industrial activities
which have more objectionable influences. Residential uses are excluded from
these districts.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Principal permitted uses and structures.  For specific
permitted uses allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures.



         (a)   Accessory off-street parking and loading
facilities as required in §§ 151.115et seq.



         (b)   Accessory facilities and buildings customarily
incidental to a permitted use as regulated by § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  For specific conditional uses
allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory use or by conditional use is prohibited in the RI Restricted
Industrial District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
industrial districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



   (E)   Use of required yard areas. The following uses may be made of
yard areas in the RI Districts.



      (1)   Landscaping. All yards not occupied by driveways and
sidewalks shall be devoted to landscaping as defined in § 151.003.



      (2)   Driveways and accessory off-street parking. No driveways
or parking area shall occupy more than one-half of any required yard.



   (F)   Site plan review process. The site plan review and approval
process is outlined in § 151.311.



   (G)   Enclosure requirements. All uses shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings except for parking and loading, exterior and
other accessory uses, as regulated by § 151.025, which by their nature must
exist outside a building.



(`00 Code, § 11-602)  (Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 2003-34,
passed 11-24-03; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed
3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11)



§ 151.077  GI - GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. These districts are designed to provide
space for a wide range of industrial and related uses which by reasons of
volume of raw materials or freight, scale of operation, type of structures
required or other similar characteristics require locations relatively well
segregated from nonindustrial uses. Residential uses are excluded from these
districts.



   (B)   Uses and structures.



      (1)   Permitted uses.  For specific permitted uses allowed in
this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (2)   Permitted accessory uses and structures.



         (a)   Accessory off-street parking and loading
facilities as required in §§ 151.115et seq.



         (b)   Accessory facilities and buildings customarily
incidental to a permitted use as regulated by § 151.025.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  For specific conditional uses
allowed in this zoning district, refer to § 151.021.



      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any use not allowed by right, by
accessory use or by conditional use is prohibited in the GI General
Industrial District.  (See also § 151.021.)



   (C)   Bulk regulations. For bulk regulations, which include minimum
lot area, minimum lot width at the building line, and maximum height, refer
to the table in § 151.027.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   General provisions. General provisions applicable to all
industrial districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are
contained in § 151.006.



      (2)   Basic provisions. For yard requirements, which include
setbacks for front, side, and rear yards, refer to the table in § 151.027.



   (E)   Use of required yard areas. The following uses may be made of
yard areas in the GI Districts.



      (1)   Landscaping. All yards not occupied by driveways and
sidewalks shall be devoted to landscaping as defined in § 151.003.



      (2)   Driveways and accessory off-street parking. No driveways
or parking area shall occupy more than one-half of any required yard.



      (3)   Sidewalks.



   (F)   Site plan review process.  The site plan review and approval
process is outlined in § 151.311.



   (G)   Enclosure requirements. All uses shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings except for parking and loading, exterior and
other accessory uses, as regulated by § 151.025, which by their nature must
exist outside a building.



(`00 Code, § 11-603)  (Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 2003-34,
passed 11-24-03; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-02, passed
3-14-11; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-14-11)



FLOOD PLAIN ZONING



§ 151.090  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND
OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of
Tennessee has in Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-201 through 13-7-210, delegated
the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed
to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the Town of Collierville, Tennessee Mayor and Board does ordain as
follows.



   (B)   Findings of fact.



      (1)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of
Collierville wishes to establish eligibility in the National Flood Insurance
Program and in order to do so must meet the requirements of section 60.3(d)
of the Federal Insurance Administration Regulations found at 44 CFR Chapter l
(44 CFR 60.3(d)) and subsequent amendments.



      (2)   Areas of the Town of Collierville are subject to
periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.



      (3)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect
of obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and
velocities; and by uses in flood hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods;
or construction which is inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.



   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this subchapter to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas.  This
subchapter is designed to:



      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to water
or erosion hazards or which cause  damaging increases in erosion, flood
heights or velocities;



      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including
community facilities, be protected against flood damage;



      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels and natural protective barriers, which accommodate flood waters;



      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development
which may increase erosion or flood damage; and



      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood
hazards.



   (D)   Objectives. The objectives of this subchapter are:



      (1)   To protect human life and health;



      (2)   To minimize expenditures of public funds for costly
flood control projects;



      (3)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding;



      (4)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



      (5)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities
such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, street and
bridges located in floodable areas;



      (6)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and development of flood prone areas;



      (7)   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that
property is in a floodable area; and



      (8)   To establish eligibility for participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program. 



(`00 Code, § 11-701)  (Am. Ord. 2007-11, passed 9-24-07; Am. Ord. 2007-12,
passed 11-12-07; Am. Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-14-13)



§ 151.091  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of §§ 151.090 through 151.101, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A subordinate structure to the principal structure
and, for the purpose of this section, shall conform to the following:



      (1)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human
habitation;



      (2)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential;



      (3)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters;



      (4)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation which may result in damage to other structures;



      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or flood- proofed.



   ACT.  The statutes authorizing the National Flood Insurance Program
that are incorporated in 42 USC 400l-4l28.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). Any walled and roofed expansion to
the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common
load bearing wall other than a fire wall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Building Official’s
interpretation of any provision of this subchapter or a request for a
variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with 1% or greater annual
change of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. The flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain which a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking
has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM Zone A usually
is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD. The land within a
community, which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion
loss. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map
(FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood- related erosion
hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM Zone E may be further
refined.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.



   BUILDING.  Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosures for
any occupancy or storage. (See STRUCTURE.)



   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.



   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building:



      (1)   Built to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by
means of pilings and columns (posts and piers); and



      (2)   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In the case of Zones Al-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D, ELEVATED
BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters.



   EMERGENCY FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM or EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The program as
implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with § l336 of the Act. It
is intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of insurance on all
insurable structures before the effective date of the initial FIRM.



   EROSION.  The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. This
peril is not per se covered under the program.



   EXCEPTION.  A waiver from the provision of this subchapter which
relieves the applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order or
other determination made or issued pursuant to this subchapter.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any type structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of this subchapter.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pad) is completed before
the effective date of this subchapter.



   EXISTING STRUCTURE. See EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of an additional site by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land area from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION. A determination by the Administrator of
the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that
has a 1% or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.



   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazard and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of muddy (for example, mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of
the flood related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated
as Zone A, M and/or E.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles as well as
the Flood Boundary Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.



   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with
sound engineering standards.



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.



   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION. The collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.



   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA or  FLOOD-RELATED EROSION PRONE AREA. A
land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water which, due to
the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wide-driven
currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.



   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related
erosion damage, including, but not limited to emergency preparedness plans,
flood-related erosion control works and floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.



   FLOOR. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), for example, top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of
wood flooring in wood-frame construction. The term does not include the floor
of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purpose of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood height greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization
of the watershed.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements to
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interiors as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By the approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states with approved programs.



   LEVEE. Man-made structures, usually an earth embankment, designated and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee or
levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that
such enclosure is now built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of this subchapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcel)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MAP. The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Agency.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL. The average height of the sea for all stages of the
tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within
the floodplain. For purposes of this subchapter, the term is synonymous with
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, is a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this subchapter. The term also
includes any subsequent improvements to such structure.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of this subchapter. 



   100-YEAR FLOOD. See BASE FLOOD.



   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association or any other entity, including state and local
government agencies.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four-hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.



   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.



   SITE COORDINATING AGENCY. (Tennessee Department of Economic and
Community Development) The agency of the state government, or other office
designated by the Governor of the state or by state statute at the request of
the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood
Insurance Program in that state.



   SPECIAL HAZARD AREA. An area having special flood mudslide (mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards and shown on the FHBM as Zone A, AO,
Al-30, AE, A99 or AH.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
(including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of  slabs or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work
beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of street
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.



   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank or other man-made
facilities or infrastructures.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.
Where  the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the
streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement
commenced.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety
specifications which have been identified by the local enforcement official
and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this subchapter
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
subchapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certification or other evidence of compliance required in this subchapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coast or
riverine areas.



(`00 Code, § 11-702)  (Am. Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-14-13)



§ 151.092  APPLICATION.



   This subchapter shall apply to all areas within the incorporated area
of Collierville, Tennessee.



(`00 Code, § 11-703)



§ 151.093  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   (A)   The areas of special flood hazard identified on the
Collierville, Tennessee, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Flood Insurance
Rate Map, Community - Panel Numbers: #47157C0470F, Effective Date 9-28-07;
#47157C0480G, Effective Date 2-6-13; #47157C0483G, Effective Date 2-6-13;
#47157C0485G, Effective Date 2-6-13; #47157C0490G, Effective Date 2-16-13;
#47157C0495G, Effective Date 2-6-13; #47157C0610F, Effective Date 9-28-07;
#47157C0630F, Effective Date 9-28-07; and any subsequent amendments or
revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
subchapter.



   (B)   The information contained in Exhibit A (“Final Summary of
Map Actions”) of Ordinance 2012-19 hereto is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as set forth in full.  The Town Administrator
shall take all necessary steps to assure that the records of the Town are
amended to reflect the revisions in Base Flood Elevations and other
information required to assure that the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the
Town fully comply with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations.



(`00 Code, § 11-703)  (Am. Ord. 2007-11, passed 9-24-07; Am. Ord. 2007-12,
passed 11-12-07; Am. Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-14-13)



§ 151.094  REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A development permit shall be required in conformity with this
subchapter prior to the commencement of any development activity.



(`00 Code, § 11-703)



§ 151.095  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or use shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this
subchapter and other applicable regulations.



(`00 Code, § 11-703)



§ 151.096  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This subchapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easement, covenant or deed restriction. However, where this
subchapter conflicts or overlaps with another, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(`00 Code, § 11-703)



§ 151.097  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this subchapter, all
provisions shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the Board; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(`00 Code, § 11-703)



§ 151.098  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this subchapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
subchapter does not imply that land outside the flood hazard areas or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
subchapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of
Collierville, Tennessee or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this subchapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.



(`00 Code, § 11-703)



§ 151.099  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Designation of Development Director. The Development Director
is appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall
be made to the Development Director on forms furnished by him or her prior to
any development activity. The development permit may include, but is not
limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing
or proposed structure, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment,
drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required.



      (1)   Application stage.



         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings. (See subsection
(2) below.)



         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
non-residential building will be flood- proofed, where base flood elevation
data is available. (See subsection (2) below.)



         (c)   Certificate from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the non-residential flood-proofed building will
meet the flood-proofing criteria in subsection (B)(2) below, where base flood
elevation data is available.



         (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



      (2)   Construction stage.



         (a)   Within unnumbered A Zones, where flood elevation
data are not available, the Development Director shall record the elevation
of the lowest floor on the development permit. The elevation of the lowest
floor shall be determined as the measurement of the lowest floor of the
building and the highest adjacent grade. USGS Quadrangle maps may be utilized
when no more detailed reference exists to establish reference elevations.



         (b)   Within all flood zones where base flood elevation
data are utilized, the Development Director shall require that upon placement
of the lowest floor, or flood-proofing by whatever construction means,
whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit
to the Development Director a certification of the elevation of the lowest
floor, or flood-proofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as built, in
relation to mean sea level. The certification shall be prepared by, or under
the direct supervision of, a registered land surveyor, professional engineer
or architect and certified by same.  When flood-proofing is utilized for a
particular building, the certification shall be prepared by, or under the
direct supervision of, a professional engineer or an architect and certified
by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall
be at the permit holder’s risk. The Development Director shall review the
floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or
failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be a cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.



   (C)   Duties and responsibilities of the Development Director. 
Duties of the Development Director shall include, but not limited to:



      (1)   Review of all development permits to assure that the
requirements of this subchapter have been satisfied, and that proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding;



      (2)   Advice to permittee that additional federal or state
permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements
are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on
file with the development permit. This shall include Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334;



      (3)   Notification to adjacent communities and the Tennessee
Department of Economic and Community Development, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submission of evidence of such notification
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;



      (4)   Record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level or highest adjacent grade, whichever is applicable) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings, in
accordance with subsection (B)(2);



      (5)   Record the actual elevation (in relation to mean seal
level or highest adjacent grade, whichever is applicable) to which the new
substantially improved buildings have been flood-proofed, in accordance with
subsection (B)(2);



      (6)   Where flood-proofing is utilized, the Development
Director shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer
or architect, in accordance with subsection (B)(2);



      (7)   Where interpretations are needed as to the exact
location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions) the Development Director shall make the necessary
interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
151.101;



      (8)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not
been provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, then the
Development Director shall obtain review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, including data developed as a result of these regulations as criteria
for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other
development in Zone A on the Community FHBM or FIRM meet the requirements of
this subchapter. (Optional additional requirements: within unnumbered A
Zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where
alternative data is not available, the Development Director shall require the
lowest floor of a building to be elevated or flood-proofed to level of at
least two feet above the highest adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest
adjacent grade being defined in § 151.091). All applicable data including
the highest adjacent grade elevation and the elevation of the lowest floor of
flood-proofing shall be recorded as set forth in division (B) of this section;



      (9)   All records pertaining to the provisions of this
subchapter shall be maintained in the office of the Development Director and
shall be open for public inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for
expedited retrieval within combined files;



      (10)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an
altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.



( (`00 Code, § 11-704)  (Am. Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-14-13)



§ 151.100  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.



   (A)   General standards. In all flood prone areas, the following
provisions are required.



      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.



      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be elevated and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Method of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable
state requirements for resisting wind forces.



      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



      (4)   New construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



      (5)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



      (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water into the
systems.                                             
 



      (7)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters. 



      (8)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



      (9)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements
to a building which is in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
shall meet the requirements of new construction, as contained in this
subchapter.



      (10)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements
to a building which is not in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not extended.



   (B)   Specific standards. These provisions shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazard as provided herein.



      (1)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data have been provided, including A Zones, Al-30, AE Zones, AO
Zones, AH Zones and A99 Zones, and has provided a regulatory floodway, as set
forth in § 151.093, the following provisions are required.



         (a)   Residential construction. New construction or
substantial improvement to any residential building (or manufactured home)
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one
foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls
be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with
standards of subsection (B)(3).



         (b)   Nonresidential construction. New construction or
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or nonresidential
building shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower
than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located
in all A Zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated, provided that
all areas of the building below the required elevation are water tight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and are built with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are
satisfied. The certification shall be provided to the Development Director as
set forth in § 151.099(B)(2).



         (c)   Elevated building.  New construction or
substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed
areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood
elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to
allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.



            1.   Designs for complying with this requirement
must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the
following minimum criteria:



               a.   Provide a minimum of two openings
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;



               b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade; and



               c.   Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the
automatic flow of floodwater in both directions;



            2.   Access to the enclosed area shall be the
minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises
(standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator);
and



            3.   The interior portion of such enclosed area
shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms in such a way as to
impede the movement of floodwaters and all such petitions shall comply with
the provisions of division (B) of this section.



         (d)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles.



            1.   All manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions of
existing manufactured home parks or subdivision or in substantially improved
manufactured home parks or subdivisions must meet all the requirements of new
construction, including elevations and anchoring.     



            2.   All manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
must be elevated so that:



               a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood
elevation on a permanent foundation;



               b.   All manufactured homes must be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement; and



               c.   In or outside of an existing or new
manufactured home park or subdivision or in an expansion of an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, on which a manufactured home has
incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, any manufactured home
placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of subsections a.
and b. above.



         (e)   All recreational vehicles placed on site must
either:



            1.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days;



            2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use;
or



            3.   The recreational vehicle must meet all the
requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation
requirements of subsection (B)(1)(d)1. or 2.a. and b.



      (2)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by a quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached structures.



      (3)   In all areas  of specific flood hazard where base flood
elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, the provisions of §
151.099(C)(8) shall be utilized for all requirements relative to the base
flood elevation or floodway.



   (C)   Standards for areas of special flood hazard zone A1-30 and AE
with established base flood elevation but without floodways designated.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 151.093,
where streams existing with base flood data is provided but where no
floodways have been provided (Zones A1-30 and AE), the following provisions
apply.



      (1)   No encroachments, including fill material, new
structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of
special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering
certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard
hydraulic engineering principles. 



      (2)   New construction or substantial improvements of
buildings shall be elevated or flood- proofed to elevations established in
accordance with division (B) of this section.



   (D)   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH Zones).
Located  within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 151.093
are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in
feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the
lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least two feet above
the highest adjacent grade.



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
non-residential buildings shall:



         (a)   Have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in
feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the
lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above
the highest adjacent grade; or



         (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities be completely flood-proofed to or above that level so that any
space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.



      (3)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.



   (E)   Standards for areas protected by flood protection systems
(A-99 Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 151.093 are areas of the 100-year flood protected by a flood protection
system which is under construction but where base flood elevations and flood
hazard factors have not been determined. With these areas (A-99 Zones), the
following provisions apply: all provisions of § 151.099 and divisions (A)
and (H) of this section shall apply.



   (F)   Standards for areas of special flood hazard with established
base flood elevation and with floodway designated. Located within the areas
of special flood hazard established in § 151.093, where streams exist with
base flood data and floodways provided, the following provisions apply.



      (1)   No encroachments, including fill material, new
construction, substantial improvements or other development shall be located
within designated floodways, unless certification from a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed encroachments or new development will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge at any point within the community. The engineering certification
should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic
engineering principles.



      (2)   If subsection (F)(1) above is satisfied, new
construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or
flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with division (B) of
this section.



   (G)   Standard for unmapped streams. Located in Collierville,
Tennessee are unmapped streams where areas of special flood hazard are
neither indicated  nor base flood data or floodways have been provided.
Adjacent to such streams the following provisions shall apply:



      (1)   In areas adjacent to such unmapped streams, no
encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within
an area of at least equal to twice the width of the stream along each side of
the stream, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any point within the locality;



      (2)   When flood elevation data is available, new construction
or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed
to elevations established with § 151.099(B)(2).



   (H)   Standards for subdivision proposals. Subdivision proposals and
other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or
subdivision, shall be reviewed to determine whether  such proposals will be
reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed
new development is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be
reviewed to ensure that:



      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage;



      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;



      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;



      (4)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions) which is greater than 50 lots and/or five acres.



(`00 Code, § 11-705)



§ 151.101  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   General. The provisions of this section shall apply
exclusively to areas of special flood hazard.



   (B)   Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (1)   The Town of Collierville Board of Zoning Appeals shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this subchapter.



      (2)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation
of historic structures (see definition) upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.



      (3)   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all
standards specified in other sections of this subchapter and:



         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
property to the injury of others;



         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion;



         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage;



         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;



         (e)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront
location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility;



         (f)   The availability of alternative locations, not
subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



         (g)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



         (h)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



         (i)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise and sediment transportation of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and



         (j)   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems,
streets and bridges.



      (4)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the
purposes of this subchapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variance as it deems necessary to effectuate
the purposes of this subchapter.



      (5)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.



   (C)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard; and
in the issuance of a historical building, a determination that the variance
is the minimum relief necessary so as not to destroy the historic character
and design of the building.



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance and that such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.



      (4)   The Development Director shall maintain the records of
all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.



(`00 Code, § 11-706)



§ 151.102  VIOLATIONS.



   Violation of the provisions of this subchapter or failure to comply
with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special
exceptions, shall be punishable as provided by law.  Each day that such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Town of Collierville, Tennessee from taking such
other lawful actions to prevent or remedy any violation.



(`00 Code, § 11-703)  Penalty, see § 10.99



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS



§ 151.115  ACCESSORY OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General purposes and applicability for off-street parking
regulations. The following provisions on accessory off-street parking are
adopted in order to provide parking spaces off all public ways for all
employees at their place of work, to reduce congestion caused by parking on
public ways, to prevent substantial amounts of traffic from circulating in
and parking on residential streets surrounding commercial and industrial
centers, to protect the character of neighborhoods, to provide for higher
standards of residential, commercial and industrial development and thus to
promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   Accessory off-street parking requirements.



      (1)   General provisions.



         (a)   In all districts, accessory off-street parking,
open or enclosed, shall be provided in conformity with the requirements set
forth in this section for all uses permitted by right or by the conditional
use provisions.



         (b)   In addition, all other applicable requirements of
this chapter shall apply as a condition precedent to the use of such
development.



         (c)   A parking space is required for a portion of a
unit of measure one-half or more of the amount set forth herein.



         (d)   For an enlargement or modification resulting in a
net increase in the floor area, the same requirements shall apply to such net
increase.



         (e)   In the case of uses where the Board of Zoning
Appeals is required to prescribe the number of parking spaces, it shall base
its determination on recommendations from the Planning Commission and such
other factors as affect the need for off-street parking which are deemed
relevant.



         (f)   For the purpose of these sections, two rooming
units may be considered the equivalent of one dwelling unit.



         (g)   After the effective date of this chapter, for all
enlargements or modification which increase the floor area, number of
employees and seating capacity or other applicable unit of measurement, the
same requirements shall apply to such enlargement or modification.



         (h)   Off-street accessory parking spaces shall be
located on the same zone lot on which the use is located.



      (2)   Space requirements for accessory off-street parking for
residential activities. In all districts, accessory off-street parking shall
be provided as set forth in § 151.117.  Duplexes shall be provided with a
separate driveway for each unit.



      (3)   Reduction of requirement for accessory off-street
parking for senior housing. In all districts, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
may, by conditional use permit, reduce the number of required accessory
off-street parking spaces when occupancy is to be primarily by elderly
persons 60 years of age or over. However, in no case shall the number of
spaces be reduced below one space per two dwelling units; nor shall the
number of spaces be reduced merely to accommodate additional dwelling units.



      (4)   Space requirements for off-street parking for commercial
activities outside the limits of the Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan.
One accessory off-street parking space shall be provided for the specified
number of square feet of gross floor area for each activity as set forth in
§ 151.117, except as noted below:



         (a)   No commercial activity for which parking is
required shall have less than four off-street parking spaces;



         (b)   For any activity permitted by right in the Central
Business District, accessory off-street parking shall not be required;



         (c)   The maximum number of permitted parking spaces
shall be based upon a ratio of one parking space per 200 square feet of gross
building area with the following exceptions:



            1.   Restaurants, which shall not exceed one space
for every two seats provided for within the assembly occupancy;



            2.   Places of public assembly, including, but not
limited to, places of worship, auditoriums, and theaters, which shall not
exceed one space for every two seats provided for within the assembly
occupancy;



            3.   Health spas/clubs, which shall not exceed a
ratio of one parking space per 150 square feet of gross building area; and



            4.   The outdoor display of products considered to
be an integral and inseparable part of the business operation associated with
the following principal uses, provided that the display areas, customer
parking areas, and employee parking areas, are shown on an approved site plan
per § 151.311:



               a.   Agricultural equipment, sales or
service;



               b.   ATV, RV, trailer, or other similar
businesses;



               c.   Auto dealership;



               d.   Auto rental;



               e.   Boat, marine sales;



               f.   Farmers market (private property);



               g.   Fruit or vegetable store;



               h.   Greenhouse or nursery products;



               i.   Heavy equipment sales and rental;



               j.   Mobile home/pre-fabricated home sales;



               k.   Motorcycle sales;



               l.   Moving equipment rental store; and



               m.   Used car sales.



            5.   The display area shall be designed to comply
with the requirements of § 151.025(D)(12); however, the striping of parking
spaces and the planting of trees in parking lot landscape islands shall not
be required for designated display areas.



         (d)   Whenever a lot in a Shopping Center Commercial
(SCC), General Commercial (GC) or Medical-Professional-Office (MPO) District
is to be developed with more than one use to be located on the lot or unified
development, the off-street parking requirement shall be based on the
following ratios according to the gross floor area of the development.



 


Gross Floor Area*

 

Ratios





Tier 1: Up to 50,000 square feet
 

1:200



Tier 2: First 50,000 square feet
 

1:200



   plus
 




For additional 50,001 to 250,000 square feet
 

1:250



Tier 3: First 50,000 square feet
 

1:200



   plus
 




For additional 50,001 to 250,000 square feet
 

1:250



   plus
 




For additional square footage more than 250,000
 

1:300



*The calculations shall be based on a cumulative basis.  For example, a
60,000 square foot shopping center shall be required to meet the 1:200 ratio
for 50,000 square feet and shall meet the 1:250 ratio for 10,000 square feet.




 



      (5)   Space requirements for off-street parking for industrial
activities. One and one-half spaces for each two persons employed on the
premises at maximum employment on a single shift.



      (6)   Space requirements for off-street parking for
conditional uses allowed in institutional structures in R-1 and R-2 Historic
Zones. Where antique shops, art galleries (studios), museums, interior
decorating shops and tearooms are allowed as conditional uses in existing
institutional structures in R-1 and R-2 Historic Zones, one off-street
accessory parking space shall be provided for each 375 square feet of gross
floor area for each activity. Additional off-street parking to meet the
requirements of this section shall be allowed at an off-site location,
provided that:



         (a)   Such off-site parking has been reviewed and
recommended by the Development Director;



         (b)   Not more than 30% of the additional off-street
parking may be allowed at the off-site location;



         (c)   The off-site parking location shall not be more
than 500 feet from the use(s) for which the additional parking is intended;



         (d)   The off-site parking location shall be under the
direct control of the owners or lessees of the lot for which the additional
parking is intended;



         (e)   The additional off-site parking spaces may not be
a part of accessory off-street parking required by other uses.



      (7)   Space requirements for parking for uses within the
limits of the Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan.  With the exception of
uses within the CB Central Business District and unless otherwise approved,
lots within the limits of the Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan
containing more than one use shall provide parking spaces in an amount equal
to the total standards for all individual uses per § 151.117.  This
provision shall not limit the ability to submit an alternative parking plan
to reduce the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces in
recognition of different operating hours or peak business periods.  Within
the limits of the Downtown Collierville Small Area Plan, the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen, through the preliminary site plan process or planned
development process, may approve an alternative parking plan that proposes
alternatives to providing the number of off-street parking spaces required by
§ 151.117, in accordance with the standards listed in this section. 
Nothing in this section shall limit the use of one or more of the following
off-street parking alternatives for a single development application.



      (8)   Alternative parking plan. Uses located in downtown
infill situations sometimes have widely varying parking and loading demand
characteristics, making it difficult to establish a single, off-street
parking or loading standard.  Upon receiving a development application for a
use subject to this subsection, the Department of Development shall apply the
off-street parking and loading standard specified for the listed use that is
deemed most similar to the proposed use of established minimum off-street
parking standards on the basis of a parking and loading study prepared by the
applicant. 



         (a)   Alternate formula. A parking and loading study
shall include estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the
Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), Urban Land Institute (ULI), or other
acceptable estimates as approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and
should include other reliable data collected from uses or combinations of
uses that are the same as, or comparable with, the proposed use.



         (b)   Shared parking.  Requests for shared parking
shall comply with the following standards.



            1.   Shared parking spaces shall be located within
1/4 mile/1,320 feet of the primary entrance of all uses served, unless remote
parking shuttle bus service is provided.  Shared parking spaces shall not be
separated from the use they serve by an arterial or collector street.  In
addition, adequate and safe pedestrian access must be provided from and to
the shared parking areas.



            2.   A shared parking area shall be located on a
site with the same or more intensive zoning district classification than
required for the primary uses served.



            3.   Applicants requesting to use shared parking
as a means of satisfying the off-street parking standards must submit a
shared parking request that justifies the feasibility of shared parking. 
Justification shall include information on the size and type of the proposed
development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking
turnover, and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses
that will be sharing off-street parking spaces.



            4.   The maximum reduction in the number of
parking spaces required for all uses sharing the parking area shall be 50%.



            5.   Directional signage that complies with the
standards of this section shall be added to direct the public to the shared
parking spaces.  It is preferable that the employees of an establishment use
these spaces.



            6.   If a use shares parking, a plan shall be
enforced through a written agreement among all owners of record.  An
attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record must be recorded
at the office of the Shelby County Register.  Recordation of the agreement
shall take place prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any use
to be served by the shared parking area.



         (c)   On-street parking.  The use of on-street parking
to meet a portion of the minimum off-street parking requirements is permitted
if there is adequate on-street parking contiguous to the lot.



         (d)   Parking structures.  The Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may reduce or waive the parking required by § 151.117 if the use is
in proximity to a parking structure, whether on the same or on a different
lot than the uses which it serves.



         (e)   Valet and tandem parking.  An off-street parking
program utilizing limited tandem parking for commercial uses shall comply
with the following standards.



            1.   The development served shall provide off-site
parking spaces equal to the use requirement per § 151.117.



            2.   No more than 30% of the total number of
spaces shall be designated as tandem.



            3.   A valet parking attendant must be on duty
during hours of operation.



      (9)   Alternative materials. The use of pervious or
semi-pervious parking area surface materials, including but not limited to
grass, mulch, grasscrete, ring and grid systems used in conjunction with
grass seed or sod, permeable concrete or asphalt, porous or grid pavers, or
recycled materials such as glass, rubber, used asphalt, brick, block and
concrete may be approved for the required vehicular surface area on a lot,
provided that such areas are properly maintained.  Decorative, dust-free
gravel used on conjunction with reinforced matting, grid pavers, or pervious
asphalt, is permitted as an alternative parking area surfacing material in
the Historic District, if the Historic District Commission grants a
certificate of appropriateness.  Where possible, such materials should be
used in areas proximate to and in combination with on-site stormwater control
devices.



      (10)   Queuing spaces.  Queuing spaces may count toward the
overall number of required parking spaces.  However, only the space that is
provided at the gas island or drive-through window may be counted. 
Additional queuing spaces that may exist when a line forms shall not be
counted as contributing to the number of required spaces.



   (C)   Additional regulations for accessory off-street parking.



      (1)   Operation of accessory off-street parking spaces.



         (a)   Off-street parking spaces which are accessory to
community facility, commercial and industrial uses shall be designed and
operated exclusively for the storage of the motor vehicles used by the
visitors, occupants, employees, patrons or customers of those uses.



         (b)   Off-street parking spaces which are accessory to
residences shall be designed and operated exclusively for the storage of the
motor vehicles used by the occupants of such residences.



      (2)   Area of accessory off-street parking spaces. Each
accessory off-street parking space, open or enclosed, shall be a minimum of
nine feet wide and 20 feet long exclusive of drives, ramps and aisles.



      (3)   Minimum drive aisle width.  The minimum drive aisle
width is based on the angle of the parking spaces and if one- or two-way
traffic is proposed.



 

Angle of Parking
 
Traffic Direction
 
Minimum Aisle Width


45-60 degree
 
One-way
 
16 feet


45-60 degree
 
Two-way
 
24 feet


90 degree
 
One-way
 
22 feet


90 degree
 
Two-way
 
24 feet



 



   (D)   Development standards for accessory off-street parking.



      (1)   Design objectives.



         (a)   Parking areas shall be designed with careful
regard given to orderly arrangement, topography, amenity of view, ease of
access and as an integral part of the overall site design.



         (b)   For reasons of use and appearance, it is desirable
that parking areas be level or on terraces formed with the slope of the land.
Changes in level between such terraces should be formed by retaining walls or
landscaped banks.



         (c)   Efforts shall be made to assure that a parking
area does not dominate a site or building.  The efforts may include
depressing the level of the parking area, construction of earth berms,
dividing large lots into smaller sub-lots and other similar techniques.



      (2)   Location of access to the street. The entrances and
exits of all required or permitted accessory off-street parking facilities
with five or more spaces shall be located not less than 50 feet from the
intersection of any two street lines.



      (3)   Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be
surfaced with asphalt or concrete and so constructed to provide for adequate
drainage for both on and off site and to prevent the release of dust.  In no
case shall drainage be allowed to cross sidewalks.



      (4)   Border barriers. An off-street parking area containing
five or more parking spaces shall be provided with a rail, fence, wall, earth
berm or other continuous barrier of a height sufficient to retain all cars
completely within the property, together with appropriate landscaping, except
as exit or access driveways. In addition, screening shall be provided on each
side of a parking area as required in subsection (D)(5) of this section.



      (5)   Screening.



         (a)   Open off-street parking areas with five or more
parking spaces, which are located on a lot adjacent to the boundary of a
residential district shall be screened by either:



            1.   A strip at least ten feet wide, densely
planted with shrubs or trees at least four feet high at the time of planting
and which are of a type which may be expected to form a year round dense
screen at least six feet high within three years; or



            2.   A wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence
of fire resistant material at least six feet in height. The wall, barrier or
fence may be opaque or perforated, provided that not more than 50% of the
fence is open.



         (b)   In addition such screening:



            1.   Shall be maintained in good condition at all
times;



            2.   Shall not be placed within 15 feet of the
normal vehicular entrances and exits;



            3.   Shall not obstruct visibility of motorists at
street intersections.



      (6)   Large parking areas. Off-street parking areas containing
50 or more parking spaces shall be subdivided into sub-lots containing not
more than 50 parking spaces by landscaping strips, landscaped works or
similar techniques.



      (7)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street
parking areas shall be directed away from property in any residential
district in such a way as not to create a nuisance, and such lighting shall
not exceed 0.5 foot candle at or above any residential district boundary or
commercial district boundary where residences are located.



(`00 Code, § 11-801) (Ord. 2003-22, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed
11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-23-11; Am. Ord. 2012-06, passed 5-29-12;
Am. Ord. 2016-07, passed 7-25-16; Am. Ord. 2018-05, passed 8-28-18)



§ 151.116  ACCESSORY OFF-STREET LOADING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General purposes and applicability for off-street loading
regulations. The following provisions for accessory off-street loading berths
are adopted in order to provide needed space off public streets for loading
and unloading activities, to limit the use of streets for such purposes, to
help relieve traffic congestion in all areas and thus to promote and protect
the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   Accessory off-street loading berth requirements.



      (1)   General provisions.



         (a)   In all districts, accessory off-street loading
berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for all community facility,
commercial and industrial uses developed after the effective date of this
ordinance, as a condition precedent to the use of such development.



         (b)   Each use or activity which may require loading
berth space has been assigned a loading berth code number. The code numbers
are listed below, along with the requirements associated with each. To find
out what the loading berth requirement is for a particular use, look that use
up in § 151.117, find out which loading berth code number has been assigned
to that use, then refer to the requirements below. The developer shall
evaluate his or her own needs to determine if the use requires a greater
number of spaces than those required by this section.



         (c)   After the effective date of this ordinance, if the
use of any building or other structure is enlarged or modified to increase
the floor area, the requirements set forth in this ordinance shall apply to
the increased floor area of the enlarged or modified portion of such building.



      (2)   Space requirements for off-street loading berths.



 

Loading Berth Code
 
For Floor Area (in Square Feet)
 
Required Berths


1
 
The number of spaces shall be prescribed by the Director of Development
Services or his or her designee after taking into consideration traffic
generation, amount and frequency of loading and unloading, the time of
operation and other factors affecting the need for off-street loading.
 


2
 
Less than 100,000

Each additional 100,000 or fraction one-half or more
 
1

1


3
 
Less than 30,000

30,000 to 100,000

Each additional 100,000 or fraction one-half or more
 
None

1

1


4
 
Less than 10,000

10,000-40,000

40,001-70,000

70,001-150,000

Each additional 80,000 or fraction one-half or more
 
None

1

2

4

1



 



 

Loading Berth Code
 
For Floor Area (in Square Feet)
 
Required Berths


5
 
Less than 5,000

5,000-100,000

Each additional 100,000 or fraction one-half or more
 
None

1

1


6
 
Less than 5,000

5,000-30,000

Each additional 30,000 or fraction one-half or more
 
None

1

1


7
 
Less than 2,000

2,001-25,000

25,001-50,000

50,001-100,000

Each additional 100,000 or fraction one-half or more
 
None

1

2

3

1



 



      (3)   Special provisions for a single lot with uses subject to
different loading requirements. When any building or lot contains two or more
uses having different requirements for loading berths, and the floor area of
each separate use is less than the minimum floor area for which berths are
required, then off-street loading berths shall be provided as if the total
floor area were used for that use for which the most berths are required.



      (4)   Wholesale, industrial or storage uses combined with
other uses. If any building or lot is used partly for wholesale, industrial
or storage uses or any combination of these uses and partly for any other
community facility or commercial uses, at least 50% of the floor area in the
building shall be subject to the requirements set forth for wholesale,
industrial and warehousing uses and the remainder shall be subject to the
other applicable requirements.



      (5)   Size of required berths.



         (a)   Off-street loading berths, opened or enclosed,
shall have minimum dimensions of:



            1.   Length:            25 feet;



            2.   Width:               12 feet;
and



            3.   Vertical clearance:         15
feet. 



         (b)   For any use which is required to furnish three or
more loading berths, at least one of every three loading berths shall have a
minimum dimensions of:



            1.   Length:            65 feet;



            2.   Width:               12 feet;
and



            3.   Vertical clearance:         15 feet.



         (c)   These dimensions shall not include drive-ways or
entrances to, or exits from, such off- street berths.



      (6)   Location of access to the street. The entrances and
exits to all required accessory off-street loading berths shall be located
not less than 50 feet from the intersection of any two street lines.



      (7)   Surfacing. All permitted or required open off-street
loading berths shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other hard surface
material and constructed so as to provide for adequate drainage and prevent
the release of dust.



      (8)   Screening.



         (a)   All permitted or required open off-street loading
berths located adjacent to residences or a residential district or within a
residential district shall be screened from the adjoining residential
districts by either:



            1.   A strip at least 10 feet wide, densely
planted with shrubs or trees which are at least four feet high at the time of
planting and which are of a type which may be expected to form a year round
dense screen at least six feet high within three years;



            2.   A wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence
of fire resistant material, at least six feet high but not more than eight
feet high, as measured from the finished grade. Such wall, barrier or fence
may be opaque or perforated, provided that not more than 50% of the fence is
open.



         (b)   In addition, such screening:



            1.   Shall be maintained in good condition at all
times;



            2.   Shall not be located within 15 feet of normal
vehicular entrances and exits; and



            3.   Shall not conflict with § 151.006(A).



      (9)   Location. To the maximum extent possible, all off-street
loading berths shall be located between the principal building and the rear
lot line of the property, and/or shall be screened from the view of the
street and adjacent properties.  Loading berths shall be located so as not
to restrict the ingress and egress to the lot nor to any intersection.



      (10)   Required open space for loading berths. No accessory
off-street loading berth shall be located within the required open space on
any lot.



      (11)   Waiver or modification of requirements.  As part of
the review and approval of a Site Plan, the Director of Development Services
or his or her designee may waive or modify the loading berth requirements
upon finding that the use does not require loading spaces of a number or size
required by this section, given the particular operational characteristics of
the use and its need or lack thereof for the delivery or shipments of goods
to and from the site.



(`00 Code, § 11-802)  (Ord. 2004-13, passed 7-26-04)



§ 151.117  TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS AND OFF-STREET LOADING
BERTH CODES.



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements


Residential Dwellings




Single family detached
 
 
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit


Single family attached
 
 
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit


Two family
 
 
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit


Multiple family
 
1
 
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit


Mobile home park
 
 
 
2 spaces per mobile home space


Other Housing


Boarding house
 
1
 
 
1 space per dwelling unit


Rooming house
 
1
 
 
1 space per dwelling unit


Hotel, motel and tourist court
 
6
 
 
1 space per unit in a bldg


Institutional


Assisted living/home for seniors
 
1
 
 
Parking shall be as set by the Town based on a qualified Parking Generation
Study, but in no case shall be less than a minimum of 0.35 spaces per
dwelling unit which is inclusive of parking for residents, employees and
visitors.


Cemetery - mausoleum
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals


Place of worship
 
1
 
 
1 space for each 4 seats in the sanctuary




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




School, public or private, grades K-12
 
2
 
 
High schools (grades 10-12, inclusive) 8 spaces per classroom or one space
for each seat in the auditorium, arena or stadium, whichever requires the
greatest number of spaces, but in no case shall more than 300 spaces be
required, except as recommended by the Planning Commission. Elementary and
junior high schools, 2 spaces per classroom or one space for each 6 seats in
the auditorium, whichever is greater.


Day care center
 
1
 
250
 


Family day care home
 
1
 
 
2 spaces


Group day care home
 
1
 
 
3 spaces


Health clinic, hospital
 
2
 
 
1 space for every 4 seats in the dining room, assembly hall or one space for
each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever is greater.


Lodge, club, country club
 
2
 
 
1 space for every 4 seats in an assembly area within the facility or 1 space
for each 60 sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever is greater.


Nursing home
 
5
 
 
Parking shall be as set by the Town based on a qualified Parking Generation
Study, but in no case shall be less than a minimum of 0.35 spaces per
dwelling unit which is inclusive of parking for residents, employees and
visitors.




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements


Observation- rehabilitation center
 
3
 
 
1 space for each 4 spaces in the dining hall, assembly room, or 1 space for
each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever is greater.


Park, playground and playfield
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Community centers
 
2
 
 
1 space for each 4 seats in an assembly area within the facility or 1 space
for each 60 sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever is greater.


Orphanages
 
1
 
 
To be determined by Board of Zoning Appeals.



 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Airports, air cargo terminals, heliports and other aeronautical devices
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals


Major mail processing centers
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Military installations
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board

of Zoning Appeals.


College, junior colleges and universities, excluding businesses operating as
profit- making enterprises
 
 
 
Minimum 1 space for each 4 seats in each classroom, plus 1 space for each 6
seats in an auditorium, arena or stadium located on the same lot on which the
use is located, the requirements under the conditional use provisions of this
chapter as specified in § 151.310.


All golf courses
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Stadiums, sports arena, auditoriums and bandstands
 
1
 
 
1 space for each 3 seats or 6 feet of benches.


Zoological gardens
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Public, parochial and private non-profit libraries and observatories
 
2
 
500
 


Public, parochial and private non-profit museums and art galleries
 
2
 
500
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Non-profit private, public and utility administrative offices
 
3
 
400
 


Post offices (excluding major mail processing centers)
 
2
 
500
 


Police or fire stations
 
2
 
500
 


Temporary non-profit festivals
 
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Public Utilities


Communications equipment, installations or exchanges
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Electric or gas substations
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Railroad, bus and transit terminals
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Electric, communication or telephone distribution lines, poles, transformers
or splice boxes
 
 
 


Water, storm drainage, sewer lines or gas distribution lines with incidental
appurtenances
 
 
 


Private streets
 
 
 


Rights-of-way to all modes of transportation
 
 
 


Small landscaped, scenically significant open areas or natural reserves
 
 
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Public and private utility corporations or truck yards
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Radio and television transmission stations
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Railroad yards and other transportation equipment marshaling and storage area
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Reservoirs and water tanks
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Sewer disposal treatment plants
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Electric transmission lines and major fuel transmission lines
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Gas, electric production or treatment facility
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Water production or treatment facility
 
1
 
 
To be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Lumber, Hardware, Building Materials


Lumber yards
 
7
 
1000
 


Building materials
 
7
 
1000
 


Heating and plumbing equipment
 
7
 
1000
 


Paint, glass and wallpaper
 
4
 
500
 


Electrical supplies
 
7
 
1000
 


Welding supplies
 
7
 
1000
 


Hardware
 
4
 
500
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Greenhouse and nursery products
 
4
 
500
 


Agricultural equipment, sales and service
 
7
 
500
 


Lawnmower, sales and service
 
4
 
500
 


General Merchandise


Department stores
 
4
 
200
 


Variety stores
 
4
 
200
 


Clothing and dry goods
 
4
 
200
 


General merchandise stores
 
4
 
200
 


Food, Drug, Beverage


Bakery
 
4
 
150
 


Candy, confectionary
 
4
 
150
 


Delicatessen
 
4
 
150
 


Drugs and pharmaceuticals
 
4
 
150
 


Fruit and vegetable stand
 
4
 
150
 


Package liquor store
 
4
 
150
 


Supermarket
 
4
 
150
 


Beverage store
 
4
 
150
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Auto Dealers and Service Stations


Service stations
 
7
 
500
 


Used car sales
 
7
 
500
 


Auto parts (new)
 
7
 
500
 


Auto dealership
 
7
 
500
 


Car wash
 
 
 
For conveyor type automatic automobile washing establishments: one queuing up
space per five feet of conveyor tunnel, plus two spaces for each 3 employees.
For self- service car washes: the number of spaces shall be determined by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.


Auto parts (used)
 
7
 
500
 


Boat, marine sales
 
7
 
500
 


Truck, heavy equipment sales
 
7
 
500
 


Mobile home or prefabricated home sales
 
7
 
500
 


Motorcycle sales
 
7
 
500
 


Tire sales and servicing
 
7
 
500
 


Apparel and Accessories


Men’s and boy’s clothing
 
4
 
400
 


Women’s ready to wear
 
4
 
400
 


Millinery and accessories
 
4
 
400
 


Shoe shops
 
4
 
400
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Tailor shops
 
4
 
400
 


Children’s shops
 
4
 
400
 


Furniture, Home Furnishings, Appliances


Furniture
 
4
 
400
 


Appliances
 
4
 
400
 


Drapery and upholstery
 
4
 
400
 


Piano and musical instruments
 
4
 
400
 


Radio and TV sales; phonographs
 
4
 
400
 


Floor coverings
 
4
 
400
 


Eating and Drinking Places


Restaurants, cafes, cafeterias
 
6
 
200
 


Taverns, bars
 
4
 
200
 


Nightclubs
 
4
 
200
 


Dairy bar
 
6
 
100
 


Drive-in restaurants
 
6
 
100
 


Art, Antique Jewelry


Antique store
 
4
 
400
 


Art gallery
 
4
 
400
 


Art and craft shop
 
4
 
200
 


Flowershop, florist
 
4
 
400
 


Gift shop
 
4
 
200
 


Glasses and china
 
4
 
200
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Jewelry, watches
 
4
 
200
 


Optical goods
 
4
 
200
 


Books, Stationary


Books
 
4
 
200
 


Greeting cards
 
4
 
200
 


Magazines
 
4
 
200
 


Newspapers
 
4
 
200
 


Stationary
 
4
 
200
 


Hobby, Toy, Pet


Aquariums, bird store, pet store
 
4
 
200
 


Camera shop
 
4
 
200
 


Hobby shop
 
4
 
200
 


Sporting goods, bicycles
 
4
 
200
 


Toys
 
4
 
200
 


Miscellaneous Retail


Salvage clothing
 
4
 
200
 


Finance, Insurance, Real Estate


Banks
 
3
 
200
 


Savings and loan
 
3
 
200
 


Real estate agents
 
3
 
200
 


Insurance carriers
 
3
 
300
 


Other financial, insurance, real estate services
 
3
 
300
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Personal Services


Branch laundry, dry cleaning equipment
 
4
 
300
 


Laundry dry cleaning pick up station
 
4
 
150
 


Self service laundry
 
4
 
150
 


Photographic services
 
4
 
500
 


Beauty shop
 
4
 
150
 


Pipe and tobacco shop
 
4
 
150
 


Barber shop
 
4
 
150
 


Funeral services
 
5
 
 
1 space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area, or when a chapel is provided, 1
space for each 4 permanent seats, plus 1 space for every 25 sq. ft. of floor
area where temporary seats are used, whichever requires the greater number of
spaces.


Tailoring and dressmaking
 
4
 
500
 


Apparel repair and alterations
 
4
 
300
 


Shoe repair
 
4
 
150
 


Professional Services


Physicians
 
5
 
100
 


Dentists
 
5
 
100
 


Veterinarians
 
5
 
200
 


Attorneys
 
3
 
300
 


Accountants
 
3
 
300
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Engineers
 
3
 
300
 


Planners
 
3
 
300
 


Architects
 
3
 
300
 


Optometrist
 
3
 
100
 


Hospital services and supplies
 
4
 
500
 


Medical clinic-outpatient
 
5
 
100
 


Business Offices


Executive, management, administrative activities or private, profit making
firms
 
4
 
300
 


Recreation and Entertainment


Motion picture theater
 
4
 
 
1 space per 4 permanent seats, plus 1 space for every 25 sq. ft. of area
where temporary seats are used.


Drive-in movie
 
1
 
 


Amusement park, fairground
 
1
 
 
1 space for each 75 sq. ft. of exhibit area and entertainment area, whether
enclosed or not.


Golf driving range
 
1
 
 
2 spaces per tee, plus 1 space for each employee.


Indoor shooting range
 
4
 
200
 


Roller skating rink
 
4
 
 
1 space for every 200 sq. ft. of skating area.


Bowling alleys
 
4
 
 
5 spaces for each lane


Electronic amusement devices, arcade
 
4
 
200
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Billiard parlor
 
4
 
 
1 space for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy and as
established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes.


Health spa
 
4
 
200
 


Miniature golf
 
1
 
 
3 spaces per hole, plus 1 space for each employee.


Business Services


Duplicating, mailing and stenographic
 
3
 
400
 


Employment agencies
 
3
 
400
 


Warehousing and storage
 
7
 
 
1 space for each employee. No loading berths required for single-story,
self-service “mini- storage” use.


Consulting service
 
3
 
400
 


Detective or protective
 
3
 
300
 


Photofinishing
 
4
 
 
1½ spaces for each 2 persons employed on the premises, at maximum employment
on a single shift.


Trading stamps
 
4
 
500
 


Equipment rental and leasing
 
4
 
500
 


Monument sales
 
4
 
500
 


Clerical services
 
4
 
400
 


Custom printing (excluding the printing of books other than small pamphlets
or small reports.)
 
4
 
400
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Research services (private)
 
4
 
500
 


Metal and wood fencing, ornamental grill work
 
8
 
1000
 


Window cleaning
 
7
 
400
 


Disinfecting and exterminating
 
7
 
400
 


Central laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services
 
6
 
 
1½ spaces for each 2 persons employed on the premises, at max. employment on
single shift.


Animal hospital and clinic
 
5
 
200
 


Freight forwarding office
 
7
 
5000
 


Truck terminal
 
7
 
5000
 


Repair Services


Auto repair, garages
 
7
 
500
 


Electrical repair, small appliances
 
4
 
300
 


Radio and TV repair
 
4
 
300
 


Watch, clock and jewelry repair
 
4
 
300
 


Auto body repair and paint shop
 
7
 
500
 


Furniture and large household appliance repair
 
4
 
300
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Armature rewinding, welding shop, reupholstery, tire recapping or retreading
 
7
 
 
1½ spaces for each 2 persons employed on the premises, at max. employment on
a single shift.


Educational Services


Business and steno schools
 
3
 
300
 


Barber and beauty schools
 
3
 
300
 


Driving schools
 
3
 
300
 


Art and music schools
 
3
 
300
 


Correspondence schools
 
3
 
300
 


Other special training and schooling
 
3
 
300
 


Contract Construction Services


Building contractor
 
7
 
1000
 


Other general construction
 
7
 
1000
 


Plumbing and heating and decorating
 
7
 
1000
 


Electrical construction
 
7
 
1000
 


Masonry, stonework, tile setting, plastering and concrete
 
7
 
1000
 


Roofing and sheet metal
 
7
 
1000
 


Carpentering and wood flooring
 
7
 
1000
 


Water well drilling
 
7
 
1000
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Wholesale Trade


Drugs, chemicals and allied products
 
7
 
1000
 


Groceries and related products
 
7
 
1000
 


Electrical goods
 
7
 
1000
 


Hardware, plumbing and cooling equipment and supplies
 
7
 
1000
 


Metals and minerals
 
7
 
1000
 


Petroleum bulk stations, terminals and distribution
 
7
 
1000
 


Scrap and waste materials
 
7
 
 
1½ spaces for each 2 persons employed on the premises, at max. employment on
a single shift.


Paper and paper products
 
7
 
1000
 


Industrial


Manufacture assembly, processing, storage, distribution of:
 
 
 


Chemicals, drugs, soap, fertilizers and abrasive products
 
 
 


Communications equipment, electronic components, engineering, scientific and
photographic equipment
 
7
 
 
1½ spaces for each 2 persons employed on the premises, at max. employment on
a single shift.




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Electrical machinery and equipment
 
7
 
 


Record processing
 
7
 
 


Book binding
 
7
 
 


Data processing service
 
7
 
 


Printing and publishing
 
7
 
 


Rubber and plastic products (except rubber manufacture)
 
7
 
 


Fabricated metal products and machinery
 
7
 
 


Food and beverage products (except animal slaughter stockyards and rendering)
 
7
 
 


Brewery
 
7
 
 


Furniture and fixtures
 
7
 
 


Jewelry, silverware, plated-ware musical instruments, toys, sporting goods,
office, art supplies
 
7
 
 
1½ spaces for each 2 persons employed on the premises, at max. employment of
single shift.


Leather products
 
7
 
 


Paperboard containers and boxes
 
7
 
 


Scrap metals processors
 
7
 
 


Stone, clay, glass and related mineral products
 
7
 
 


Lumber and wood products
 
7
 
 




 



 

Uses Permitted
 
Loading Berths
 
Sq. Ft. of Bldg for Which a Parking Space Must be Provided
 
Other Requirements




Mortar, plaster, paving materials
 
7
 
 


Textile and apparel products
 
7
 
 


Tobacco products
 
7
 
 


Transportation equipment including motor vehicles, aircraft and parts, boat
building, railroad equipment, motorcycles, bicycles and parts
 
7
 
 
1½ spaces for each 2 persons employed at the premises, at max. employment on
a single shift.


Undeveloped and Vacant


Agriculture and forestry
 
1
 
 


Yard areas, greenbelt and open spaces, wildlife habitat, refuge hiking,
nature and bike trails and related uses
 
 
 


Circuses, carnivals and similar transient enterprises
 
1
 
 
Off-street parking to be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.


Erosion and sedimentation control measures, facilities and districts
 
 
 


Flood proofing and flood hazard reduction structures
 
 
 


Open water including ponds, lakes, reservoirs, streams and waterways (all
man-made)
 
 
 




 



(`00 Code, § 11-803)  (Ord. passed 5- -02; Am. Ord. 2004-13, passed
7-26-04; Am. Ord. 2005-12, passed 12-12-05)



NONCONFORMING USES



§ 151.130  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (A)   In the event that a zoning change has occurred or hereafter
occurs in any land area where such land area was not previously covered by
any zoning restrictions of any political subdivision of the State of
Tennessee, or where such land area is covered by zoning restrictions of a
political subdivision of the State of Tennessee and such zoning restrictions
differ from zoning restrictions imposed after the zoning change, then any use
or structure in operation, permitted to operate under zoning regulations or
exceptions thereto prior to the zoning change shall be allowed to continue in
operation and be permitted; provided that no change in the use of the land is
undertaken by such use or establishment.



   (B)   When the use or structure permitted to continue, to expand, or
to be rebuilt pursuant to this chapter is an off-premises sign, such use or
structure shall not preclude any new or additional conforming use or
structure on the property on which the sign structure is located or on any
adjacent property under the same ownership, provided that any such new or
additional use or structure does not result in any violations of the
applicable zoning restrictions other than those nonconformities associated
with the off-premises sign as allowed hereunder.



   (C)   The provisions are thus designed to preserve the character of
the districts established in this subchapter and thus to promote and protect
the public health, safety and general welfare.



(Ord. 2009-07, passed 7-13-09)



§ 151.131  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter apply to all uses or structures which
are not permitted within the districts in which they are located. These
provisions also apply to all uses in flood hazard districts which do not meet
floodproofing standards.



(Ord. 2009-07, passed 7-13-09)



§ 151.132  DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMITY STATUS.



   The burden of establishing that a nonconformity lawfully exists shall
be on the owner of the land on which the purported nonconformity is located.



(Ord. 2009-07, passed 7-13-09)



§ 151.133  CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING NONRESIDENTIAL USE OR STRUCTURE.



   (A)   With the exception of signs and wireless communication
facilitates, nonresidential uses or structures in operation and permitted to
operate under zoning regulations or exceptions thereto in effect immediately
preceding a change in zoning shall be allowed to expand operations and
construct additional facilities which involve an actual continuance and
expansion of the activities of the nonresidential use which were permitted
and being conducted prior to the change in zoning; provided, that there is a
reasonable amount of space for such expansion on the property owned by such
nonresidential use situated within the area which is affected by the change
in zoning, so as to avoid nuisances to adjoining landowners.  No building
permit or like permission for construction or landscaping shall be denied to
a nonresidential use seeking to expand and continue activities conducted by
that nonresidential use which were permitted prior to the change in zoning;
provided, that there is a reasonable amount of space for such expansion on
the property owned by such nonresidential situated within the area which is
affected by the change in zoning, so as to avoid nuisances to adjoining
landowners.



   (B)   With the exception of signs and wireless communication
facilitates, nonresidential uses or structures in operation and permitted to
operate under zoning regulations or exceptions thereto in effect immediately
preceding a change in zoning shall be allowed to destroy present facilities
and reconstruct new facilities necessary to the conduct of such industry or
business subsequent to the zoning change; provided that no destruction and
rebuilding shall occur which shall act to change the use classification of
the land as classified under any zoning regulations or exceptions thereto in
effect immediately prior to or subsequent to a change in the zoning of the
land area on which such industry or business is located.  No building permit
or like permission for demolition, construction or landscaping shall be
denied to an industry or business seeking to destroy and reconstruct
facilities necessary to the continued conduct of the activities of that
industry or business, where such conduct was permitted prior to a change in
zoning; provided, that there is a reasonable amount of space for such
expansion on the property owned by such industry or business situated within
the area which is affected by the change in zoning, so as to avoid nuisances
to adjoining landowners. 



   (C)   The provisions of § 151.130 and divisions (A) and (B) of this
§ 151.133 apply only to land owned and in use by such affected use and do
not operate to permit expansion of an existing use through the acquisition of
additional land.



   (D)   The provisions of § 151.024 apply to nonconforming wireless
communication facilitates.



   (E)   The provisions of § 151.181 apply to nonconforming signs.



   (F)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B) of this
section, any structure rebuilt on the site must conform to the provisions of
the existing zoning regulations as to setbacks, height, bulk, or requirements
as to the physical location of a structure upon the site.  This division (F)
shall only apply if the property owner intentionally and voluntarily abandons
the nonconforming use of the property.  In any contested matter on the use
of such property, the town has the burden of proving an overt act of
abandonment in such matter.



(Ord. 2009-07, passed 7-13-09; Am. Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10)



§ 151.134  VARIANCES AND CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Whenever the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of
adoption of this subchapter has authorized a use by issuing a variance or
conditional use permit, such authorization may be continued in accord with
the conditions which were established at the time the variance or conditional
use was granted.



   (B)   When such use was authorized subject to a term of years, that
use may be continued until the expiration of the term, and thereafter, the
Board of Zoning Appeals may, in appropriate cases, extend the period of
continuance for one or more terms of not more than five years each.  The
Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards
to minimize the effects of such use on the character of the neighborhood.



(Ord. 2009-07, passed 7-13-09)



§ 151.135  GOVERNMENTAL ACQUISITION.



   Governmental acquisition of a portion of a lot for a public purpose
that results in reduction in a required yard or building setback below the
required dimension shall not render the structure nonconforming.



(Ord. 2009-07, passed 7-13-09)



§ 151.136  DISCONTINUANCE.



   (A)   The provisions of § 151.130 and divisions (A) and (B) of §
151.133 shall not apply if a nonresidential use or structure ceases to
operate for a period of 30 continuous months and the of the property did not
conform with the land use classification as denoted in the existing zoning
regulations for the zoning district in which it is located.  Anytime after
the 30-month cessation, any use proposed to be established on the site,
including any existing or proposed on-site sign, must conform to the
provisions of the existing zoning regulations.  For the purposed of this
division, the 30-month period of continuous ceased operation shall be tolled
by:



      (1)   The period in which a nonresidential use is party to any
action in a court of competent jurisdiction regarding the use of the property
until such time that a final settlement, order, decree, or judgment has been
rendered;



      (2)   Any period in which a facility is being constructed,
reconstructed, renovated, or refurbished, provided that all necessary
building permits were obtained within 30 months of cessation of continuous
use;



      (3)   The filing of an application for a building permit for
the alteration, renovation or reconstruction of a structure which is
non-conforming or of a structure in which or out of which a non-conforming
nonresidential use operates or is located; or



      (4)   The reactivation of the non-conforming use any time
prior to the end of the 30-month period.



   (B)   The restrictions of division (A) of this § 151.136 shall only
apply if the property owner intentionally and voluntarily abandons the
nonconforming use of the property.  In any contested matter on the use of
such property, the town has the burden of proving an overt act of abandonment
in such matter.



   (C)   The restrictions of division (A) of this § 151.136 shall not
apply to any industrial establishment location where 25% or more of the gross
annual sales from such location are derived from sales to or contracts with
local, state or federal governments or as a subcontractor to contracts with
the same, or to any industrial establishment location where 75% or more of
the gross annual sales from the location are made to agriculture or
construction businesses.



(Ord. 2009-07, passed 7-13-09)



§ 151.137  CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL USE OR STRUCTURE.



   (A)   Residential use for the purposes hereof means use of a
structure used exclusively for human habitation and related accessory
structures.  For the purposed of nonconformities, when a structure contains
both residential and nonresidential uses, it shall be regulated as a
nonresidential structure and use.



   (B)   In the event that a zoning change has occurred or hereafter
occurs in any land area where such land area was not previously covered by
any zoning restrictions of any political subdivision of the State of
Tennessee, or where such land area is covered by zoning restrictions of a
political subdivision of the State of Tennessee and such zoning restrictions
differ from zoning restrictions imposed after the zoning change, then any
residential use in operation, permitted to operate under zoning regulations
or exceptions thereto prior to the zoning change, shall be allowed to
continue in operation and be permitted provided that no change of use is
undertaken.



   (C)   Structures used for residential use, including accessory
structures, and which are permitted to continue in operation pursuant to
division (B) above, shall also be allowed to expand and be allowed to be
destroyed and rebuilt in the same manner as provided in §§ 151.130 and
151.133 above relative to nonconforming nonresidential uses and likewise
shall be subject to the provisions of § 151.133 above.



   (D)   The provisions of § 151.136 shall apply to any structure,
including accessory buildings, used for residential use and which ceases to
be used for residential use except that the term of 30 continuous months
relative to discontinuance of use as used therein shall not be applicable and
the term of 12 continuous months shall rather be applicable to residential
uses.



(Ord. 2009-07, passed 7-13-09)



PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS



§ 151.150  GENERAL.



   This section is intended to provide the rules and regulations through
which tracts of land may be developed through an overall unified approach
rather than the traditional lot-by-lot treatment afforded to other districts
in this chapter. It is intended to provide a maximum of design freedom in
order to create a better living environment, by making the best use of
topography and land features and by permitting the developer an opportunity
to more fully utilize the physical characteristics of the site through the
reduction of lot sizes, the absence of yard and bulk restrictions and the
planned mixing of uses. Through the requirements of a development plan, it is
the intent that property under this section will be developed through a
unified design providing continuity between the various elements and
ultimately leading to a better environment. Increased residential densities
may be permitted under this section if such increase can be substantiated on
the basis that the superior design makes greater densities possible with no
material adverse effects. This section is and should not be utilized as a
device for making increased densities more acceptable without corresponding
benefits or as a means of circumventing the Town’s development regulations.



(`00 Code, § 11-1101)  (Ord. 2000-05, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. 2008-17,
passed 7-28-08)



§ 151.151  OBJECTIVES AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Objectives.  The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may, upon proper
application, adopt a Resolution permitting a Planned Development (sometimes
“PD”) to facilitate the use of flexible techniques of land development
and site design by providing relief from requirements designed for
conventional developments. In return for greater flexibility in site design
requirements, planned developments are expected to deliver exceptional
quality community designs that:



      (1)   Preserve environmental resources;



      (2)   Provide exceptional open space amenities;



      (3)   Incorporate creative design in the layout of buildings,
open space and circulation;



      (4)    Assure compatibility with surrounding land uses and
neighborhood character;



      (5)   Provide greater efficiency in the layout and provision
of roads, utilities, and other infrastructure; and



      (6)   Facilitate a development pattern more in harmony with
the policies and objectives of the Town Land Use Plan.



   (B)   (1)   Minimum size requirements.  The minimum required
site acreage for a commercial, industrial or mixed-use planned development
shall be three acres, unless the Board of Mayor and Aldermen find that one or
more of the following conditions exist;



         (a)   That an unusual physical or topographic feature of
importance to the area as a whole exists on the site or in the surrounding
area that will contribute to and be protected by the planned development;



         (b)   That the property or the surrounding area has a
historic character of importance to the community that will be protected by
the planned development;



         (c)   That the proposed planned development is adjacent
to a previously approved planned development and will contribute to the
amenities and values of the neighboring planned development;



         (d)   That the planned development is located in an area
being redeveloped and will implement the policies of an adopted plan,
including, but not limited to the Land Use Plan, a specific area plan, or
redevelopment plan; or



         (e)   That due to additional screening, buffering,
transitional uses or other design features, the proposed planned development
would provide better protection to existing or proposed uses of surrounding
property that would otherwise be provided by a conventional development. 



      (2)   There shall be no minimum site acreage requirement for
residential planned developments. However, residential planned developments
containing less than ten gross acres of land area shall not be eligible for
density increases above the prescribed base density for each residential
zoning classification as prescribed in § 151.156(B).



(`00 Code, § 11-1102)  (Ord. 2000-25, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. 2008-06,
passed 2-25-08; Am. Ord. 2008-17, passed 7-28-08)



§ 151.152  RELATION BETWEEN PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS AND ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Districts permitted and planned developments in the Historic
District (H-1).



      (1)   Planned developments shall be permitted in all districts
except the Forest-Agricultural-Residential District (FAR).



      (2)   For any portion of a planned development located within
the Town’s Historic District (H-1), the Collierville Historic District
Commission shall review the proposed planned development Outline Plan and
provide a recommendation to the Board of Mayor Aldermen (this recommendation
shall be in addition to the Planning Commission’s review and
recommendation).



      (3)   Following adoption of an Outline Plan, approval of a
Certificate of Appropriateness by the Historic District Commission shall be
required for proposed projects within the Town’s Historic District (H-1)
including, but not limited to, new construction, alterations, or demolition
(in accordance with §§ 151.195 through 151.204). Collierville’s Historic
District Commission’s review capacity shall be in accordance with §§
151.195 through 151.204.



   (B)   Modification of district regulations. Planned developments may
be constructed subject to the standards and procedures set forth below:



      (1)   Except as expressly modified by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen by approval of an Outline Plan, a planned development shall be
governed by the regulations of the zoning district or districts in which the
planned development is located;



      (2)   Outline Plan approval for the planned development may
provide for such exceptions from the zoning district regulations governing
use, area, setback, loading, width and other bulk regulations, parking, other
design features and such subdivision regulations as may be necessary or
desirable to achieve the objectives of the proposed planned development,
provided such exceptions are consistent with the standards and criteria
contained in this section and have been specifically requested in the
application for a planned development; provided, however, no modification of
the district requirements or subdivision regulations may be allowed when such
proposed modification will result in:         



         (a)   Inadequate or unsafe access to the planned
development; 



         (b)   Traffic volume exceeding the anticipated capacity
of the proposed major street network in the vicinity;



         (c)   An undue burden on public parks, recreation areas,
schools, fire and police protection and other public facilities which serve
or are proposed to serve the planned development; 



         (d)   An undue detrimental effect upon surrounding
properties;



         (e)   A development which will be incompatible with the
purposes of this subchapter and goals of the Town’s Land Use Plan, design
guidelines, and other applicable regulations and guidelines.



      (3)   Such exceptions shall supersede any conflicting
subdivision regulations and zoning district restrictions in which the planned
development is located; provided, however, in no case shall the uses or
densities be varied, except as herein provided. All setbacks abutting private
properties along the planned development shall not be less than those allowed
in the zoning district in which the planned development is located unless
specifically provided for in the planned development conditions. In the
absence of an express condition of the planned development, the applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Town will apply. 



(`00 Code, § 11-1103)  (Ord. 2000-25, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. 2008-17,
passed 7-28-08)



§ 151.153  COORDINATION WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The uniqueness of each proposal for a planned development
requires that specifications for the width and surfacing of streets, public
ways, public utility rights-of-way, curbs and other standards be subject to
modification from the specifications established in the subdivision
regulations adopted by the Planning Commission. Modifications to such
specifications may be approved only after review by the Collierville Planning
Commission and approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (B)   It is the intent of this subchapter that subdivision  review
and approval under the subdivision regulations be carried out simultaneously
with the review of a planned development under this section of the Zoning
Ordinance.



   (C)   The development plans for planned developments  must be
submitted in a form consistent with the requirements of the subdivision
regulations.



   (D)   The requirements for both this section of this chapter and
those of the subdivision regulations shall apply to all planned developments
and all actions of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen pertaining to planned
developments shall be based upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission.



(`00 Code, § 11-1104)  (Ord. 2000-25, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. 2008-17,
passed 7-28-08)



§ 151.154  GENERAL STANDARDS AND CRITERIA.



   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall initially approve a PD
by approving an Outline Plan upon written findings and recommendations by the
Planning Commission which shall be forwarded to the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen pursuant to the provisions contained in this section. 



   (B)   General review criteria for planned developments. The
following general review criteria shall be utilized in evaluating requests
and establishing conditions for a planned development:



      (1)   Consistency with plan. The proposed planned development
must be in agreement with the adopted Land Use Plan and any adopted Area Plan
for the town (subject to division (B)(2) of this section);



      (2)   Exceptions due to substantially changed or changing
conditions. If not in conformance with the adopted Land Use Plan and an
adopted Area Plan for the Town, the proposed planned development shall be
necessary because of substantially changed or changing conditions in the area
or surrounding properties;



      (3)   Physical characteristics of the site; relation to
surrounding property. The tract shall be suitable, or it shall be possible to
make the tract suitable for development in the manner proposed without hazard
to persons or property, on or off the tract, free from the probability of
erosion, subsidence, flood hazard, destruction of wetlands or other dangers.
Conditions of soil, drainage, and topography shall all be appropriate to both
type and pattern of use intended.



      (4)   Relation to public utilities, facilities and services. A
planned development shall be so located in relation to transportation
systems, sanitary sewers, emergency services, public safety, water lines,
storm and surface drainage systems, and other utilities systems and
installations that services can reasonably be expected to be available at the
time of development and such services are adequate to serve the proposed
development.



      (5)   Access to major transportation facilities. A planned
development, where appropriate because of the size or intensity of the
proposed development, shall be so located with respect to expressways,
arterial and collector streets or mass transit facilities, and shall be so
designed, as to provide access to and from such districts without creating
excessive traffic along local streets in residential neighborhoods outside
the development.



      (6)   Compatibility. Any planned development shall be located
and designed so as to minimize the negative effects of external impacts
resulting from factors such as land use, traffic, noise, or lights. Project
control shall be accomplished through buffering, architectural design,
architectural compatibility, site design, height limitations, land use
restrictions, and density or intensity limitations.



         (a)   The design of any planned development should
reflect an effort by the developer to plan land uses within the planned
development so as to blend harmoniously with adjacent land uses.



         (b)   Architecture and building materials shall be
consistent within the design of the development and compatible with
surrounding properties and/or adjacent neighborhoods.



         (7)   Transitions. Any planned development district
shall be responsive to the character of surrounding properties and the
existing neighborhood area. When located in an area where land use types
and/or intensities or densities vary, the planned development shall be
designed in such a manner as to provide for gradual changes in intensity
and/or density.



         (8)   Relationship to adjacent property. The planned
development shall include additional screening, buffering, transitional uses
or other design features as necessary to adequately protect existing or
proposed uses of surrounding property; and shall provide functional and
logical linkages to activity centers and circulation facilities on such
adjacent property.



         (9)   Natural and historic features, conservation and
preservation areas. Planned Development districts shall be designed to
preserve the natural features of the land and historic resources, such as
existing trees, natural topography, and archaeological and historic sites, as
much as possible.



         (10)   Density/Intensity. Density and/or intensity shall
not exceed maximums established in the Land Use Plan (subject to division
(B)(2)). The planned development densities/intensities shall be established
after consideration of the Land Use Plan criteria and limits, neighborhood
compatibility, transitions, and site design.



         (11)   Height. Height in a planned development shall be
determined after review of the nature of surrounding land uses to ensure that
the proposed development will not create any external impacts that would
adversely affect surrounding development, existing or proposed.



         (12)    Fences and screening. Fences or vegetative
screening at the periphery of a planned development shall be provided to
protect occupants from undesirable views, lighting, noise or other off-site
influence, or to protect occupants of surrounding areas from similar adverse
influences. When adjacent development is of either similar use or intensity,
such screening is not required.



         (13)    Environmental Conservation. Planned development
districts shall provide environmental enhancements, such as Leadership in
Energy & Environmental Design (LEED) certification from the U.S. Green
Building Council to promote sustainable building design and construction
including but not limited to, sustainable neighborhood development,
sustainable site development, green roofs, water savings, energy efficiency,
materials selection, and indoor environmental quality.



   (C)   Homeowner associations or some other responsible party shall
be required to maintain any and all common and open space and/or common
elements, unless accepted to be conveyed to the Town of Collierville.



(`00 Code, § 11-1105)  (Ord. 2000-25, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord; Am. Ord.
2008-17, passed 7-28-08)



§ 151.155  ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.



   The following general provisions shall apply to any planned
developments created by Resolution by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (A)   Application for planned development required. Each application
for a planned development shall be submitted in accordance with requirements
of these regulations and the requirements set forth in the Subdivision
Regulations. Variances to the requirements of both regulations may be granted
upon review and recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval by the
Mayor and Board.



   (B)   Waiver of Board of Zoning Appeals action. No action of the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall be required in the approval of a planned
development.



   (C)   Ownership and division of land. No tract of land may be
considered for or approved as a planned development unless such tract is
under the single ownership of a landowner. For the purpose of this
subchapter, a landowner may be a person, partnership, corporation,
association or any other legal entity entitled to own property. The holder of
a written option to purchase, a party purchaser to a contract for the sale of
real property contingent upon the success of a PD application for the
property or any governmental agency shall be considered landowners for the
purpose of this section. Unless otherwise provided as a condition of approval
of the PD, the landowner of an adopted PD may divide and transfer parts of
such development. The Outline Plan shall control the development of any part
of a PD that is subdivided, sold, or leased. No development may be undertaken
in any part of the PD that is subdivided, sold, or leased that will violate
the Outline Plan for the PD.



   (D)   Professional design.



      (1)   The Collierville Planning Commission shall not consider
any development plan for any proposed planned development, nor shall the
Collierville Board of Mayor and Aldermen approve any  Outline Plan for a
proposed planned development unless such proposed plan included a
certification that the services of one or more design professionals were
utilized in the preparation of the Outline Plan in addition to a licensed
civil engineer.



      (2)   An Outline Plan shall be certified that in addition to a
licensed civil engineer, the services of one or more of the following
professionals were utilized in the design and planning process: 



         (a)   An urban planner who possesses the education and
experience to qualify for membership in a recognized professional planning
association;



         (b)   A practicing landscape architect licensed by the
State of Tennessee;



         (c)   A practicing architect licensed by the State of
Tennessee.



      (3)   A final site plan or subdivision plat shall certify that
the series of one of the professionals indicated in subsections (a), (b) or
(c) were utilized in the preparation of the final plan/plat.



   (E)   Phasing, inactive planned developments, and time extensions.
The expeditious construction of any planned development authorized under
these provisions shall be undertaken to assist in the assurance of the full
completion of the development in accordance with the approved Outline Plan
and subsequent approved plans.



      (1)   Phasing of development. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen
may elect to permit the development of the planned development in phases, in
which case, the following provisions shall be complied with:   



         (a)   Any phasing of a planned development shall be
approved during the planned development review process and shall be
sufficient in terms of size and scope in order for the phase to exist as a
“stand alone” project, in the event the applicant does not implement
subsequent phases of the planned development as proposed and approved.



         (b)   Each phase shall be designed and sequenced to
ensure that the impacts of the development upon the surrounding community and
properties will not be detrimental or a deterrent to further development of
the community and adjacent properties.



         (c)   The commencement of actual construction of any
phase of the planned development shall be governed by the provisions of this
chapter.



      (2)   Inactive planned developments.



         (a)   If a preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary
site plan has not been acted upon by the Planning Commission within one year
of the approval, by resolution, of the Outline Plan by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen;



         (b)   If a final subdivision plat or final site plan has
not been acted upon by the Planning Commission with one year of the approval
of the Planning Commission’s approval of a preliminary subdivision plat or
preliminary site plan;



         (c)   If the development contract is not approved and
executed within three years following final subdivision plat or final site
plan approval; or



         (d)   At any time the planned development or any phase
of the planned development has not been developed according to a schedule.



         (e)   The Planning Commission shall give notice by
certified mail to the owner and applicant who requested the planned
development and shall schedule a public hearing to take any of the following
actions:



            1.   Recommend extending, removing, or modifying
the schedule for development;



            2.   Recommend amendments to the Outline Plan;



            3.    Recommend revocation of the Planned
Development; and/or



            4.   Recommend rezoning of the property to its
former zoning classification.



         (f)   After receiving the Planning Commission’s
recommendation(s), the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall hold a public
hearing and render a decision.



      (3)   Time extension for Outline Plans.  The owner and
applicant who requested the planned development may request an extension of
the Outline Plan in one year increments. Approval of any time extension is at
the discretion of the Planning Commission; however, the total time extension
shall not exceed two years without reapproval being granted by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen. When considering approval of a time extension, the
Planning Commission may recommend the Outline Plan be modified to comply with
regulations adopted since the planned development was approved and/or to
address changes to surrounding properties since the planned development was
approved. 



   (F)   Common open space and public facilities. The requirements of
common open space and public facilities shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this section.



      (1)   Common open space must be usable for recreational
purpose or must provide visual, aesthetic environmental amenities. The uses
authorized for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale and
character of the planned development considering its size, density, expected
population, topography and the number and type of structures to be provided.



      (2)   Common open space must be suitably improved for its
intended use, but open space containing natural features worthy of
preservation may be left unimproved. Any buildings, structures and
improvements to be located in the common open space must be appropriate to
the uses which are authorized therefore and must conserve and enhance the
amenities of the common open space having regard to its topography and the
intended function of the common open space.



      (3)   The development phasing sequence which is part of the
Outline Plan must coordinate the improvements of the common open space, the
construction of the buildings, structures and improvements in the common open
space, the construction of public improvements and the construction of
residential dwellings in a planned residential development, but in no event
shall occupancy permits for any phase be issued unless and until the open
space which is part of that phase has been dedicated or conveyed and improved.



      (4)   No common open space of a planned residential
development shall be conveyed or dedicated by the developer or any other
person to any public body, homeowner’s association or other responsible
party unless the Collierville Planning Commission has determined that the
character and quality of the tract to be conveyed make it suitable for the
purpose for which it was intended. The Planning Commission may give
consideration to the size and character of the dwellings to be constructed
within the planned residential development, the topography and existing
trees, the ground cover and other natural features, the manner in which the
open space is to be improved and maintained for recreational or amenity
purposes and the existence of public parks or other public recreational
facilities in the vicinity.



      (5)   All land shown on a plan as common open space may be
either:



         (a)   Conveyed to a public body, if the public body
agrees to accept conveyance and to maintain the common open space and any
buildings, structures or improvements which have been placed on it; or



         (b)   Conveyed to an organization for ownership and
maintenance subject to the following: 



            1.   The Collierville Planning Commission and the
Collierville Board of Mayor and Aldermen may require that the landowner
provide for and establish an organization for the ownership and maintenance
of any common open space and such organization shall not be dissolved nor
shall it dispose of any common open space, by sale or otherwise, (except to
an organization conceived and established to own and maintain the common open
space), without first offering to dedicate the same to the Town of
Collierville and the dedication be approved by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen;



            2.   In the event that the organization
established to own and maintain common open space or any successor
organization shall at any time after the establishment of the planned
development fail to maintain the common open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the adopted final subdivision plat or final site
plan (if required), the Town may serve written notice upon such organization
and/or  the owners or residents of the planned development and hold a public
hearing. After 30 days when the  deficiencies of maintenance are not
corrected, the Town shall call upon all the owners of property within the PD
to maintain the common open space, and, in default thereof, the Town may
maintain same;



            3.   The cost of such maintenance by the Town
shall be assessed severally and proportionally against the properties within
the planned development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open
space and shall become a lien on the properties; 



            4.   If the common open space is deeded to a
Homeowners’ and/or Property Owners’ Association, the developer shall file
with the Planning Commission a declaration of covenants and restrictions that
will govern the association to be submitted with the application  for
preliminary subdivision plan or preliminary site plan approval (if
applicable). The Town Attorney will review the documentation as to form prior
to Planning Commission approval. The provisions shall include, but not be
limited to the following:



               a.   The Association must be set up before
the properties are sold;



               b.   Membership must be mandatory for each
buyer and any successive buyer; 



               c.   The open space restrictions must be
permanent, not just for a period of years; 



               d.   The Association must be responsible for
liability insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of recreational and
other facilities; 



               e.   Homeowners/property owners must pay
their prorated share of the cost of the assessment levied by the association
to meet changed needs;



      (6)   The Collierville Planning Commission and the
Collierville Board of Mayor and Aldermen may, as a condition of approval,
require that suitable areas for streets, public rights-of-way, schools, parks
and other public areas be set aside, improved and/or dedicated for public use.



   (G)    Security requirements for improvements. Adequate security
shall be furnished and filed with the Town of Collierville for private and
public improvements in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Subdivision Regulations and Zoning Ordinance. The security shall insure
completion of all improvements, including, but not limited to public site
improvements, streets, surface and subsurface drainage, water lines, sewer
lines, parking areas, landscaping, planting and screening, as recommended by
the Town Engineer.



   (H)   Development contract.  After a final subdivision plat or
final site plan (if required) is approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen,
the developer, and owner, if different from the developer, must enter into a
development contract with the Town of Collierville Board of Mayor and
Aldermen relative to all required improvements.



   (I)   Relation to utilities, public facilities.  The planned
development shall be so located in relation to sanitary sewers, water lines,
storm and surface drainage systems and other utilities systems and
installations that neither extension nor enlargement of such systems will be
required in manner, form, character, location, degree, scale or timing
resulting in higher net public cost or earlier incursion of public cost than
would development in a form generally permitted in the area. The planned
development shall be so located with respect to schools, parks, playgrounds
and other public facilities required as to have access in the same degree as
would development in a form generally permitted in the area.



   (J)   Relation to major transportation facilities.  The planned
development shall be so located with respect to major streets and highways or
other transportation facilities as to provide direct access to such districts
without creating traffic along minor streets in residential neighborhoods
outside such districts.



   (K)   Vehicular movement and standards. The street design of any PD
should include a clearly defined hierarchical street system. Streets, drives,
parking and service areas must provide a safe and convenient access to
dwelling units and project facilities and for service and emergency vehicles.
Streets will not be laid out as to encourage outside traffic to traverse the
development on minor streets or occupy more land than is required to provide
access as needed or create unnecessary fragmentation of the development into
small tracts. In general, tract sizes shall be the maximum consistent with
use, shape of the site and for the convenience and safety of the occupants.



      (1)   Vehicular access to other streets from off-street
parking and service areas shall be combined, limited, located, designed and
controlled as to channel traffic to and from such areas conveniently, safely
and in a manner which minimizes marginal traffic friction and promotes free
traffic flow on streets without excessive interruptions.



      (2)   Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to
permit smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum
hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Minor streets within PDs shall
not be connected to streets outside the development in such a way as to
encourage their use by through traffic.



      (3)   The methods for designing and constructing private
streets are flexible. Construction plans must be approved by the Town
Engineer. If no agreement between the developer and the Town Engineer can be
reached, then private streets must be designed and built according to the
Town of Collierville’s Subdivision Regulations Construction Manual.



   (L)   Pedestrian and Bicycle movement.



      (1)   Access for pedestrians and bicyclists shall be arranged
to provide safe, convenient routes and need not be limited to the vehicular
access points. To the maximum extent feasible, plans for proposed
developments shall separate movement of pedestrians from movement of vehicles
and bicycles, and protect bicyclists from conflicts with vehicles.



      (2)   Where complete separation of movement of pedestrians
from movement of vehicles and bicycles is not possible, plans shall minimize
potential hazards by using special paving, grade separations, pavement
parking, signs, striping, bollards, median refuge areas, traffic calming
features, landscaping, lighting, or other means to clearly delineate
pedestrian areas for both day and night use.



      (3)   Where pedestrians and bicyclists share walkways, the
pedestrian/bicycle system shall be designed to be wide enough to accommodate
anticipated pedestrian and bicycle traffic volumes. A shared walkway shall
have a minimum width of eight feet. In areas or on shared walkway segments
with heavy use, the width should be increased to a minimum of ten feet.



   (M)   Comprehensive sign policy.



      (1)   Applicability.  A comprehensive sign policy, to be
enforced by the property owner or his/her designee, shall be required for all
planned developments outlining color, type, illumination, size and location
of all development signage.  A proposed sign policy for a planned
development shall be included in the outline plan and approved by the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen after a recommendation by the Planning Commission and
the Design Review Commission.



      (2)   Procedures.



         (a)   The developer shall submit a proposed
comprehensive sign policy for all signage within the Planned Development to
the Planning Commission as part of the planned development outline plan. The
Design Review Commission shall review the sign policy prior to approval of
the planned development outline plan by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. 
The Town’s role in reviewing signage shall be only as it relates to the
Town’s adopted sign ordinance and design guidelines.



      (3)   Requirements.



         (a)   Signage shall be consistent in color, size,
material, location, and design throughout each planned development.



         (b)   Signage within any planned development shall be
consistent with the Town’s adopted sign ordinance and guidelines and shall
be reviewed administratively.



      (4)   Modifications of standards for signage.  The Design
Review Commission or Planning Commission may not waive any zoning ordinance
provisions related to signage through a comprehensive sign policy.  Only the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen, through an approved planned development, or the
Board of Zoning Appeals through a variance may waive any zoning ordinance
provisions.



   (N)   Site planning.



      (1)   Site planning within any PD shall provide for the
protection of the development from potentially adverse surrounding influences
and shall also provide for the protection of surrounding areas from
potentially adverse influences within the development, including, but not
limited to area storm water management plans, hydrological studies, water and
wastewater facilities, streets, noise and other environmental consideration. 



      (2)   All reports and plans shall be submitted to the Town
Engineer for review and approval and shall be made a part of the final site
plan.



      (3)   Site plans shall provide for safe, efficient, convenient
and harmonious grouping of structures, uses and facilities and for the
appropriate relation of space, inside and outside buildings to intended uses
and structural features.



   (O)   Signs. Signs permitted in the PD shall be as permitted by the
underlying district and regulated by the “Collierville Sign Ordinance”
set forth in §§ 151.170 through 151.183.



   (P)   Accessory off-street parking and loading. Accessory off-street
parking and loading in the PD shall be regulated by §§ 151.115 through
151.117 unless otherwise provided in the Outline Plan.



(`00 Code, § 11-1106)  (Ord. 2000-25, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. 2008-17,
passed 7-28-08; Am. Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10)



§ 151.156  SPECIFIC STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR RESIDENTIAL PLANNED
DEVELOPMENTS.



   In addition to the general standards and general provisions set forth
above, planned residential developments shall comply with the requirements
and standards which follow.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  Within the residential planned development,
the following uses are permitted subject to review of the Planning Commission
and approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



      (1)   Any permitted use, accessory use or conditional use
allowed in any residential district.



      (2)   In a residential planned development of 100 acres or
larger, convenience commercial activities may be permitted to serve the
regular recurring needs of the residents, provided that such commercial areas
shall not exceed l.5 acres.



      (3)   All such commercial areas shall meet the following
additional requirements:



         (a)   Access from public streets shall be from major or
collector streets as shown on the most recent Major Road Plan;



         (b)   The building design shall be compatible with the
remainder of the residential planned development;



         (c)   No outside storage shall be permitted unless
specifically authorized in the conditions of approval and trash disposal
facilities shall be completely enclosed by walls or materials that complement
the buildings;



         (d)   Off-street parking areas shall be paved and
landscaped. A permanently landscaped front yard shall be maintained a minimum
of 15 feet wide which shall not be used for parking and with only driveways
crossing the yard. Permanently landscaped side and rear yards of appropriate
width shall also be maintained;



         (e)   Unless otherwise provided in the Outline Plan, all
signs advertising the nature or names of the businesses shall be constructed
flat against the walls of the buildings and shall not extend above or beyond
any wall of the building; and one such sign shall be permitted for each
business located therein, provided that such sign(s) shall meet the size
requirements of the sign regulations set forth in §§ 151.170 through
151.183;



         (f)   Unless otherwise provided in the Outline Plan, any
loading service area shall be in the rear of the building;



         (g)   The Planning Commission and/or Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may require other landscaping or design features as needed in order
to protect any adjoining or neighboring uses.



   (B)   Residential densities. Conceptual lot configurations shall be
depicted upon residential Outline Plans. Within any PD, the Planning
Commission, subject to approval of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, may
authorize an increase in overall residential density within the project area.
The base densities which may be increased are as follows:



 

Zone
 
Density




R-L
 
0.30 units per acre


R-L1
 
0.5 units per acre


R-25
 
1.75 units per acre


R-1
 
2.10 units per acre


R-1A
 
2.59 units per acre


R-2
 
2.90 units per acre


R-2A
 
3.20 units per acre


R-3
 
3.63 units per acre


R-3A
 
5.44 units per acre


R-4
 
6.00 units per acre


R-TH
 
6.00 units per acre




 



      (1)   An increase in density not to exceed 16% of the base
density of the underlying zoning district may be granted for incorporating
any combination of the following elements into the planned development:



         (a)   The establishment of private usable common open
space within the planned development/residential development may be given a
1% density incentive for every 2.5% of the total land area of the development
that is set aside as usable common open space, but not to exceed a maximum of
a 4% density incentive for establishing a 10% of the total land area of the
development as usable open space;



         (b)    The construction of any combination of two
recreation amenities, including, but not limited to, a playground with
durable playground equipment comparable to Town specifications for public
playground equipment, a club house and/or swimming pool and/or tennis courts
that are of suitable size and capacity to adequately accommodate the number
of residents within the development, but not to exceed a maximum 4% density
incentive;



         (c)   The preservation of unique physiographic or
environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands and old-growth wooded areas
in a perpetual conservation easement or common open space area but not to
exceed a maximum 4% density incentive; and/or



         (d)   A residential development may be given a 1%
density incentive for each additional 10% of street trees, ornamental trees
and shrubbery planted in excess of required plant materials (street trees,
ornamental trees and shrubs) required by Town regulations. The additional
plant materials must be planted along streetscapes, entrances and/or common
open spaces for maximum visual effect.



         (e)   Density incentives shall not be granted for design
elements that are already design elements and/or improvements required by
this subchapter and/or the Collierville Design Guidelines Manual. Amenities
to be used in common by property owners must be on land owned by a property
owner’s association which shall have the obligation to perpetually maintain
same.



      (2)   Provisions which have permitted increases in density
granted under this section shall be accomplished at such stages during
construction of each development phase as expressly required by the  Outline
Plan or, if there is no expressed requirement, at such stages as the
development staff may require. In every development, however, provisions for
increases in density shall be 100% accomplished at the time 50% of the
dwelling units per development phase are occupied.



      (3)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may prohibit or limit an
increase in density to avoid the following conditions:



         (a)   Inconvenient or unsafe access to the planned
development;



         (b)   Traffic congestion in the streets within or
adjoining the planned development;



         (c)   An excessive burden on parks, recreation areas,
schools, police and fire protection and other public facilities which serve
or are proposed to serve the planned development;



         (d)   Insufficient public infrastructure to serve the
proposed planned development, including, but not limited to, water and sewer
systems, streets and traffic signalization and stormwater management systems;



         (e)   Any condition which might pose a threat to the
health, safety or welfare of the residents of the planned development or the
general public or frustrate the orderly development of the surrounding area.



      (4)   The developer shall submit documentation, plans and
drawings as necessary to justify density increases. The Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may decrease or eliminate allowed density increases if it is
determined that the developer is not performing as agreed upon in the
applicable final site plan.



      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision herein, residential
planned developments containing less than ten gross acres of land area shall
not be eligible for density increases above the prescribed base density for
each residential zoning classification as prescribed in this division (B) of
this section.



   (C)   Accessibility of site. All proposed streets and driveways
shall be adequate to serve the residents, occupants, visitors or other
anticipated traffic of the planned residential development, but may be
designed so as to discourage outside through traffic from traversing the
development. The location of the entrance points of the streets and driveways
upon existing public roadways shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Commission.



   (D)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be conveniently
accessible to all dwelling units and other uses. Where appropriate, common
driveways, parking areas, walks and steps may be provided, maintained and
lighted for night use. Screening of parking and service areas shall be
required through the use of trees, shrubs, berms and/or hedges and screening
walls.



   (E)   Privacy.



      (1)   The residential planned development shall provide
reasonable visual and acoustical privacy for dwelling units within and
adjacent to the residential planned development.



      (2)   Protection and enhancement of property values and the
privacy of its occupants may be provided by the screening of objectionable
views or uses and reduction of noise through the use of fences, insulation,
natural foliage, berms and landscaped barriers.



   (F)   Yard and bulk requirements. A residential planned development
shall not deviate from the yard and bulk requirements of the base residential
zoning classification except as approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
A written justification for any deviation from the minimum yard and bulk
requirements contained in the base residential zoning classification shall be
presented by the applicant to the Planning Commission and Board of Mayor and
Aldermen for consideration.



   (G)   Design.  The following design standards shall be applied to
all single-family dwellings or buildings containing more than one dwelling
unit.



      (1)   Garages.  Garage fronts shall be de-emphasized and not
be the most prominent architectural feature of any dwelling in the
development.



      (2)   Developmental entrances.  Customized entrances shall be
provided at all streets intersecting a thoroughfare or collector. Such
locations may include a sculpture, monument signage, special landscaping,
specialty pavement, enhanced fence or wall details, boulevard median or other
similar treatment. The extent of such features shall match the scale of the
proposed development (more significant features shall be required for larger
developments).



(`00 Code, § 11-1107)  (Ord. 99-26, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2000-05, passed
6-11-01; Am. Ord.2000-25, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. passed 5- -02; Am. Ord.
2008-17, passed 7-28-08; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.157  SPECIFIC STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.



   A Resolution permitting a commercial or industrial planned development
may be issued by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen for buildings or premises to
be used for the retail sale of merchandise and services, parking areas,
office buildings, hotels and motels and other similar facilities ordinarily
accepted as commercial center uses and those industrial uses which can
reasonably be expected to function in a compatible manner with the other
permitted uses in the area. In addition to the applicable standards and
criteria and the provisions set forth in §§ 151.150 through 151.155,
commercial or industrial planned development shall comply with the following
standards.



   (A)   Residential use. Except for hotels and motels, no buildings
shall be designed, constructed, structurally altered or used for dwelling
purposes except to provide, within permitted buildings, facilities for a
custodian, caretaker or watchman employed on the premises. This provision
shall not be applicable in planned development permits approved for mixed
uses.



   (B)   Display of merchandise.  Unless specifically authorized by an
Ordinance of the Town, all business manufacturing and processes shall be
conducted and all merchandise and materials shall be displayed and stored
within a completely enclosed building or within an open area which is
completely screened from the view of adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way; provided, however, that when an automobile service station or
gasoline sales are permitted in a planned commercial development, gasoline
may be sold from pumps outside of a structure. 



   (C)   Accessibility. The site shall be accessible from the proposed
street network in the vicinity which will be adequate to carry the
anticipated traffic of the proposed development. The streets and driveways on
the site of the proposed development shall be adequate to serve the
enterprises located in the proposed development and may be designed to
discourage outside through traffic from traversing the development.



(`00 Code, § 11-1108)  (Ord. 2000-25, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. 2008-17,
passed 7-28-08)



§ 151.158  MIXED USE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Planned developments which do not qualify as a residential
planned development and which are not exclusively for commercial or
industrial uses shall be subject to all of the applicable provisions of 
§§ 151.150 through 151.157.



   (B)   Nonresidential land uses within the proposed mixed use planned
development shall be oriented in such a manner as to provide suitable buffers
of residential land use or common open spaces containing sufficient screening
and buffering measures as prescribed in this subchapter and the Design
Guidelines Manual.



(`00 Code, § 11-1109)  (Ord. 2000-25, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. 2008-17,
passed 7-28-08)



Editor’s note: 



   As written, section 4 of Ordinance No. 2005-12 calls for the creation
of a new § 151.158B between §§ 151.158 and 151.159.  In order to retain
current numerical formatting of the code, the provisions of section 4 of
Ordinance No. 2005-12 were added as § 151.159.  Consequently, former §
151.159 has been renumbered as § 151.160.



§ 151.159  SPECIFIC STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR SENIORS HOUSING PLANNED
DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   It is the intent of these provisions to recognize the need
within the Town for dwellings and facilities which are designed to meet the
physical and social needs of older persons.



   (B)   In addition to the applicable standards and criteria and the
provisions set forth in §§ 151.150 through 151.155, Seniors Housing Planned
Developments (SHPD) shall comply with the following standards:



      (1)   Effect of development and/or use pursuant to SHPD
regulations.  Any site developed or used pursuant to SHPD regulations shall
not thereafter be used for any purpose other than those permitted uses
allowed in this chapter unless the BMA expressly allows specific uses in the
Planned Development Outline Plan.



      (2)   Eligibility.  Housing which qualifies for inclusion in
this zone is development providing housing specifically designed for the
needs of seniors. A minimum of 90% of the occupied dwelling units must be
occupied by at least one person 55 years of age, or older, and complies with
all standards of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C., Sections 3601 et seq. and
the rules issued thereunder, as amended from time to time, the Housing for
Older Persons Act, and the Tennessee Fair Housing Act, Tenn. Code Ann. §
4-21-602, as amended from time to time.



      (3)   Impact of use.  The impact of the use will be
substantially equivalent to those impacts produced by uses otherwise allowed
for land within the underlying zoning classification, with consideration
given to the type of dwelling units, number of dwelling units, the probable
number of residents and the demand on public facilities and services
generated.



      (4)   The location, size, design, and operating
characteristics of the use will be compatible with and will not adversely
affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and
the surrounding area, with consideration to be given to harmony in scale,
bulk, coverage, and density; to the availability of municipal services; to
the generation of traffic and the capacity of surrounding streets; and to any
other relevant impacts of the use.



      (5)   The location, design, and site planning of the use shall
provide a convenient and functional living, working, shopping, or civic
environment. New Seniors Housing Planned Developments shall be located within
a 1/4-mile radius of a commercial node or public park.



      (6)   The use will be so located as to provide residents easy
access to community services such as shopping, transportation, and other
daily services.  There should also be provided a generous amount of easily
accessible activity facilities, both indoors and outdoors, for residents.



      (7)   Permitted uses.  The following uses shall be permitted
in a Seniors Housing Planned Development:



         (a)   A variety of housing types exclusively addressing
the needs of older persons, including, but not limited to: adult care
facility, assisted living facility, Continuing Care Retirement Community
(CCRC), Independent Living Senior Housing Complex, health clinic, hospital,
nursing home facilities, and observation rehabilitation center.



         (b)   Accessory uses.  The following shall be permitted
for the convenience of the residents and their guests, but not for the
general public, with no exterior signage allowed.  Accessory uses include,
but are not limited to, the following:



            1.   Banking facility.



            2.   Beauty and/or barber shops.



            3.   Central dining facilities.



            4.   Convenience retail shop.



            5.   Chapel/place of worship.



            6.   Pharmacy.



      (8)   Minimum tract area.  The minimum tract area within a
planned development designated as a SHPD shall be contained in a contiguous
parcel of land comprising a total area of at least three acres.



      (9)   Development density.  The location, size, design, and
operating characteristics of the use will be compatible with and will not
adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting
properties and the surrounding area, in no case shall the density of
development exceed the following (based on the height of the building):



              Stories            Dwelling units/acre



         1               10



         2               15



         3               20



      (10)   Single-family detached dwelling units.  Single family
detached dwelling units may be situated on individual lots, may be part of a
detached condominium regime, or may be separate rental units.  Single family
detached projects require a minimum tract area of ten acres.  If separate
lots are created, each lot shall not be less than 7,200 square feet.  In the
case of single-family detached dwellings, the density of a district may not
exceed one dwelling unit for each 7,200 square feet of lot area.



      (11)   Required frontage.  The planned development shall have
a minimum of 200 feet of frontage on an existing or proposed collector or
arterial road.



      (12)   Special dwelling standards.  Notwithstanding any other
provision of this code, the minimum floor area for each dwelling unit for
seniors housing use shall be no less than the following:



         (a)   Studio/efficiency units      400 square feet



         (b)   One-bedroom units         525 square feet



         (c)   Two-bedroom units         700 square feet



      (13)   Outdoor/indoor recreational area requirement.  An area
or areas for outdoor recreational purposes shall be set aside exclusively for
the use of the occupants and their guests unless the site is located within
200 feet of a park or recreational area available to the general public and
access to said park or recreational area is not separated by a freeway,
arterial and/or collector road. These areas may include, but are not limited
to, sitting areas and group game areas. Such areas shall be shown on the site
plan. A minimum of 150 square feet of outside recreation per dwelling unit
must be provided, improved, constructed and maintained at the expense of the
owner/landlord or homeowners’ association. Walkways, driveways, parking
areas, and landscaped areas for non-recreational purposes shall not be deemed
to satisfy the requirements of this section. In addition, a minimum of ten
square feet per dwelling unit of indoor recreational area must also be
provided. Such area shall not be used for storage or any such similar purpose
and shall be available to all occupants and their guests. The indoor
recreational area shall be central to the entire facility and may be either
attached to a residential building or be in the form of a multipurpose
community building or buildings with rooms sufficient to accommodate indoor
recreational facilities, social gatherings, meetings, and like functions.



      (14)   Special design standards.  Seniors Housing Planned
Developments shall graduate building height, scale, and mass through
utilization of the following methods. If an applicant demonstrates innovative
land planning and design techniques to break up the scale of a building so as
to complement existing development patterns, the BMA may approve a
modification of these regulations pursuant to § 151.152(B). The applicant
must provide written justification to support any waiver requests.



         (a)   A structure shall not exceed 45 feet in height. An
additional building setback of at least ten feet shall be provided for each
foot in additional building height above 35 feet.



         (b)   A building face or wall shall not exceed 200 feet
along its longest length.



         (c)   Buildings with more than two stories shall be
stepped down at the edges of the structure(s) to aid in transitions between
buildings and reduce the mass of the buildings.



         (d)   Building roofs shall be articulated by smaller
planes or roof elements. A minimum of two roof breaks (roofs that turn a
corner or change elevation) will be provided on all buildings.



         (e)   A minimum of 45% of the gross site area shall be
landscaped.



         (f)   At the edge of a zoning district where the
adjacent district has a lower maximum building height, buildings shall
transition in height using the following methods:



            1.   Building step-backs to reduce the bulk of a
building’s upper floors with no portion of a building exceeding 35 feet
within 200 feet of the adjacent district;



            2.   Dividing buildings within 200 feet of the
adjacent district into smaller parts, including detached buildings, to reduce
effective visual bulk and to maintain the scale and rhythm of the existing
pattern of development; and



            3.   A 50-foot wide vegetative buffer provided
along the adjoining zoning district.



         (g)   Along a perimeter collector and/or arterial
street, Seniors Housing Planned Developments shall provide either:



            1.   The primary pedestrian entrance and front
facade of the perimeter buildings oriented towards the public street with any
building having a setback of at least 200 feet from the nearest travel lane
of adjacent public roads (per the Major Road Plan), and provide the
applicable front yard buffer requirements in the Design Guidelines (Appendix
II); or



            2.   A 50-foot or greater front yard buffer
(measured from the edge of curb) intended to screen the development from view
from the public realm. Within the front yard buffer a minimum 50% opaque
brick or stone wall with a minimum of six feet in height, the required street
trees, and evergreen shrubs, shall be provided. The wall must be set back at
least 10 feet from a public sidewalk and have columns spaced no farther than
50 feet on center.



         (h)   Separate buildings shall be clustered around
usable open spaces.



         (i)   Building facades shall be comprised of brick or
stone for a minimum of 75% of the net facade area (excluding windows and
doors). The remaining trim and accent materials shall be as regulated by the
Design Guidelines (Chapter IV).



      (15)   Yard requirements.  The basic yard regulations
appearing below apply to structures within a SHPD unless otherwise regulated
by § 151.159(B)(14):



         (a)   Front yard            40 feet



         (b)   Side yard            50 feet



         (c)   Rear yard            50 feet



      (16)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be based on the type of
dwelling units proposed.  Minimum requirements are as follows:



 


Use

 

Loading berths  (code #)

 

Square feet of bldg for which a parking space must be provided

 

Other requirements



Independent living senior housing complex
 
1
 
 
 
Parking shall be set by the Town based on a qualified Parking Generation
Study provided by the applicant, but in no case shall be less than a minimum
of 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit


Assisted living
 
1
 
 
 
Parking shall be set by the Town based on a qualified Parking Generation
Study provided by the applicant, but in no case shall be less than a minimum
of 0.35 spaces per dwelling unit which is inclusive of parking for residents,
employees and visitors.


Nursing Home
 
5
 
 
 
Parking shall be set by the Town based on a qualified Parking Generation
Study provided by the applicant, but in no case shall be less than a minimum
of 0.35 spaces per dwelling unit which is inclusive of parking for residents,
employees and visitors.



 



      (17)   Minimum safety standards.



         (a)   Each health care unit shall contain or be
adjustable to contain conveniently accessible emergency signal facilities,
located three to four feet above floor level, and shall register a signal at
a central location to permit 24-hour per day monitoring. Each independent
living senior housing and assisted living unit shall be provided with a
personal emergency response system with the ability to signal the central
facility for an emergency with 24-hour per day monitoring.



         (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision in the Code of
Ordinances, all residential units and public spaces shall have smoke
detectors and be sprinkler protected with a system approved by the Town Fire
Marshal.



      (18)   Seniors use guarantees.  Prior to the execution of a
development agreement, the applicant shall provide documentation limiting the
use of the project to seniors housing exclusively and vesting in the Town the
right to enforce such limitation until and unless it determines that any
proposed alternate use complies fully with regulations pertaining to the
underlying district.  All such documentation shall be in a form satisfactory
to the Town Attorney.



(Ord. 2005-12, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. 2008-17, passed 7-28-08; Am. Ord.
2018-02, passed 8-14-18)



§ 151.160  PROCEDURES FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL.



   The provisions of this subchapter govern the procedures for approval of
all planned developments provided herein.



   (A)   Pre-application procedures.



      (1)   Pre-application meeting required.  At least two months
prior to filing any application for a planned development, the prospective
applicant shall request a pre-application conference with the Department of
Development Services.



      (2)   Town planner to provide comments.  To obtain
information, each applicant shall confer with the Town Planner and interested
department heads in connection with the preparation of the planned
development application. It shall be the responsibility of the Town Planner
to contact these department heads and arrange a joint meeting. The general
outlines of the proposal evidenced schematically by sketch plans are to be
considered before submission of the planned development application.
Thereafter, the Town Planner shall furnish the applicant with written
comments regarding such conference, including appropriate recommendations to
inform and assist the applicant prior to his or her preparing the components
of the planned development application.



      (3)   Neighborhood meeting required.  A neighborhood meeting
is mandatory prior to the submission of applicants for Outline Plan approval
of a Planned Development.



         (a)   The purposed of the neighborhood meeting is to
educate owners of nearby lands about the proposed development and
application, receive comments, address concerns about the development
proposal, and resolve conflicts and outstanding issues, where possible.
Neighborhood meetings are encouraged as opportunities for informal
communication between owners of nearby lands, applicants, and other residents
who may be affected by development proposals.



         (b)   The neighborhood meeting shall generally comply
with the following procedures:



            1.   Time and place.  The neighborhood meeting
shall be held at a place that is generally accessible to neighbors that
reside in close proximity to the land subject to the application. It shall be
scheduled after 5:00 p.m. on a weekday.



            2.   Notification.  The applicant shall provide
notification of the neighborhood meeting a minimum of ten business days in
advance of the meeting by mail, to all owners and occupants within 500 feet
of the land subject to the application, to any neighborhood organization
registered with the Town, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, and the Town
Planner. The notification shall state the time and place of the meeting.



            3.   Conduct of meetings.  At the neighborhood
meeting, the applicant shall explain the development proposal and
application, answer any questions, and respond to concerns neighbors have
about the application and proposed ways to resolve conflicts.



            4.   Written summary of neighborhood record of
meeting.  The applicant shall provide to the Town Planner (or his or her
designee) a written summary of the neighborhood meeting within five business
days of its conclusion. The written summary shall include a list of those in
attendance, a summary of the issues related to the development proposal
discussed, comments by those in attendance about the development proposal,
and any other information the applicant deems appropriate. The written
summary of the neighborhood meeting shall be included with the application
materials, and be made available to the public for inspection.



            5.   Response to summary.  Any person in
attendance at the neighborhood meeting, within ten business days of the
meeting, may submit an additional written summary stating their understanding
of the issues related to the development proposal discussed, comments by
those in attendance about the development proposal, and any other information
they deem appropriate. This written summary may include a response to the
applicant’s written summary of the neighborhood record of meeting. All
written summaries of the neighborhood meeting shall be included with the
application materials, and be made available for public inspection.



   (B)   Outline Plan. An Outline Plan shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission with the application for the planned development within
six months of the pre-application conference and neighborhood meeting. An
Outline Plan shall contain all items required by this subchapter and shall
include those items that the Planning Commission shall specify in rules
published from time to time, as well as the following:



      (1)   Written documents.



         (a)   A legal description of the total site proposed for
development, including a statement of present and proposed ownership and
present and proposed zoning.



         (b)   A concise statement of planning objectives to be
achieved by the PD through the particular approach proposed by the applicant.
This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed
development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the
applicant.



         (c)   A development schedule indicating the approximate
date when construction of the PD or stages of the PD can be expected to begin
and be completed. If the planned development is proposed to be constructed in
phases or units during a period extending beyond a single construction
season, a development schedule indicating:



            1.   The approximate date when construction of the
project can be expected to begin;



            2.   The order in which the phases of the project
will be built; and



            3.   The minimum area and the approximate location
of common open space and public improvements that will be required at each
phase.



         (d)   Quantitative data for the following: total number
and type of dwelling units; parcel size; proposed lot coverage of buildings
and structures (except for single-family detached residential structures);
approximate gross and net residential densities; total amount of open space
(including a separate figure for usable open space); total amount and type of
nonresidential construction (including separate figure for commercial or
industrial facilities); minimum square footage of heated floor space for
residential dwelling units; economic feasibility studies or market analysis
where necessary and other studies as required by the Planning Commission.



         (e)   A statement setting forth in detail:



            1.   Any exceptions which are required from the
zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the property to
permit the development of the proposed planned development; and



            2.   The bulk regulations under which the planned
development is proposed. 



         (f)   A tabulation setting forth:



            1.   Maximum total square feet of building floor
area proposed for commercial uses and for industrial uses by general type of
use;



            2.   Maximum total land area, expressed in acres
and as a percent of the total development area, proposed to be devoted to
commercial or industrial uses; minimum public and private open space;
streets; and off-street parking and loading areas.



      (2)   Site plan and supporting maps. A site plan and any maps
necessary to show the major details of the proposed PD must contain the
following minimum information: 



         (a)   The existing site conditions, including contours
at two foot intervals, water courses, flood plains, unique natural features
and forest cover;



         (b)   Proposed lot lines and plot designs; 



         (c)   Architectural graphics including typical floor
plans and elevations (an exemption from this requirement may be considered
for single-family detached residential uses);



         (d)   The location and floor size of all existing
buildings, structures and other improvements and proposed non-single family
detached residential buildings, structures and other improvements, maximum
heights, floor area ratios (for non-residential uses), types of dwelling
units (for residential uses), density per type (for residential uses);



         (e)   The location and size in acres or square feet of
all areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common open space, public
parks, recreational areas, school sites and similar public and semi-public
uses;



         (f)   The existing and proposed circulation  system of
arterial, collector and local streets, including off-street parking areas,
service areas, loading areas and major points of access to public
rights-of-way (including major points of ingress and egress to the
development). Notations of proposed ownership, public or private, should be
included where appropriate. (Detailed engineering drawings of cross sections
and street standards shall be handled in the final site plan stage.) A
detailed traffic impact analysis may be required at the discretion of the
Town.



         (g)   The existing and proposed pedestrian and bicycle
circulation system, including its interrelationships with the vehicular
circulation system indicating proposed treatments of points of conflict.



         (h)   The existing and proposed utility systems,
including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water lines and drainage.



         (i)   A general landscape plan indicating the treatment
of materials used for private and common open spaces.



         (j)   Enough information on land areas adjacent to the
proposed PD to indicate relationships between the proposed development and
existing and proposed adjacent areas, including land uses, zoning
classifications, densities, circulation systems, public facilities and unique
natural features of landscape. 



         (k)   The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PD,
including materials and techniques used, such as screens, fences and walls.



         (l)   Any additional information as required by the
Planning Commission necessary to evaluate the character and impact of the
proposed PD.



         (m)   The Planning Commission may, in its discretion,
modify or waive any of the informational requirements contained in
subsections (a) through (l) in order to reasonably adapt these requirements
to a particular planned development to facilitate an orderly application
process. If any informational requirement is waived, however, provisions
shall be made to supply such information in a form satisfactory to the
development staff prior to final site plan approval.



   (C)   Outline Plan approval process and effect of approval.



      (1)   At least 45 days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting at which it is to be considered, the owner of the property or his or
her agent shall submit to the Planning Commission the Outline Plan and a
completed application form and all other information required under this
section.  The Planning Commission shall review the application and shall
recommend to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to: approve, disapprove or
approve the planned development subject to conditions. The Planning
Commission may also defer a decision or take the matter under advisement
until the next meeting.



      (2)   Any owner or his or her agent may appeal to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen any recommendation or condition the Planning Commission
imposes in the recommendations by filing written notice of appeal at least
seven days prior to review by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. However, the
applicant shall submit a Outline Plan incorporating any and all conditions
not appealed to the Department of Development Services within 90 days after
the Planning Commission’s decision on the requested planned development or
the application shall be deemed withdrawn.



      (3)   The Department of Development Services shall forward the
recommendation of the Planning Commission and any notices of appeal to the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



      (4)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall hold a public
hearing on the application for the planned development and the Outline Plan
after receipt of recommendations from the Department of Development Services
and any notice of appeal. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall establish a
date for a public hearing and shall cause notice thereof to be published in
accordance with law at least 15 days prior to the hearing and shall mail
written notice to owners of property within 500 feet of the subject project.
The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall render a decision on any appeal and
shall approve, disapprove or approve the proposed planned development and
Outline Plan subject to conditions and, if approved, shall set forth the
conditions imposed.



      (5)   The approved Outline Plan shall bind the applicant,
owner and mortgagee, if any, and the Town of Collierville with respect to the
contents of such plan. The Outline Plan shall be provided by the applicant in
a form suitable for recording and shall be recorded at the Shelby County
Register of Deeds after receiving approval from the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.



      (6)   The Outline Plan shall be used in lieu of a Sketch Plat
to comply with the provisions of the subdivision regulations pertaining to
Sketch Plats.



      (7)   The Collierville Planning Commission may amend or waive
a development schedule upon submission of written justification by the
applicant.



      (8)   Unless as specified otherwise in this chapter, the
approved Outline Plan of the planned development shall control the
development of the planned development rather than any other provisions of
this chapter. In the absence of an express condition of the planned
development, the applicable ordinances and regulations of the Town will apply.



   (D)   Steps of the approval process following Outline Plan
approval.  Development plans submitted as part of the planned development
shall be submitted in a form that will satisfy the requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations for subdivision plats or zoning requirements for site
plants.



   (E)   (1)   Application for preliminary subdivision plat/site
plan approval. After an Outline Plan has been approved, the landowner shall
submit an application to the Planning Commission for approval of a
preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary site plan, provided that such
plats/plans are in substantial compliance with the Outline Plan. The
submission of a preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary site  plan will
be based on the type of development and will follow the applicable
requirements and review procedure for a preliminary subdivision plat or
preliminary site plan.



      (2)   The preliminary subdivision plat/site plan application
shall include a copy of the Outline Plan showing the overall development, any
applicable covenants and/or restrictions, conditions, and other required
drawings and specifications as set forth by the approval of the Outline Plan.



   (F)   Constructiondrawings. The construction drawings for either the
entire development or a phase of the development shall be reviewed by the
Town Engineer in accordance with the subdivision regulations.



   (G)   (1)   Application for final subdivision plat/site plan
approval. After a preliminary subdivision plat/site plan has been approved,
the landowner shall submit an application to the Planning Commission for
approval of a final subdivision plat or final site plan, provided that such
plats/plans are in substantial compliance with the preliminary plat/site plan
and the Outline Plan. The submission of a final subdivision plat or final
site plan will be based on the type of development and will follow the
applicable requirements and review procedure for a final subdivision plat or
final site plan.



      (2)   The final subdivision plat/site plan application shall
include a copy of the Outline Plan showing the overall development, any
applicable covenants and/or restrictions, conditions, and any other required
drawings and specifications set forth by the approval of the Outline Plan.



   (H)   Zoning administration; permits. The Building Official may
issue building permits for the area of the planned development covered by an
approved final subdivision plat or site plan for work in conformity with an
approved final site plan and with all other applicable ordinances and
regulations.  However, the Building Official shall not issue an occupancy
permit for any building or structure shown on the final subdivision plat or
site plan of any stage of the planned development unless the open spaces and
public facilities allocated to that stage of the development schedule have
been conveyed to the designated public agency or Homeowner’s Association or
a responsible party. The Building Official shall issue a certificate of
occupancy for any completed building or structure located in an area covered
by the approved final subdivision plat or site plan if the completed
buildings or structures conform to the requirements of the approved final
subdivision plat or site plan and all other applicable regulations and
ordinances.



   (I)   Reapplication if denied. If any application for a planned
development is denied by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, a reapplication
pertaining to the same property and requesting the same or substantially
similar planned development may not be filed within 18 months of the date
final action was taken on the previous application, unless such reapplication
is initiated by the Planning Commission or authorized by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen.



   (J)   (1)   Procedure for amendment. A planned development and
the approved Outline Plan may be amended in accordance with the procedure
which governed its approval as set forth in this section.  However, no such
amendment shall be required if the applicant only proposes a modification
from what has been previously approved, and such modification is determined
by the Town Planner as minor.  As used in this subsection, the term MINOR
shall mean slight variations or alterations to the Outline Plan which cannot
reasonably be expected to cause a change in the internal function of the site
or its off-site impact.  The Town Planner may authorize minor modifications
when same are determined to be consistent with the Outline Plan. A request
for a minor modification must be filed with the Department of Development
Services stating the nature of the request and justification for same, as
well as a proposed final site plan illustrating the proposed change, which
shall be suitable for official recording in the land records of Shelby
County.  If the Town Planner determines the proposed modification is not
minor, the applicant may seek an amendment in accordance with the procedure
which governed the initial approval as set forth in this section.



      (2)   If a planned development is subdivided, sold, or leased,
all the owners of the subdivided, sold, or leased planned development may
jointly apply for an amendment to the Outline Plan, which shall be governed
by the procedures and requirements contained in this chapter for the approval
of the Outline Plan.



(`00 Code, § 11-1110)  (Ord. 2000-25, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord. 2006-08,
passed 7-10-06; Am. Ord. 2008-17, passed 7-28-08)



SIGN REGULATIONS



§ 151.170  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter entitled “Sign Regulations” to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare through reasonable,
consistent, and non-discriminatory sign standards.  This subchapter is not
intended to censor speech or to regulate viewpoints, but instead is intended
to regulate, in a content-neutral manner, any secondary effects of speech
that may adversely affect aesthetics and traffic and pedestrian safety.  The
purpose of this subchapter is to:



   (A)   Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of
communication in the Town;



   (B)   Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the
Town’s ability to attract sources of economic development and growth;



   (C)   Improve pedestrian and traffic safety;



   (D)   Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public
and private property;



   (E)   Foster the integration of signage with architectural and
landscape designs;



   (F)   Allow signs that are compatible with their surroundings and
that aid orientation, while precluding the placement of signs that contribute
to sign clutter or that conceal or obstruct adjacent land uses or signs;



   (G)   Regulate signs in a manner so as to prevent the interference
with, the obstruction of the vision of, and/or the distraction of motorists,
bicyclists, and/or pedestrians;



   (H)   Allow for traffic control devices to promote highway safety
and efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of road users on streets
and highways, and to notify road users of regulations and provide warning and
guidance needed for the safe, uniform, and efficient operation of all
elements of the traffic stream;



   (I)   Protect property values by precluding sign types that create a
nuisance to the occupancy or use of other properties as a result of their
size, height, illumination, brightness, or movement;



   (J)   Protect property values by ensuring that the types and numbers
of signs are in harmony with buildings, neighborhoods, and conforming signs
in the area;



   (K)   Preserve and enhance the historic character of the Town; and



   (L)   Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord.
2013-01, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.171  DEFINITIONS.



   The words, terms and phrases set out below, when used in this
subchapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subchapter,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   ARTWORK. A two- or three-dimensional representation that is expressed
in a form and manner as to provide aesthetic enjoyment for the viewer rather
than to specifically convey the name of the business or a commercial message
about the products or services offered on the property upon which the artwork
is displayed.  The exterior alteration of commercial buildings in the
Historic District for purposes of restoring historic painted murals is not
within the scope of this subchapter but is instead regulated under the
subchapter pertaining to the Historic District.



   BALLOON-TYPE DEVICES. A stationary or mobile inflated device used to
attract attention.



   BANNER. See SIGN, BANNER.



   BMA. The Town of Collierville Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   BUILDING FAÇADE. See FAÇADE.



   BUILDING WALL. The entire surface area, including windows and floors,
of an exterior wall of a building.



   BZA. The Town of Collierville Board of Zoning Appeals.



   CODES DIVISION. The Town of Collierville Codes Enforcement Division of
the Development Department.



   COMMERCIAL. Any nonresidential use of land involving commerce or
commercial activity such as wholesale or retail trade, or the provision of
services.



   CONVENTIONAL AREA. Portions of the town that are appropriate for, or
characterized by, development that is typically segregated by use; is two
stories or less in height; is primarily or exclusively automobile-oriented;
has parking between the building and the street; and is served primarily by
curvilinear streets as described in the Collierville Design Guidelines.



   COPY. Words, letters, numbers, figures, characters, symbols, logos, or
insignia that are used on a sign face.



   COPY AREA. The smallest geometric shape that encloses all graphics,
letters, and logos of the sign face.



   DESIGN COMPATIBILITY. A condition occurring between two of the same or
two different sign types where the individual tenant spaces in a shopping
center harmonize together through the use of signs with a common scale,
heights from the finished grade, illumination, materials, type and color of
returns, and sign color scheme and type (channel letter, halo-lit, and the
like), placement on sign bands built into the building facade, or other
signage features.



   DOWNTOWN AREA. The planning area within the boundaries of the Downtown
Collierville Small Area Plan.



   DRC. The Town of Collierville Design Review Commission



   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD. Any sign that displays still images,
scrolling images or moving images, including video and animation, utilizing a
series or grid of lights that may be changed through electrostatic means,
including cathode ray, light emitting diode (LED) display, plasma screen,
liquid crystal display (LCD), fiber optic or other electronic media or
technology.



   ELEVATION. The front, side, or rear of a structure.



   FAÇADE. The exterior wall on the front, side, or rear elevation of the
building regardless of whether the building side faces a street.



   FENCE. A structure used to delineate a boundary or act as a barrier or
means of protection, confinement, or screening.



   FLAG. Bunting or fabric of distinctive color and design that is used as
an emblem, standard, decoration, or symbol and that is hoisted on a permanent
flagpole or otherwise displayed from a building.



   FORMED PLASTIC LETTERS. Letters or graphics that are formed from a
sheet of plastic that is warmed and shaped in a mold.



   GLAZING. The portion of an exterior building surface occupied by glass
or windows.



   HDC. The Town of Collierville Historic District Commission.



   ILLUMINATION. The calling of attention to a sign or device by means of
brightening or shining with light or a luminous substance.



   LOGO.A symbol or other small design adopted by an organization to
identify its products, services, and the like.



   MARQUEE. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building
or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building, including
any object or decoration attached to or part of said marquee, with the
purpose of providing protection from sun and rain or embellishment of the
facade.



   MENU BOARD. A structure primarily designed for the display of menu
items and prices for the purpose of placing orders for such items in
conjunction with a restaurant utilizing drive-through or curbside service.



   MULTI-PHASE DEVELOPMENT. A development consisting of two or more
distinct phases intended to occur in a sequential order.



   MULTIPLE FRANCHISE BUSINESS. A business that, pursuant to franchise
agreements, markets the goods or services of more than one company or
manufacturer.



   MULTIPLE TENANT BUILDING. A single building that contains two or more
distinct occupants internally separated by firewalls or demising walls.



   NEON. Lights, tubes, or other devices used to emit neon light.



   NONCONFORMING SIGN. See SIGN, NONCONFORMING.



   PLASTIC. The general and commonly used term for a wide range of
synthetic or semi-synthetic organic amorphous solid materials including, but
not limited to, acrylic, sintra and lexan.



   PREMISES. A house or building, together with its land and outbuildings,
occupied by a business or considered in an official context.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Property dedicated for public use, usually for a
public street, public infrastructure and/or waterway.  For the purposes of
this subchapter, such PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall be considered to extend a
minimum of ten feet from the edge of the pavement, or to the dedicated
right-of-way boundary, whichever is farther.



   ROOF LINE. The apex, or highest point of the roof.  In a series of
roofs, the apex of the lowest roof will be considered.



   SCOREBOARD. A structure that is located within an athletic field and
that displays changing scores, related information, and additional content
that may include, without limitation, the names and logos of sponsors.



   SIGN. Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses color, form,
graphics, illumination, text, symbol, and/or writing to advertise, attract
attention to, announce, identify, or identify the purpose of a person or
entity, or to communicate information of any kind.  The following shall not
be considered SIGNS subject to sign regulation: artwork; holiday lighting and
decorations, including strips or strings of lights outlining property lines,
sales areas, roof lines, doors, windows, wall edges, or other architectural
features of a building, displayed between Thanksgiving Day and New Year’s
Day of each calendar year and 15 days prior to and after this time period;
and memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical tables, and the like (see also
§ 151.175).



   SIGN, ABANDONED. A sign that was lawfully erected on the property in
conjunction with a particular use, that use having been subsequently
discontinued for a period of 60 days or more; a sign that has been blank for
60 days or more; or a lawfully erected temporary sign for which the time
period allowed for display of the sign has expired.



   SIGN, A-FRAME (also a SANDWICH BOARD). A freestanding upright sign on a
rigid supporting frame in the form of a triangle or an inverted V.



   SIGN, ANIMATED. Any sign that moves or that appears to move by any
means, including fluttering or rotating.  Such signs shall also include, but
not be limited to, pennants, ribbons, streamers or propellers.



   SIGN AREA or SIGN FACE. See sign face calculation in § 151.178(B)(6).



   SIGN, ATTACHED. A sign that is permanently affixed to or painted on a
building, canopy, or wall and that has a permanent or changeable copy face.



   SIGN, AWNING. A sign that is part of or attached to the face or valance
of an awning and that is constructed in the same fabric or material as the
awning.



   SIGN, BANNER. A sign made of flexible material that advertises a
business, an event, or a product for sale.



   SIGN, BENCH. A sign affixed to or painted on a bench.



   SIGN, CABINET. An internally illuminated sign structure consisting of a
cabinet that holds a display.  CABINET SIGN also includes, but is not
limited to, backlit displays and light boxes.



   SIGN, CANOPY. See SIGN, AWNING.



   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY (AUTOMATIC). A sign that is electronically
controlled.



   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY (MANUAL). A sign on which copy is changed
manually.



   SIGN, CONVENIENCE. A sign displayed only for the direction, safety, and
convenience of the public. CONVENIENCE SIGNS may include, without limitation,
address signs, address and name plaques, signs identifying rest rooms,
parking area entrances and exits, gas station self-service or full-service
pump islands, freight entrances and exits, and other facilities that may
require directional signage.



   SIGN DEPTH. On an attached sign, the distance from the face of the
letters to the surface to which they are attached.



   SIGN, DEVELOPMENT. A sign located at the entrance to a residential
development and constructed of masonry or natural materials, except for
attached letters or logos.



   SIGN, DEVELOPMENT-IN-PROGRESS. A temporary sign that may include,
without limitation,  the name of the project, the architect, the contractor,
the developer, the engineer, the financing institution, or the materials
supplier for the premises, whose construction is active, or announcing the
future development.



   SIGN, DIGITAL PICTURE FRAME. A desktop picture frame that displays
digital images through a digital screen.



   SIGN FACE. (See § 151.178(B)(6), Sign face area.)



   SIGN, FREESTANDING (also GROUND MOUNTED).



      (1)   A sandwich board sign; or



      (2)   A sign supported by a sign structure that is secured in
the ground and that is wholly independent of any building or object, other
than the sign structure, for support. 



   SIGN, GOVERNMENT IMITATION. A sign that copies, imitates, or in any way
approximates an official highway sign or carries the words “Stop” or
“Danger.”  Also, a sign that obscures a sign displayed by public
authority for the purpose of giving traffic instruction or direction, or
other public information, including any authorized traffic control sign,
signal, or similar device.



   SIGN, HAND HELD. A sign that is held by or otherwise mounted on a
person.



   SIGN, HANGING. A sign installed under an awning, canopy, porch
overhang, or marquee that hangs either parallel or perpendicular to a
building.



   SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION. A sign erected for the purpose of identifying an
allowed home occupation.



   SIGN, INTEGRAL. A sign or plaque carved into stone, concrete, or
similar material, or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type metal
materials, and made an integral part of the structure.



   SIGN, MARQUEE.A sign that is attached to a marquee other than a theater
marquee.



   SIGN, MENU BOARD. A structure primarily designed for the display of
menu items and prices for the purpose of placing orders for such items in
conjunction with a restaurant utilizing drive-through or curbside service.



   SIGN, MOVING. A sign or device that swings, undulates, or otherwise
attracts attention through the movement of parts, or through the impression
of movement, and includes flashing, fluttering, moving, pennant, revolving,
rotating, streamer, windblown, or similar signs or devices.



   SIGN, NONCONFORMING. A sign lawfully constructed or erected prior to
the effective date of any ordinance or amendment containing provisions with
which the sign does not comply, or any sign that was lawfully erected in
compliance with the sign regulations in effect at the time it was erected,
but that is no longer in compliance.



   SIGN, OBSOLETE. See SIGN, ABANDONED.



   SIGN, PARKED VEHICLE. Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles or
trailers that are parked on a right-of-way or on public or private property
so as to be visible from a public right-of-way and that are visible for more
than two consecutive hours or more than four total hours between sunrise and
sunset.  This term does not include signs that advertise the sale of the
vehicles on which they are placed or that are placed on or affixed to
vehicles but that are incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or
trailer.  See § 151.180(Q) for special provisions for political signs.



   SIGN, PERMANENT. A sign that is intended for other than temporary use
or a limited period.  A PERMANENT SIGN is usually affixed or attached to the
exterior of a building or to a pole or other structure by adhesive or
mechanical means or is otherwise characterized by anchoring, construction
materials, or a foundation indicative of an intent to display the sign for
more than a limited period.



   SIGN POLICY, COMPREHENSIVE. A plan establishing parameters for the
size, location and design of signs in a planned development.



   SIGN, POLITICAL. A temporary sign erected on private property for the
purpose of supporting a political candidate or stating a position regarding a
political issue or similar purpose.



   SIGN, PORTABLE. A temporary sign or device that is located on the
ground, is easily movable, and is not permanently attached to the ground. 
PORTABLE SIGNS include, but are not limited to, counterbalance signs, trailer
signs, and any variations thereof.  See § 151.180(Q) for special provisions
for political signs.



   SIGN, PROJECT. A sign that displays solely numbers and/or letters and
that is erected to display the identity of five or more occupants in a single
building, business or office complex with a total of at least 10,000 square
feet in the project; with or without individual street frontage; and with a
common parking lot or private drive.



   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign mounted on beams, brackets, or poles
projecting from a building.



   SIGN, PUBLIC. A sign that is in the public interest and that is erected
by, or on the order of, a governmental entity or agency.  This term
includes, without limitation, safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs,
traffic signs, signs of historical interest, wayfinding signs, signs
pertaining to events sponsored or co-sponsored by the Town, and other similar
signs.



   SIGN, REAL ESTATE. A temporary sign pertaining to the sale, lease, or
rental of property.  This term includes, but is not limited to, real estate
directional, open house, and open house directional signs.



   SIGN, ROOF. An attached sign wholly or partially dependent upon the
roof of any building for support.  A roof does not include a mansard mounted
on a parapet wall.



   SIGN, ROUTED FACE. A sign face, the background of which is an opaque
material that has been routed to create the letters and/or graphics, and
backed with plastic.



   SIGN, ROUTED PUSH-THROUGH. A sign face the background of which is
routed and the letters and/or graphics are inserted into the routed
background.



   SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD (also an A-FRAME SIGN). A freestanding upright
sign on a rigid supporting frame in the form of a triangle or an inverted V.



   SIGN, SERVICE STATION CANOPY. A sign attached to a roof-like structure
supported by poles or columns for the purpose of providing shelter for gas
pumps and surrounding fuel area.



   SIGN, SNIPE. Any sign other than a convenience sign that is affixed by
any means to trees, utility poles, fences or other objects.



   SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT. A sign associated with a special event (Class 1 or
Class 2) or outdoor event.



   SIGN SURFACE AREA. (See § 151.178(B)(6), Sign face area.)



   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign that is intended for temporary use and a
limited period, as allowed by this subchapter.  TEMPORARY SIGNS may include,
but are not limited to: auction signs, banners, builder signs, development in
progress signs, garage sale signs, grand opening signs, political signs, real
estate signs, and special event signs.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION ZONE. A sign that is intended for
temporary use and a limited period, as allowed by this chapter, for premises
that are, in the opinion of the Development Department, significantly
disturbed by state or local road widening projects or utility line or
sidewalk repairs/installations/relocations. Temporary signs may include, but
are not limited to: banners, window signs, and special event signs.



   SIGN, THEATER MARQUEE. Any sign painted, mounted, constructed or
attached in any manner to a theater marquee.



   SIGN, TRAILER. A sign attached to or painted on a trailer and visible
from the public right-of-way for more than two consecutive hours or more than
four total hours between sunrise and sunset.  See § 151.180(Q) for special
provisions for political signs.



   SIGN, TRASH RECEPTACLE. A sign affixed to, or painted on, a trash
receptacle and containing only the company name or logo of the
trash-collecting firm.



   SIGN, WALL. A sign designating the name of the business, institution,
or organization which is attached to, in a rigid manner, and parallel to a
building wall or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a
manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for or forms the
background surface of the sign and which does not extend more than 12 inches
from such building or structure.



   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign placed within, affixed to, in contact with, or
located within three feet of a window and intended to be seen from the
exterior.



   STREET FRONTAGE. The distance that a lot line adjoins a public or
private street from one lot line intersecting the street to the furthest lot
line intersecting the same street.



   STRING LIGHTING. Lighting used to outline a structure and to attract
attention for commercial purposes.



   TRADITIONAL AREA. Portions of the town, including the Historic
District, that are appropriate for, or characterized by, development that
typically includes mixed-uses, or residential and nonresidential uses in
proximity to one another, buildings typically more than one story tall and
built close to the street, a high level of architectural detailing on the
primary building façades, the use of a modified street grid system,
pedestrian oriented site design rather than exclusively or predominantly for
the automobile, and off-street parking located to the side or rear of
buildings as described in the Collierville Design Guidelines.



   TRANSITIONAL SHOPPING CENTER. A designation given to a single building
or group of buildings, developed prior to August 2010, that contains two or
more distinct occupants internally separated by firewalls or demising walls,
and has an approved Comprehensive Sign Policy per § 151.155(M), as part of a
Planned Development approved by resolution by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
after a recommendation by the Planning Commission and the Design Review
Commission, that demonstrate how the shopping center will incrementally
transition the center into meeting the current signage regulations.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2011-10, passed 10-10-11; Am. Ord.
2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 2018-06,
passed 8-28-18)



§ 151.172  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply within all zoning districts.  However, if
the Historic District Commission has formulated and the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen has approved written sign guidelines for the Historic District that
conflict with provisions in this subchapter, then those guidelines shall take
precedence within the Historic District.  In addition, if the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen has approved a comprehensive sign policy as part of a planned
development outline plan, then that sign policy shall take precedence within
that approved planned development.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord.
2013-01, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.173  GENERAL VISUAL QUALITY.



   These regulations establish the physical characteristics of signage and
prescribe a level of visual quality in sign design, especially where new
signage is in substantial conformance with its surroundings. Anyone planning
a sign shall consider:



   (A)   The character of the proposed sign, not only in and of itself,
but also in terms of the effects a sign will have upon the character of the
surrounding area;



   (B)   The way in which the sign will be read and whether its size,
location, configuration, and character are appropriate to its intended
audience or whether a more appropriate sign could better serve its intended
purpose and, at the same time, be less visually disruptive;



   (C)   The character of the sign structure, (the physical means of
supporting the sign,) and whether that structure could be made an integral
part of the sign rather than a separate and frequently distracting element;
and



   (D)   Design compatibility among the individual tenant spaces in a
shopping center constructed prior to August 2010 through the use of signs
with a common scale, heights from the finished grade, illumination, color,
materials, type and color of returns, and sign type (channel letter,
halo-lit, and the like), placement on sign bands built into the building
facade, or other signage features.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord.
2013-01, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.174  SIGNS PROHIBITED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The following signs shall be prohibited and may neither be erected nor
maintained.



   (A)   Signs erected in a public right-of-way or on public property;



   (B)   Bench signs;



   (C)   Canopies or awnings with backlighting;



   (D)   Electronic message boards;



   (E)   Government-imitation signs;



   (F)   Inflatable animated characters, lighter than air devices, or
similar balloon-type devices;



   (G)   LED electronic message center window signs;



   (H)   Moving signs;



   (I)   Flashing signs;



   (J)   Signs that are not securely affixed to the ground, or that are
not otherwise affixed in a permanent manner to an approved supporting
structure, including but not limited to, portable signs; provided however,
that temporary signs specifically allowed under this subchapter shall be
exempt from this prohibition;



   (K)   Noisy mechanical devices;



   (L)   Plastic-faced cabinet signs, with the exception of menu boards
that are screened or not visible from the public right-of-way;



   (M)   Parked-vehicle signs (see § 151.180(Q) for special provisions
for political signs);



   (N)   Roof signs, including signs painted on roofs or that extend
above the highest point of a roof;



   (O)   Changeable copy signs (manual and automatic);



   (P)   Signs that contain reflective materials, except that the
Development Director shall have the ability to approve decorative metals
(e.g., brass, copper) on a case-by-case basis;



   (Q)   Searchlights;



   (R)   Strobe lights:



   (S)   Signs interfering with, or blocking the visibility of,
directional, instructional, or warning signs;



   (T)   Signs on natural features such as trees, other living
vegetation, and rocks;



   (U)   Trailer signs (see § 151.180(Q) for special provisions for
political signs);



   (V)   Home occupation signs, with an exception for those required by
state law;



   (W)   Snipe signs;



   (X)   Trash receptacle signs;



   (Y)   Signs that contain words suggestive of, or pictures depicting
those acts or displays described in, § 130.046, Nudity and sexual activities;



   (Z)   Animated signs;



   (AA)   Hand held signs displayed within the public right-of-way;



   (BB)   Obsolete or abandoned signs that are not lawful nonconforming
signs;



   (CC)   Digital display signs larger than 48 square inches
incorporated into a gas pump;



   (DD)   Internally illuminated window signs within ten feet of the
interior of a window;



   (EE)   Off-premises commercial advertising signs; and



   (FF)   Wall mounted metal cabinet signs outside of the Historic
District or an approved planned development.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord.
2013-01, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.175  EXEMPTIONS.



   These sign regulations do not pertain to the following:



   (A)   Public signs;



   (B)   Signs not visible from the public right-of-way, including
drive-in restaurant menu boards;



   (C)   Signs internal to a building set back more than ten feet from
a window;



   (D)   Flags attached to residential structures in residential zones;



   (E)   Freestanding flag poles in residential zones per §
151.006(D)(7);



   (F)   Scoreboards;



   (G)   Decals, numbers, names, addresses, hours, credit information
and the like attached to doors or windows and all of which occupy a total
area of one square foot or less;



   (H)   Temporary outdoor lighting used as holiday decorations;



   (I)   Artwork;



   (J)   Memorial plaques; and



   (K)   Historical tables.



   (L)   For service stations solely engaged in the retail distribution
of petroleum and petroleum products the following signs are exempt:



      (1)   One non-illuminated permanent price sign per street
frontage, the sign not to exceed two square feet in face area, and located
upon the pump island nearest to the street or upon the face of the station
building;



      (2)   Two non-illuminated self service or full service signs
per pump island, the signs not to exceed two square feet in sign area nor to
be located at a height more than eight feet from the surrounding grade;



      (3)   Signs displaying the federal and state stamps, octane
ratings, pump use direction, no smoking signs and other signs as required by
federal, state and local authorities, provided that the accumulated square
footage of same shall not exceed two square feet per pump island; and



      (4)   Other signs and stamps required by state and federal
law, provided same are of a size no greater than the minimum requirements of
the law and for design, size and lighting is approved by the Development
Director.



      (5)   Digital display signs with a combined area of no more
than 48 square inches per pump.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord.
2013-01, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.176  SIGN PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Applicability.



      (1)   If any temporary or permanent sign is not otherwise
exempted in division (B), it shall be unlawful to construct, alter, or
relocate such temporary or permanent sign without a valid sign permit
approved by the Development Department and issued by its Construction Codes
Division.



      (2)   A property owner, business occupant, or organization
allowed more than one sign shall obtain a separate permit for each sign.



      (3)   In instances where a sign is proposed for construction,
alteration, relocation, or demolition within the Historic District, no sign
permit shall be issued by the Construction Codes Division until the project
has been submitted to, and received a written Certificate of Appropriateness
from, the Historic District Commission.



      (4)   For any sign with lighting, including ground lighting,
the Town requires an electrical permit and inspections pursuant to the
provisions of the Electrical Code, as adopted by the Town of Collierville. In
cases where an electrical permit is required, it shall be obtained at the
same time as the sign permit.



   (B)   Exemptions from sign permits.



      (1)   The following signs may be constructed, altered,
relocated, or demolished without a sign permit, but shall be subject to all
applicable requirements in §§ 151.170 through 151.183:



         (a)   Real estate signs;



         (b)   Political signs;



         (c)   Convenience signs;



         (d)   Integral signs;



         (e)   Attached ballfield fence signs;



         (f)   Temporary signs in residential areas and for
institutional uses that are six square feet or smaller permitted by this
subchapter;



         (g)   Horizontal directional signs on and flush with
paved areas;



         (h)   Signs posted in conjunction with door bells or
mailboxes, not exceeding 36 square inches in surface area;



         (i)   Address signs, not more than one for each street
frontage of each principal use on a lot and none exceeding 72 square inches
in area, showing only the numerical address designations of the premises upon
which they are situated.  All address signs shall be prominently displayed
and written in contrasting colors to the color of the structure or background
against which the signs are placed in order to facilitate emergency
identification for public service employees; and



         (j)   In buildings located in non-residential zones,
signs that are placed greater than three feet behind the interior surface of
glass and that are legible from the public right-of-way.



      (2)   The following activities may be conducted without
obtaining a sign permit.



         (a)   Cleaning and other normal maintenance and repair
of a sign or sign structure, or other customary maintenance performed
periodically to a properly permitted sign unless a structural change is made.



         (b)   Painting or repainting of a sign or sign structure
located outside the Historic District.



   (C)   Procedure.  All applications for signage shall be reviewed by
the Development Director or his or her designee prior to the issuance of a
sign permit.



      (1)   Initiation.  An application for a sign permit shall be
initiated by the property owner or other person having authority to file an
application.



      (2)   Application for a sign permit. An application for a sign
permit shall be made in accordance with application requirements established
by the Development Department.  For signs within the Historic District that
must be approved by the Historic District Commission, the issuance of a
Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic District Commission is
required prior to approval of the sign permit application.



      (3)   Development Department decision on sign permit.  Within
30 days of receiving a complete sign permit application, the Development
Department shall review the application and shall approve it, approve it with
stated conditions, or reject it.



   (D)   Approval criteria.  The Development Department shall review
an application for a sign permit based on the standards set forth in §§
151.170 through 151.183.



   (E)   Approval for sign construction, alteration, relocation, or
demolition. Construction, alteration, relocation, or demolition of a sign or
sign structure authorized by a sign permit shall be completed within a period
of 180 days of the date of the sign permit approval.  Upon written request,
one extension of 180 days may be granted by the Development Department if the
applicant can show good cause.



   (F)   Nullification.  A sign permit shall become null and void if
the sign varies in any respect from the approved design or location.



   (G)   Fees. The permit fee for each sign allowed under the
requirements of this chapter shall be fixed from time to time by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.



   (H)   Review of permitting decisions.  Permit applicants may appeal
unfavorable decisions or interpretations rendered pursuant to this subchapter
to the Board of Zoning Appeals, as set forth in § 151.182(B).



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord.
2013-01, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.177  TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR SHOPPING CENTERS.



   Signage for a single building or group of buildings, that contains two
or more distinct occupants internally separated by firewalls or demising
walls, developed after August 2010 shall conform to the provisions of §
151.170 through § 151.183. Because of this, newer shopping centers are
likely to have a diversity of signage. Multiple tenant buildings developed
prior to August 2010 were developed under different signage regulations,
processes, and guidelines, and this produced a homogenous theme for sign
designs throughout the site. For these reasons, § 151.178(C)(1) requires
multiple tenant buildings developed prior to August 2010 to be compatible
with the existing signage on the site. Property owners have the option to
utilize the design allowed under the August 2010 revisions if the property is
designed as a Transitional Shopping Center pursuant to the following:



   (A)   The property is subject to a Comprehensive Sign Policy that
demonstrates how the shopping center will incrementally transition the center
into meeting the current signage regulations. This may include, but not be
limited to, an amortization schedule for nonconforming sign removal and
design guidelines to be established a master-planned theme for sign color,
use of logos, scale, height from the finished grade, illumination, materials,
type and color of returns, and signage types, placement on sign bands built
into the building facade, or other signage or architectural features.



   (B)   Any Comprehensive Sign Policy for a Transitional Shopping
Center shall be established through a Planned Development and shall be
adopted by resolution according to §§ 151.150 through 151.160 of the Zoning
Ordinance and shall comply with § 151.155(M) regarding a Comprehensive Sign
Policy.



(Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.178  REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Illumination. Sign illumination shall only be achieved through
the following standards. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide
any appeals of staff decisions related to the interpretation of this section.



      (1)   General. All illuminated signage shall be externally lit
with the exception of signs containing or consisting of channel letters as
allowed in § 151.178(A)(3) below.



      (2)   External illumination.



         (a)   Signs that are externally illuminated shall have
the light source shielded from adjacent buildings and streets, and no sign or
device shall produce glare or illumination so as to create a nuisance or a
safety hazard to adjacent property owners or to the traveling public. 
Illumination shall be achieved via a steady, stationary white light of
reasonable intensity that is directed solely at the sign.  No sign shall
have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or other illuminating device
which has a changing light intensity, brightness or color.



         (b)   Ground signs that are externally illuminated with
ground mounted lighting shall have the fixtures fully screened with evergreen
landscaping, in addition to mechanical light source shielding.



         (c)   Electrical lights and fixtures shall not be
attached to a sign unless they are installed in accordance with the current
adopted National Electrical Code.



      (3)   Internal illumination. Only those signs as set forth in
§ 151.179may be illuminated internally by one of the following methods, with
the exception of theater marquee signs.  No other form of internal
illumination is permitted.



         (a)   Individual channel letters and logos shall be
permitted but only with the following physical characteristics:



            1.   White, translucent plastic (e.g., acrylic,
lexan, sintra) faces, aluminum returns, and a white internal light;



            2.   Black or silver dual color film on white
plastic faces, aluminum returns, and a white internal light; and



            3.   Logos shall not exceed 25% of the sign area.



         (b)   Individual reverse-channel (also know as
"halo-lit" or "reverse lit") aluminum letters with opaque faces and returns
of any color and white internal light.



         (c)   Routed face signs shall be permitted but only with
the following physical characteristics (see § 151.180(G) for limitations on
use of this sign design):



            1.   Metal face of any color and white internal
light; and



            2.   Backed with white, translucent plastic (e.g.,
acrylic, lexan, sintra) or black dual color film on white plastic.



         (d)   Routed signs with push-through letters shall be
permitted but only with the following characteristics (see § 151.180(G) for
limitations on use of this sign design):



            1.   Metal sign face of any color and white
internal light; and



            2.   Pushed through clear plastic (e.g., acrylic,
lexan, sintra) letters with opaque vinyl faces of any color with a maximum
return depth of one-half inch.



      (4)   Prohibited forms of illuminated signage.



         (a)   Exposed neon, or technologies such as LED that
simulate neon, are prohibited for signs and shall not be incorporated into
the design of a principal or accessory structure.



         (b)   Plastic-faced cabinet signs, whether internally or
externally illuminated, with the exception of menu boards not visible from
the public right-of-way, and theater marquee logos.



         (c)   The internal illumination of any sign not
expressly allowed pursuant to the provisions of § 151.179.



         (d)   Any form or color of individual channel letters or
reverse channel letters not expressly permitted by § 151.178(A)(3).



   (B)   Sign design; calculation of sign area and height.



      (1)   Attached letters and graphics. When separate letters or
graphics are attached to, or painted on, a wall, then the sign area shall be
determined by the smallest geometric shape that encloses all borders,
graphics, and letters as a complete sign.



      (2)   Clearance from electrical lines. Signs shall maintain a
minimum horizontal clearance of eight feet in addition to the fall radius and
a vertical clearance of at least eight feet from electrical lines and in
accordance with the provisions of the current adopted National Electrical
Code, as revised.



      (3)   Double-faced signs. When two signs of the same shape and
dimensions are mounted or displayed in a V shape, then all sign faces shall
be included in calculating the aggregate sign area.



      (4)   Freestanding/ground signs. The height of a sign shall be
computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top
of the sign face area.  Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of
(1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) the newly established grade
after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or
excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.  In cases where the
normal grade cannot be reasonably determined, sign height shall be computed
on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the
sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public
street.



         (a)   Sign base.



            1.   All ground signs, with the exception of
ornamental ground signs, shall have a minimum base of two to three feet below
the sign. 



            2.   The sign base, with the exception of
ornamental ground signs, must be solid in appearance with no exposed poles.



            3.   The design and materials of the sign base
shall coordinate with the architecture of the building with which it is
associated.



            4.   Landscaping of the solid sign base with
planters and/or shrubbery in all directions is required to soften the
appearance of the sign and provide a transition to the ground.



         (b)   Sign location. Grounds signs shall be separated
from adjacent ground signs by 100 feet, with the exception of project signs,
when allowed, that shall be separated by 1,000 feet.



      (5)   Wall signs.



         (a)   Wall signs shall not obstruct or crowd
architectural elements and details that define the design of the building.



         (b)   The sign placement and architectural features of
adjacent buildings shall be respected.



         (c)   Within the Historic District, wall signs shall not
be painted directly on the surface of masonry walls if the wall has not been
previously painted, unless a Certificate of Appropriateness for a new
building has been approved by the Historic District Commission.



      (6)   Sign face area. The entire area of a sign face shall be
measured by a single, uninterrupted polygon (a square, rectangle, semicircle,
or parallelogram) comprising the entire sign inclusive of any border or trim
and all of the elements of the matter displayed, but excluding architectural
embellishment, the base, supports, and other structural members.  In the
case of three-dimensional letters, or painted letters directly on the wall
surface (with a Certificate of Appropriateness in the Historic District), the
surface area shall be that area encompassing the individual letters
themselves, including any trim or border and excluding the background that
supports the three-dimensional letters.







Figure 1: Example of how a sign area is determined by drawing a polygon
(indicated by the dashed line) around all type and markings associated with
the sign.



      (7)   Design of sign face. The following provisions shall
regulate sign compatibility and physical characteristics:



         (a)   Ground signs shall not be in the shape of a
sponsor name or motif (e.g., soda bottles, hamburgers, boot, and so forth).



         (b)   Individual, plastic-faced channel letters shall
have only white, silver or black faces with aluminum returns of bronze,
black, white or silver. Otherwise, color is not regulated if the sign is
designed per § 151.178(A), Illumination.



   (C)   Building standards for permanent signs.



      (1)   Compatibility, quality, and impact.



         (a)   Building materials for signs shall be durable,
have low maintenance, be of the same or higher quality as the principal
structure(s), and shall not adversely impact adjacent uses.



         (b)   Ground sign materials shall match the materials of
the associated building.



         (c)   Signs proposed for a building, or group of
buildings, developed prior to August 2010, that contains two or more distinct
occupants internally separated by firewalls or demising walls, shall be
compatible with the signs of adjacent existing businesses, unless the
property has been designated a Transitional Shopping Center pursuant to §
151.177. Compatibility of sign design shall be accomplished by individual
tenant spaces in a shopping center harmonizing together through the use of
signs with a common scale, heights from the finished grade, illumination,
materials, type and color of sign faces and returns, and sign type (channel
letter, halo-lit, and the like), placement on sign bands built into the
building façade, or other signage features. Signs in Planned Developments
where the outline plan has its own signage regulations, or buildings
developed after August 2010, are exempt from the compatibility requirement.



      (2)   Appropriate materials for permanent, attached signs. The
following materials are considered to be appropriate for sign backgrounds,
frames, supports, and ornamentation for permanent attached signs:



         (a)   Wood;



         (b)   Metal;



         (c)   Plastic only when used as part of the following.



            1.   Channel letter faces and logos;



            2.   Backing for routed face signs;



            3.   Routed push-through letters and logos; or



            4.   Cut out or laser cut letters.



      (3)   Appropriate materials for permanent, freestanding/ground
signs. The following materials are considered to be appropriate for sign
backgrounds, frames, supports, and ornamentation for permanent
freestanding/ground signs:



         (a)   Brick;



         (b)   Natural stone, including panels, or imitation
stone;



         (c)   Stained, split-face block;



         (d)   Wood;



         (e)   Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) or
similar material in combination with brick, split-face block, or stone;



         (f)   Metal panels, when used in combination with brick,
split-face block, or stone; and



         (g)   Plastic or other synthetic materials when used in
combination with brick, split-face block, or stone. The Development Director
or his designee may specify an acceptable alternative to brick, split-face
block, or stone that is composed of quality synthetic materials approximating
the look and dimensions of authentic brick, split-face block, or stone.



      (4)   Prohibited materials. The following materials are
prohibited for sign backgrounds, frames, supports, and ornamentation:



         (a)   Exposed metal poles, when not enclosed by a
masonry veneer;



         (b)   Smooth-face concrete blocks, whether painted or
unpainted;



         (c)   Metal panels, when used without brick, split-face
block, or stone;



         (d)   Plastic, or other synthetic materials, when used
without brick, split face block, or stone, or an acceptable alternative
thereto as specified by the Development Director or his designee;



         (e)   Reflective materials; and



         (f)   Formed plastic letters.



      (5)   Structural requirements. All signs constructed or placed
within the Town shall comply with all current Building Codes adopted by the
Town. An electrical permit must be obtained for installation of any sign
requiring electrical service or connection.



   (D)   Premises and sign maintenance.



      (1)   Premises maintenance. Signs and the premises surrounding
them shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary, and inoffensive condition,
free and clear of obnoxious substances, rubbish, and weeds.



      (2)   Structure maintenance. Signs, together with their
supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in good, safe repair and
shall be maintained in good and safe condition, including the periodic
application of paint or other weatherproofing materials to prevent rust or
other decay. 



      (3)   Sign area or other maintenance. The sign shall not be
allowed to deteriorate to a broken, torn, peeling, flaking, out of plumb or
level, illegible, or otherwise decayed condition.



      (4)   Maintenance of banners and flags. Banners and flags
shall not be allowed to deteriorate to a tattered, torn, or faded condition
and shall be attached and secured properly at all times. 



      (5)   Removal of attached signs. Upon removal of an attached
sign, the wall or face of the building on which the sign was attached shall
be repaired or resurfaced to restore the wall or face to its original
condition prior to installation of the sign.



   (E)   Visibility.



      (1)   No obstruction. Signs, including any means of supporting
or staying the signs, shall not be placed or constructed so as to obstruct or
interfere with any door, window, fire escape or other means of egress, light,
or ventilation. Signs shall not be located so that they obscure the view of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic in a manner so as to endanger safe movement,
particularly at entrances, exits and intersections.



      (2)   Protection of vegetation and trees. No person may, for
the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of signs, damage, trim,
destroy or remove any trees, shrubs, or other vegetation located as follows:



         (a)   Within public right-of-way, unless the work is
done pursuant to the express written authorization of the Town or state,
whichever is appropriate; or



         (b)   On property that is not under the ownership or
control of the person conducting or responsible for the work, unless the work
is done pursuant to the express authorization of the person owning the
property on which the trees or shrubs are located; or



         (c)   In any area where trees or shrubs are required to
remain under an approved development contract.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord.
2013-01, passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-28-18)



§ 151.179  SIGN STANDARDS BY SIGN TYPE AND ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Allowed sign standards table. The Table of Allowed Sign
Standards sets out the minimum requirements for the physical characteristics
of signs in the Town.  Additional conditions for some sign types are found
in § 151.180.



 


Sign or Device

 

Zoning District

 

Maximum Number

 

Maximum Sign Area by Sign Type
(in sq. ft. per side, total)

 

Maximum Height
(in feet)

 

Minimum Setback
(in feet)

 

Conditions

 

Included in Maximum Aggregate Sign Area

 

Internal Illumination Permitted






ATTACHED




Ballfield Fence

 
All
 
NA
 
NA
 
Top of fence to which it’s attached
 
NA
 
§ 151.180(A)
 
No
 
No


Awning
(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
1 per building side facing a street and/or at a main pedestrian entrance(s)
to the building
 
See Conditions
 
Shall not project above or below awning or roofline; max 16 when located
within 200 ft of a residential district
 
Shall not extend beyond 10 ft from building
 
§ 151.180(B)
 
Yes
§ 151.179(B)
 
No


Marquee if not otherwise regulated
(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
1 per building side facing a street and/or at a main pedestrian entrance(s)
to the building
 
See Conditions
 
Maximum 30"; shall not project below fascia, or above parapet or roofline;
max 16 when located within 200 ft of a residential district
 
NA
 
§ 151.180 (C)
 

Yes


§ 151.179(B)
 
No


Theater Marquee
(Permit Required)
 
SCC, GC, CB, NC, MU
 
1 per building at the main pedestrian entrance to the building
 
300
 
See Conditions
 
NA
 
§ 151.180 (W)
 
Yes
§ 151.179 (B)
 
Yes


Service Station Canopy
(Permit Required)
 
SCC, GC, CB, NC, MU
 
1 per canopy side facing a street
 
See Conditions
 
Maximum 30"; shall not project above or below canopy
 
NA
 
§ 151.180(S)
 

Yes


§ 151.179(B)
 
No



ATTACHED




Convenience

 
All Non-residential
 
NA
 
4.5
 
6
 
Outside right-of-way or 10 from back of curb or edge of pavement, whichever
is farther
 
NA
 
No
 
Yes


Hanging
(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
1 per building side facing a street and/or at a main pedestrian entrance(s)
to the building
 
See Conditions
 
NA
 
NA
 
§ 151.180(D)
 
Yes
§ 151.179(B)
 
No


Projecting (Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
1 per building side facing a street
 
6, 12
 
See Conditions
 
Max 4 ft from building
 
§ 151.180 (T)
 
Yes
 
No


Window
(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
§ 151.180(E)
 
No
 
No


Multiple Franchise Businesses
(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
NA
 
NA
 
§ 151.180(F)
 
Yes
See also § 151.180(O)
 
Yes


Wall and attached if not otherwise regulated
(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
1 per building side facing a street and/or at a main pedestrian entrance(s)
to the building
 
See § 151.179(B)
 
Shall not project below canopy, or above parapet or roofline; max 16 when
located within 200 ft of a residential district
 
 
 
§ 151.180(G)
 
Yes
§ 151.179(B)
 
Yes



Flags (Permit Required)

 

All Non-residential

 

1 per building

 

See Conditions

 

20 pole height for roof mounted

 

NA

 

§ 151.180 (U)

 

No

 

No




FREESTANDING/GROUND



Development (Residential)
(Permit Required)
 
Residential
 
2 per entrance
 
32, 64
 
6
 
Outside right-of-way or 10 from back of curb or edge of pavement, whichever
is farther
 
§ 151.180(H)
 
Yes
 
No



Flags


(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
3 per lot
 
See Conditions
 
40 pole height for ground set
 
Outside right-of-way or equal to the height of the pole, whichever is farther
 
§ 151.180 (U)
 

Yes, after the first flag


§ 151.179(B)
 
No


Convenience
 
All Non-residential
 
1 per entrance/exit
 
4.5, 9
 
6
 
Outside right-of-way or 10 from back of curb or edge of pavement, whichever
is farther
 
NA
 
No
 
No


Menu Board
(Permit Required)
 
SCC, GC, MPO
 
1 per drive- through lane for restaurants with drive-through but no curbside
service/1 per bay for restaurants with curbside service
 
30 for restaurants with drive-through but no curbside service/6 per bay for
restaurants with curbside service
 
6
 
Shall be contained within the buildable area of the premises
 
§ 151.180(I)
 
No
 
Yes


Project Sign (Multiple Tenant)
(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
1 per lot per street for lots w/1,000 ft of frontage or less.  For lots with
> 1,000 ft of frontage, one sign per 1,000 ft or a portion thereof.
 
See Conditions
 
See § 151.180(J)
 
20 from right-of-way
 
§ 151.180(J)
 
No
 
Yes, but for existing, legally non- conforming signs only


Multiple Franchise Businesses
(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
1
 
See Conditions
 
10
 
20 from right-of-way
 
§ 151.180(F)
 
Yes § 151.180(F)
 
Yes, but for existing, legally non- conforming signs only


Sandwich Board
(Permit Required)
 
SCC, GC, MPO, CB, NC
 
1 per business, tenant or occupant
 
10, 20
 
4
 
Outside of required 48" pedestrian sidewalk clearance
 
§ 151.180(K)
 
No
 
No


Ornamental Ground Sign (Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
1 per lot per street for lots w/1,000 ft of frontage or less.  For lots with
> 1,000 ft of frontage, one sign per 1,000 ft or a portion thereof.
 
32, 64 for sign face area
 
6
 
Outside right-of-way or 10 from back of curb or edge of pavement, whichever
is farther
 
§ 151.180 (V)
 
Yes
 
No


Ground signs not otherwise regulated
(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
1 per lot per street for lots w/1,000 ft of frontage or less.  For lots with
> 1,000 ft of frontage, one sign per 1,000 ft or a portion thereof.
 
32, 64 for sign face area
 
6
 
Outside right-of-way or 10 from back of curb or edge of pavement, whichever
is farther
 
§ 151.180(L)
 
Yes
§ 151.179(B)
 
Yes



TEMPORARY



Development-in-progress (Permit Required)
 
All
 
1 per entrance and 1 per phase or section of development
 
32, 64
 
6
 
No less than 10 from face of curb or edge of pavement
 
§ 151.180(M)
 
Yes
 
No


Window
 
All
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
§ 151.180(E)
 
No
 
No


Temporary,  with the exception of political and special event, in all
residential zoning districts if not otherwise regulated
 
All Residential
 
2
 
For all parcels: 6, 12; however, for parcels 2 acres or greater, one sign may
be 12, 24
 
5; however, for parcels 2 acres or greater, one sign may be 6
 
Outside right-of-way or 10 from back of curb or edge of pavement, whichever
is farther
 
§ 151.180(N)
 
No
 
No


Temporary,  with the exception of political and special event, in all
non-residential zoning districts if not otherwise regulated
(Permit Required)
 
All Non-residential
 
1 per business or tenant
 
32, 64
 
6
Unless attached to a building or in a window
 
Outside right-of-way or 10 from back of curb or edge of pavement, whichever
is farther
 
§ 151.180(O)
 
No
 
No


Political signs
 
All
 
1 per campaign or candidate per frontage
 
See Conditions
 
5
See Conditions
 
Outside right-of- way or any pedestrian easement
 
§ 151.180 (Q)
 
No
 
No


Temporary in a construction zone
 
All
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
§ 151.180 (P)
 
No
 
No


Special Event Signs
(Permit Required)
 
All
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 
See Conditions
 

§ 151.180


(R)
 
No
 
No




 



   (B)   Aggregate sign area.



      (1)   Except for multiple franchises or multiple tenant
buildings, each nonresidential building is entitled to a maximum aggregate
square footage of signage for each visible building side to be calculated as
follows:



         (a)   For the first 100 linear feet of visible frontage,
1.5 square feet of signage for each linear foot; plus



         (b)   0.45 square feet of signage for each additional
linear foot of building frontage in excess of 100 linear feet.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum aggregate
square footage of signage per building, regardless of the number of visible
building sides, shall be 300 square feet.



      (3)   Visible building side shall mean:



         (a)   The horizontal length measured from the side of a
building on a public or private street frontage of the heated and enclosed
structure upon a premises, not including out-buildings or appurtenant
structures; or



         (b)   The horizontal length of a building on the side
with a principal pedestrian entrance.



   (C)   Civic/institutional uses permitted in residential districts or
planned developments that cite uses in non-residential districts shall follow
the sign regulations for non-residential districts.



   (D)   Non-residential uses permitted in the MU Mixed Use district
shall follow sign regulations for non-residential districts.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2011-10, passed 10-10-11; Am. Ord.
2012-02, passed 4-9-12; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord. 2013-01,
passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-28-18)



§ 151.180  SIGN-SPECIFIC CONDITIONS.



   The following conditions supplement the standards set forth in Table
151.179.



   (A)   Attached ballfield fence signs.  The following additional
provisions shall apply to all signs attached to ballfield fences:



      (1)   Signs shall face into the ballfield; and



      (2)   All backs of ballfield fence signs in a given ballfield
shall be the same color.



   (B)   Attached awning signs.  The following additional provisions
shall apply to all attached awning signs:



      (1)   Awnings with backlighting are prohibited;



      (2)   Awning signs shall be placed on the valance area only;
and 



      (3)   The minimum space between the edge of the letter and the
top and bottom of the valance shall be 1.5 inches.



   (C)   Marquee signs (if not otherwise regulated). The following
additional provisions shall apply to all attached marquee signs other than
theater marquee signs:



      (1)   No illumination shall be allowed for attached marquee
signs;



      (2)   Maximum letter height shall be 30 inches;



      (3)   Maximum width shall be 25% of marquee face;



      (4)   Marquee signs shall be placed on the fascia area only;
and



      (5)   The minimum space between the edge of the letter and the
top and bottom of the fascia shall be 1.5 inches. 







 



   (D)   Hanging signs.  Hanging signs may hang either parallel or
perpendicular to a building and shall adhere to the following provisions:



      (1)   Parallel hanging signs shall be no more than ten square
feet in area.



      (2)   Perpendicular hanging signs shall be:



         (a)   No more than four square feet per side; and



         (b)   No less than seven feet above the sidewalk.







 



   (E)   Window signs.  All window signage, whether temporary or
permanent, shall comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Temporary signs shall be located fully within the
interior of the building;



      (2)   Temporary or permanent signs may be attached directly to
or mounted within three feet of the inside of commercial-type businesses;



      (3)   Except as provided in this section, window signage may
be constructed of vinyl, paper, cloth, or other like material;



      (4)   Signs, whether temporary or permanent, shall not exceed
15% of the aggregate window and door area. A group of windows on a particular
building elevation separated by a distinct architectural feature, other than
the window frame, shall be considered a separate contiguous window area and
the sign area within each contiguous window area shall not exceed 15%. Each
building elevation shall be considered separately; and



      (5)   LED, or similar technology, electronic message center
window signs are prohibited.



   (F)   Multiple franchise businesses.  The following additional
provisions shall apply to all multiple franchise business signs, if not
otherwise regulated:



      (1)   Businesses shall provide documentation demonstrating
that they offer multiple franchises (e.g., “makes” of automobiles) and
that there are signage requirements associated with specific franchise
agreements;



      (2)   The Development Director may approve signs for other
types of businesses that contain multiple franchises under these provisions
if the franchisee(s) demonstrate that:



         (a)   Its franchise agreement contains specific signage
requirements; and



         (b)   Such requirements cannot otherwise be met unless
these provisions are utilized.



      (3)   One wall sign shall be allowed for the business name
with a total of one square foot per linear foot of building
(sales/showroom/office building only) per street frontage façade;



      (4)   One wall sign shall be allowed for each franchise with a
maximum aggregate sign area not to exceed 200 square feet per building
(sales/showroom/office building only) street frontage façade and/or at a
main pedestrian entrance to the building;



      (5)   The aggregate sign area calculated for each building
street frontage may be shared among the dealership, or other multiple
franchise business, and each of its franchises on the building elevation
facing the same street frontage;



      (6)   One freestanding/ground sign shall be shared by the
dealership, or other multiple franchise business, regardless of the number of
public streets the property fronts, with a total sign area of one square foot
per ten linear feet of street frontage along the property line including
multiple street frontages.  Maximum allowable sign area for this
freestanding/ground sign shall not exceed 75 square feet;



      (7)   A freestanding ground sign outside of traditional areas
shall have a two foot masonry base;



      (8)   The face of the freestanding/ground sign shall be
rectangular in shape; and



      (9)   The base of the freestanding/ground sign shall be fully
landscaped with planters and/or shrubbery in all directions not less than the
dimensional width of the sign.



   (G)   Wall signs and attached signs, if not otherwise regulated. 
The following additional provisions shall apply to all attached signs, if not
otherwise regulated:



      (1)   Signs shall not be located closer than two feet from any
other business located on the ground floor of the same building; and



      (2)   Signs shall not be located closer than four feet in any
direction from any other business sign.



      (3)   Solid metal panels (e.g. flat panels, metal cabinets,
routed letters, push-through letters) in existing, multi-tenant shopping
centers built before 2010 shall meet the Compatibility Standards found in §
151.178(C).



   (H)   Freestanding residential development signs.  The following
additional provisions shall apply to all freestanding residential development
signage:



      (1)   Freestanding residential development signs shall be
located within a common open space lot or a private lot with an easement
dedicated to a property owners’ association.



      (2)   One residential development sign shall be allowed if
located within a central median at an entrance if within a common open space
and not within the public right-of-way.



      (3)   Only one residential development sign shall be allowed
on each side of an entrance.



      (4)   Residential development signs shall be constructed only
of masonry or natural materials, except for attached letters or logo, and may
include signs constructed within entrance walls.



      (5)   With the exception of the Historic District where signs
with pole bases are in keeping with historic signs, an encompassing finished
masonry frame shall be required:



         (a)   The base shall not exceed 25% of the sign face
area; and



         (b)   In no case shall this percentage change the
permitted sign face area.



   (I)   Menu boards.



      (1)   For menu boards used in conjunction with a restaurant
providing drive-through or curb-side services the structure shall be included
on a site plan.



      (2)   Internally illuminated, plastic faced cabinet sign menu
boards are allowed provided they are screened from the public right-of-way or
are not visible from the public right-of-way.



   (J)   Project signs.  The following additional provisions shall
apply to all multi-tenant project signs, if not otherwise regulated:



      (1)   When five or more businesses, tenants or occupants are
contained with or without individual street frontage with a common parking
lot or private drive and a total of at least 10,000 square feet in the
project, a project sign shall be installed rather than a ground sign.  One
parcel with less than five tenants that does not qualify for a project sign
shall share a single ground sign per § 151.180(L);



      (2)   For developments that qualify for more than one project
sign, there shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet between project signs;



      (3)   The height of the project sign shall be determined as
follows:



 


Table 151.180(J)(3)


Maximum Dimensions of Project Signs


Building Square Footage
 
Maximum Project Sign Height (in feet)
 
Maximum Project Sign Width (in feet)


15,000 or less
 
10
 
10


15,001 or greater
 
15
 
10



 



      (4)   Project signs shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from
the right-of-way;



      (5)   The base of the sign shall be fully landscaped with
planters and/or shrubbery in all directions not less than the dimensional
width of the sign;



      (6)   The face of the project sign shall be rectangular in
shape;



      (7)   Project signs shall be designed to match the
architecture of the building or development;



      (8)   The base of all project signs shall be two feet in
height and of masonry or stone construction; and



      (9)   The project sign shall be on the same parcel as the
multiple tenant project.



   (K)   Sandwich board-type signs.  The following additional
provision shall apply to all sandwich board-type signs:



      (1)   Sandwich board-type signs shall be constructed of metal
or wood;



      (2)   Wood signs shall be constructed of medium density
overlay (MDO) or a similar quality material, not grained plywood;



      (3)   Edges shall be covered with molding; and



      (4)   Erasable slate chalk boards are allowed.



   (L)   Freestanding/ground signs, if not otherwise regulated. The
following additional provisions shall apply to all freestanding/ground signs,
if not otherwise regulated, including a multiple tenant project sign for one
parcel with less than five tenants that does not qualify for a project sign.



      (1)   Freestanding/ground signs shall have a minimum of 100
feet between signs on adjacent lots;



      (2)   Freestanding/ground signs shall be constructed only of
masonry or natural materials, except for attached letters or logo, and may
include signs constructed within entrance walls;



      (3)   The maximum overall area of a freestanding/ground sign,
including the finished masonry frame, shall be 100 square feet;



      (4)   Freestanding/ground signs, other than ornamental ground
signs, shall have a two foot masonry base; and



      (5)   The base of any freestanding/ground sign shall be fully
landscaped with planters and/or shrubbery in all directions to soften the
appearance of the sign and to provide a transition to the ground.



   (M)   Development-in-progress signs.  The following additional
provisions shall apply to all temporary development-in-progress signs:



      (1)   Signs in nonresidential projects shall be permitted only
for sites with either a Town-approved site plan or only during the period for
which there is an active building permit, or development agreement; and



      (2)   Signs in residential projects shall only be permitted
with a Town approved site plan (for multifamily) or recorded subdivision with
incomplete infrastructure and/or unbuilt lots remaining.



      (3)   A setback of less than 10 feet may be approved by the
Development Director under circumstances where there are physical site
constraints that would prevent compliance with this section.







 



Figure 3: Example of a development-in-progress sign



   (N)   Temporary, with the exception of political, in all residential
zoning districts if not otherwise regulated.



      (1)   Real estate signs shall be removed within seven days of
the closing of the sale, rental or leasing of the premises, or as determined
by the Development Director in the case of multiple lease or rental spaces in
a single project;



      (2)   The display of any single temporary sign, other than a
real estate sign or a political sign, shall be limited to 60 days per
calendar year.



   (O)   Temporary, with the exception of political, in all
non-residential zoning districts if not otherwise regulated.  The following
additional provisions shall apply to all temporary signs outside of a
building in non-residential zoning districts, if not otherwise regulated:



      (1)   A premises shall display temporary signage outside of a
building, other than a real estate sign or a political sign, no more than 60
days per calendar year and no more than one sign at a time (Examples: one
sign = 60 days; two signs = 30 days each; three signs = 20 days each, and the
like) and shall require a permit; and



      (2)   For multiple tenant developments, temporary signs for
tenants shall be mounted on the tenant's leased space either in the window as
a temporary window sign or on the tenant's building frontage.



      (3)   For multiple tenant developments, temporary signs for
the development and requested by the property owner may be placed within the
common area.



   (P)   Temporary construction zone signs. The following regulations
shall apply to sites that are, in the opinion of the Development Department,
significantly disturbed for long durations (over 60 days) by state or local
road widening projects or utility line or sidewalk
repairs/installations/relocations. Tenants located on properties that meet
these criteria will be allowed to use one of the two methods of temporary
construction signage noted below.



      (1)   Window signs. Temporary window signs shall not exceed 
50% of the aggregate window and door area allowable until the roadway section
is completed, at which time the Town will provide  a 30-day notice that
these temporary signs shall be removed. A group of windows on a particular
building elevation separated by a distinct architectural feature, other than
the window frame, shall be considered a separate contiguous window area and
the sign area within each contiguous area shall not exceed 50% of the
contiguous area. Each building elevation shall be considered separately.



      (2)   Other (freestanding/ground signs, attached to
building).The continuous display of any single temporary sign, other than a
real estate sign or a political sign, shall be permitted until the roadway
section is completed at which time the Town will provide a 30-day notice that
these temporary signs shall be removed. Except for limitations on the
duration, requirements for temporary signs for nonresidential developments
per § 151.179(A) and divisions (N) and (O) of this section shall be
applicable. Where a multifamily property with four or more dwelling units is
affected by roadway construction, the continuous display of any single
temporary sign, other than a real estate sign or a political sign, shall be
as allowed for nonresidential developments and are allowable until that
roadway section is completed, at which time the Town will provide a 30-day
notice that these temporary signs shall be removed.



   (Q)   Political signs.  The following shall apply to political
signs.



      (1)   Ground-mounted political signs shall:



         (a)   Have a maximum sign area of six square feet per
side with a total of 12 square feet;



         (b)   Have a maximum height of five feet; and



         (c)   Shall be limited to only one sign per
candidate/campaign, for each street frontage of a premises or for each street
frontage of an undeveloped lot, parcel, or tract of land.



      (2)   Political signs mounted on a parked vehicle or a trailer
shall:



         (a)   Have a maximum sign area of 32 square feet per
side with a total of 64 square feet;



         (b)   Have a maximum height of four feet, exclusive of
the vehicle or trailer; and



         (c)   Be exempt from any maximum time
durations/limitations if parked in a residential driveway.



   (R)   Special event signs. The following additional provisions shall
apply to all temporary special event signs:



      (1)   Temporary signs, on or off-premises, associated with a
special event are prohibited unless the event is formally registered with the
Town in one of the following ways:



         (a)   An approved Class 1 Special Event Permit;



         (b)   A Board of Mayor and Alderman-approved Conditional
Use Permit for a Class 2 Special Event Permit; or



         (c)   An Outdoor Event Questionnaire is on file with the
Department of Development.



      (2)   Special event signs shall be erected no more than 24
hours prior to the registered special event without a permit.



      (3)   A permit is required for a special event sign (see §
151.176(B)(1)(f) for exemptions).



      (4)   Off-premises special event signs shall comply with the
following requirements:



         (a)   The maximum number of off-premises special event
signs per lot shall be one;



         (b)   The maximum sign area of off-premises special
event signs shall be six square feet; and



         (c)   The maximum height of off-premises special events
signs shall be five feet.



      (4)   On-premises special event signs visible off the lot
shall comply with the following requirements:



         (a)   The maximum number of on-premises special event
signs per lot shall be one per street frontage;



         (b)   The maximum sign area of an on-premises special
event sign shall be 32 square feet;



         (c)   The maximum height of an on-premises special
events sign shall be six feet; and



         (d)   Special event signs not visible off the lot are
exempt from these requirements.



   (S)   Attached service station canopy signs. The following
additional provisions shall apply to all attached service station canopy
signs:



      (1)   No illumination shall be allowed for attached service
station canopy signs;



      (2)   Maximum letter height shall be 30 inches;



      (3)   Maximum width shall be 25% of canopy face;



      (4)   Service station canopy signs shall be placed on the
fascia area only; and



      (5)   The minimum space between the edge of the letter and the
top and bottom of the fascia shall be 1.5 inches. 



   (T)   Projecting signs. The following additional provisions shall
apply to projecting signs:



      (1)   Projecting signs shall be at least ten feet above the
sidewalk; and



      (2)   Projecting signs shall not be placed above the cornice
line of the first floor level unless they have a clearance of less than ten
feet.



   (U)   Flags. Flag sizes shall be in proportion to the pole height
and shall comply with the following.



      (1)   All flag poles and poles shall comply with the National
Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers' Guide Specifications for
Design of Metal Flagpoles Manual.



      (2)   Pole and flag size shall comply with the following:



 

Ground-Set Poles


Exposed Pole Height (feet)
 
Flag Size (feet)


15 - 20
 
3 x 5


20 - 30
 
4 x 6


30 - 35
 
5 x 8


35 - 40
 
6 x 10



 



 

Roof and Wall Mounted Poles


Exposed Pole Height (feet)
 
Flag Size (feet)


Up to 14
 
3 x 5


15 - 20
 
4 x 6



 



   (V)   Ornamental ground signs. The following additional provisions
shall apply to ornamental ground signs.



      (1)   All ornamental ground signs shall have a minimum
distance of 18 inches between the bottom of the sign and the surrounding
grade.



      (2)   The design and materials of an ornamental ground sign
shall coordinate with the building with which it is associated.



      (3)   The sign base of an ornamental ground sign may be
landscaped when appropriate according to the Town's Design Guidelines.



      (4)   Only ground mounted external illumination shall be
allowed for ornamental ground signs.



   (W)   Theater marquee signs. The following additional provisions
shall apply to theater marquee signs.



      (1)   No changeable copy allowed;



      (2)   Maximum sign width shall be 50% of marquee face;



      (3)   Multiple methods of internal illumination are allowed;



      (4)   Maximum of 300 square feet;



      (5)   Logos not to exceed 25% of the allowable sign area; and



      (6)   Allowed to extend above the roofline.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2011-10, passed 10-10-11; Am. Ord.
2012-02, passed 4-9-12; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord. 2013-01,
passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-28-18)



§ 151.181  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   The utilization of a nonconforming sign and/or sign structure,
as defined herein, may continue subject to the conditions and requirements
noted below. When the use of a property changes (including but not limited to
the redevelopment of the site, a change in the use of the business(es), or a
tenancy change requiring the demolition or reconstruction of the sign), the
signs on that property must be brought into compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter, with the following exceptions:



      (1)   The replacement of portions of the removable plastic
face on a project sign shall be allowed for signs lawfully constructed prior
to August 23, 2010 provided that such new portion utilizes the same size,
shape, color and material of the replaced portion.



      (2)   A nonconforming freestanding/ground sign that does not
meet masonry base requirements (size, materials), shall be allowed to replace
portions of the sign face provided that the new sign face meets the
illumination provisions of § 151.178(A) and the sign base is solid in
appearance with no exposed poles.



   (B)   With the exception of minor repairs and maintenance and
alterations allowed pursuant to state law, no alterations to a nonconforming
sign/sign structure shall be allowed. Unless otherwise allowed by law, any
structural or other substantial improvement to a nonconforming sign (except
for those activities as specified in § 151.176(B)(2) or in § 151.181(A))
shall be deemed an abandonment of the nonconforming status and shall result
in the reclassification of such sign as a prohibited sign as set forth in §
151.174.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-9-12; Am. Ord.
2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.182  ADMINISTRATION AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Enforcement. The Department of Development Services, or other
departments or officers of the Town designated from time to time by the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen, is authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the
Development Director or his or her duly authorized representative may enter
at reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the Town of
Collierville to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this
subchapter.  The Development Director shall be authorized to pursue all such
remedies as are available under the law and shall not be limited to those
remedies listed below.



      (1)   Notice of violation; repair or removal.  The
Development Director, or his or her duly authorized representative, shall
send a letter by certified mail to the owner, agent, and/or person having the
beneficial interest in the building or the premises on which the subject sign
is located, ordering that such sign be brought into conformance or removed
within 30 days of receipt of the letter or such other reasonable period of
time as the Development Director may determine to be appropriate under the
circumstances.  If the sign is not brought into conformity or removed by the
end of the 30-day period, the Development Director may cause the same to be
removed or repaired, as the case may be, at the expense of the owner of the
sign and the owner of the premises on which the sign is located, each of whom
shall be jointly and severally liable for such expense.



      (2)   Signs in public right-of-way.  Signs illegally placed
in any public right-of-way shall be forfeited to the public and shall be
immediately confiscated by the Department of Development.



      (3)   Unsafe signs.  The Development Director, or his or her
duly authorized representative, may cause any sign or sign structure to be
removed immediately upon written notice at the expense of the owner of the
sign and the owner of the premises on which the sign is located if the sign
is an immediate hazard to persons or property by virtue of its construction.



   (B)   Appeals to Board of Zoning Appeals.  As set forth in §
151.308, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Development
Director or any other official charged with the responsibility of enforcing
the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than the maximum
prescribed by Tennessee law. Each day’s continuance of a violation shall be
considered a separate offense. The owner of any sign, building or premises,
or part thereof, where any matter in violation of this subchapter shall be
placed or shall exist, and any person who may have knowingly assisted in the
commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord.
2013-01, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.183  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   Generally; severability where less speech results.  If any
part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause,
term, or word of this subchapter is declared or held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration or
holding shall not affect any other part, table, section, subsection,
paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this
subchapter, even if such severability would result in less speech, whether by
subjecting previously exempt signs to this subchapter’s permitting
requirements, or otherwise.



   (B)   Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs and
sign types.  Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of
severability set forth above or elsewhere in this subchapter, this ordinance
or in any adopting ordinance, if any part, table, section, subsection,
paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this
subchapter or any other law is declared or held to be unconstitutional or
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration or holding
shall not affect any other part, table, section, subsection, paragraph,
subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this subchapter that
pertains to prohibited signs.



   (C)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates the
application of any provision of this subchapter to a particular property,
structure, or situation, then such judgment shall not affect the application
of that provision to any other building, structure, or situation not
specifically included in that judgment.



   (D)   If any court of competent jurisdiction judges invalid any
condition attached to the approval of a development review application, then
such judgment shall not affect any other conditions or requirements attached
to the same approval that are not specifically included in that judgment.



   (E)   Whenever a condition or limitation is included in an
administrative action authorizing regulatory activity, then it shall be
conclusively presumed that the authorizing officer, commission, or board
considered such condition or limitation necessary to carry out the spirit and
intent of this subchapter, and that the officer, commission, or board would
not have granted the authorization to which the condition or limitation
pertained except in belief that the condition or limitation was lawful.



(Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord.
2013-01, passed 1-13-14)



EXTERIOR LIGHTING



§ 151.190  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  All exterior lighting shall be designed
and installed to maintain adequate, safe illumination levels in public areas
and on private lands, utilizing durable light fixtures and minimal mounting
heights that minimize objectionable off-site glare.  It is the intent of
this section to provide clear guidelines so that lighting adequately serves
the site while minimizing negative impacts on surrounding properties.



   (B)   Applicability.  Unless exempted, the provisions of this
section shall apply to multi-family residential, commercial, and mixed-use
development.



   (C)   Public and private lighting distinguished.  For the purposes
of this section, public light poles and fixtures shall refer to lighting
intended to illuminate public rights-of-way and streets.  Private lighting
fixtures shall refer lighting intended to illuminate private parking areas,
private drives, alleys, common areas, buildings, and other lighting on
private property.



   (D)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Individual residential lighting that is not reviewed as
part of a site plan.



      (2)   Lighting associated with temporary uses that have been
permitted, provided that the lighting meets standards of this section.



      (3)   Temporary outdoor light fixtures used as holiday
decoration provided per § 151.175(Q),  holiday lighting.



      (4)   Government facility lighting necessary for public
safety. 



      (5)   Fossil fuel lighting - all outdoor light fixtures
producing light directly from the combustion of fossil fuels.



      (6)   Emergency lighting, provided the use of the lighting is
temporary and discontinued immediately upon abatement of the emergency
necessitating the lighting.



      (7)   Underwater lighting used for illumination of swimming
pools and fountains.



      (8)   Decorative light fixtures using lamps 60 watts or less. 



   (E)   Lighting submittal requirements.  Any development that
proposes exterior lighting shall include a detailed exterior lighting plan as
part of the application unless waived by the Development Director or
designee. 



   (F)   Lighting style and compatibility.



      (1)   General requirement.



         (a)   Fixture style, design, and compatibility.



            1.   Private lighting fixtures shall be:



               a.   A design and size compatible with the
principal building of a development and adjacent areas, and shall be designed
to be an integral part of the entire development of the site. Compatibility
shall be determined by the Collierville Design Guidelines.



               b.   Be either a fixture appropriate for a
traditional area or a conventional area as defined by the Collierville Design
Guidelines.



            2.   Public lighting fixtures, such as
streetlights located within the public ROW, shall be selected from MLG&W’s
most current list of poles and fixtures approved for use within Collierville.
The developer shall specify the type streetlight to be used within the ROW at
the time the development agreement information sheet (DAIS) is submitted.



         (b)   Lamp sources.  Metal halide, incandescent, LED,
and compact fluorescent are allowable forms of exterior lighting.  The same
light source shall be used for the same or similar types of lighting on any
one site throughout any development. 



         (c)   All wiring for outdoor lighting shall be concealed.



         (d)   Lighting fixture shielding shall be arranged to
minimize glare, spillover,  and reflection upon adjacent lands.  The
maximum level of spillover shall be in accordance with Table 151.190-02. 



         (e)   Lighting values will be based on maintained
illuminance.



         (f)   Per § 1006 of the 2003 International Building
Code, a light corridor measured from the exit discharge from a means of
egress from a building to a public way shall be provided, with a minimum
width of ten feet and a minimum of 1.0 footcandle measured at the ground
level.  The Building Official may make exceptions as needed for historic
buildings.



         (g)   Lighting should meet the minimum Illuminating
Engineering Society (IES) standards, and shall not exceed 200% of the
recommended values.  Lighting shall comply with the standards in Table
151.190-03.  Lighting level calculations shall be based on maintained lamp
lumens and 1.0 maintenance factor. 



TABLE 151.190-02:  MAXIMUM SPILLOVER (IN FOOTCANDLES)



 



 

At Property Line

 

10 feet from  Property Line



Adjacent to commercial
 

1.0

 

0.5



Adjacent to residential
 

0.5

 

0.25




 



      (2)   Light levels in parking areas and outdoor areas.



         (a)   Parking lot lighting levels shall meet the levels
noted in Table 151.190-03.



TABLE 151.190-03: PARKING LOT LIGHTING LEVELS [1] [3]



 


Requirement

 

Basic [2]

 

Enhanced Security [2]



Min. horizontal illuminance
 

0.2 FC

 

0.5 FC



Uniformity ratio, max. to min. for
 

20:1

 

15:1




[1]   These are the minimum light levels recommended per IES RP-20


[2]   FC = Footcandles

[3]   For average value design and average value of 1.0 FC for basic or
2.5 FC for enhanced illuminance may be used.








         (b)   In order to maintain uniformity in light levels
across a development and prevent or minimize dark areas, the ratio of maximum
to minimum lighting levels on a given site or parcel of land as measured in
footcandles at ground level, shall not exceed twenty-to-one (20:1) in
residential developments or fifteen-to-one (15:1) in the nonresidential and
mixed-use developments.  Parking lots shall maintain the same uniformity
ratios as the principal use they serve.



      (3)   Pole-mounted lights.  Freestanding light fixtures shall
be in proportion with the building and shall not exceed building height. 
Pole-mounted light fixtures within or near residential areas shall not exceed
the heights described in Table 151.190.02.



TABLE 151.190.02:  MAXIMUM LIGHT POLE FIXTURE HEIGHT WITHIN PROXIMITY OF
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



 


Distance To Residential Zoning District

 
Maximum Height Limit


< 50 ft.
 
14 ft.


50 ft. - 100 ft.
 
25 ft.


100 ft. - 150 ft.
 
30 ft.



 



         (a)   Pole-mounted lighting shall be designed so that
the poles do not interfere  with other elements of the approved site such as
trees, landscaping, and parking. 



         (b)   Pole-mounted light fixtures shall be full cutoff.



         (c)   Pedestrian areas should be lighted with
appropriately scaled poles and luminaries.  Their heights shall be no taller
than 14 feet when adjacent to residential areas.



         (d)   Light pole heights shall be no taller than 30 feet
tall.  The Design Review Commission may review and approve 35-foot tall
poles on a case by case basis.



      (4)   Wall-mounted lights.



         (a)   Building-mounted light fixtures within and near
residential areas shall not exceed the heights described in Table 151.190.02.



         (b)   Building-mounted light fixtures (other than
decorative only fixtures) shall be cutoff or full cutoff fixture type.



         (c)   Building-mounted light fixtures shall be in
proportion with the building and shall not exceed the building height when
“arm-mounted” lights are used. 



         (d)   Wall packs on buildings may be used at entrances
to a building to light unsafe areas.  They are not intended to draw
attention to the building or provide general building or site lighting.



         (e)   Decorative wall mounted fixtures using lamps with
60 watts or more and installed primarily to add architectural detail to a
building rather than used primarily as a light source shall have the lamp
source shielded such as metal louvers to reduce objectionable glare. 
Decorative light fixtures using lamps less 60 watts or less will be exempt
from the required shielding requirements. 



      (5)   Spotlights and floodlights.



         (a)   Floodlights shall have the lamp source shielded by
using barn doors, glare shields, fixed hood or grid louvers.



         (b)   All flood lights shall be installed such that the
fixture shall be screened such that no portion of the bulb extends beyond the
edge of the external shield to provide screen of the bulb from view. 



         (c)   Lighting fixtures shall be selected, located,
aimed, and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the
building façade, plantings, and other intended site features and away from
adjoining properties and public rights-of-way.



      (6)   Outdoor sports field/outdoor performance area lighting.



         (a)   The mounting height of outdoor sports field and
outdoor performance area lighting fixtures shall not exceed 80 feet from
finished grade unless approved by the Design Review Commission if there are
no adverse effects on surrounding properties.



         (b)   All outdoor sports field and outdoor performance
area lighting fixtures shall be equipped with a glare control package
(louvers, shields, or similar devices).



         (c)   The fixtures must be aimed so that their beams are
directed and fall within the primary playing field or performance area so
that no direct light illuminations are directed off site. 



         (d)   Spill light values shall not exceed 0.2 footcandle
(FC) horizontal levels at 150 feet beyond the field boundary.



         (e)   Lighting for all recreational facilities and
outdoor performance areas shall be reviewed by the Design Review Commission
on a case by case basis.



         (f)   No outdoor recreational facility, outdoor
performance, shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude
recreational activity or performance conducted at the facility prior to 11:00
p.m. 



      (7)   Lighting for vehicular canopies.



         (a)   Areas under a vehicular canopy shall not exceed 20
footcandles.



         (b)   Lighting under vehicular canopies shall be
designed so there is no glare created off-site.



         (c)   Fixtures shall be fully-recessed lighting fixtures
with the bottom of the lens flush with the canopy.



      (8)   Lighting of outdoor display areas.



         (a)   Parking lot outdoor areas shall be illuminated in
accordance with the requirements of division (F)(2) of this section. 
Outdoor display areas shall have a maximum average of illuminance of 24
maintained footcandles.



         (b)   All light fixtures shall meet the IESNA definition
of cutoff fixtures.



         (c)   The mounting height of outdoor display area
fixtures shall not exceed maximum pole height requirements of Table
151.190.02. Exceptions will be reviewed by the Design Review Commission on a
case-by-case basis.



      (9)   Sign lighting.  Illuminating signs shall be aimed and
shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the sign. 
Top down mounting of lighting fixtures is required wherever possible. 



      (10)   Decorative architectural lighting of buildings, arbors,
landscaping, and similar features.  For all forms of decorative lighting
other than holiday decorating lighting, which is considered to be illuminated
tubing or strings of lights outlining property lines, rooflines, or wall
edges of buildings, the following shall apply:



         (a)   Lighting fixtures shall be selected, located,
aimed and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the
building façade, plantings, and other intended site feature and away from
adjoining properties and the public street right-of-way.



         (b)   Lights, including string lighting, added to
arbors, pergolas, between buildings over pedestrian ways and outdoor seating
areas, will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.



   (G)   Location.



      (1)   All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be kept out of and
at least two feet away from any required perimeter or streetscape buffer, and
tree save area.



      (2)   The layout of lighting shall be designed so that poles
do not interfere with other elements of the approved site such as trees,
landscaping, and parking.



   (H)   Prohibited Lighting.



      (1)   No exterior lighting shall have any blinking, flashing
or fluttering lights or other illuminating device that has a changing light
intensity, brightness, or color.



      (2)   Ornamental style light fixtures that rely on prismatic
glass, acrylic, polycarbonate outer globes, or glass refractors as the only
lamp shielding shall be prohibited.



      (3)   Awnings used for building accents over doors, windows,
or similar features, shall not be internally illuminated (i.e., from
underneath or behind the awning).



      (4)   Flood lights/lamps, spot lights or any other similar
lighting shall not be used to illuminate buildings or other site features
unless approved as an integral architectural element on the development plan.



      (5)   Illuminated tubing or strings of lights outlining
property lines, rooflines, or wall edges of buildings are prohibited except
as provided in § 151.175(Q), holiday lighting.



      (6)   Exposed neon lights.



      (7)   Fixtures that create off-site glare.



      (8)   Fixtures deemed architecturally inconsistent with the
Design Guidelines.



   (I)   Final inspection.  When a lighting plan is required,  the
owner/builder must supply the town with a final letter of certification from
the lighting engineer, qualified lighting professional, or lighting
manufacturer verifying that all site lighting is installed according to town
standards, the approved plans, and any applicable conditions before
certificates of occupancy are released.



(Ord. 2009-16, passed 11-23-09)



HISTORIC DISTRICT



§ 151.195  H-1 HISTORIC ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   It is the intent of this District to preserve the historic
sites and structures of the Town of Collierville. The requirements of the
District are designed to protect and preserve historic and/or architectural
value; create an aesthetic atmosphere; strengthen the economy; promote
cultural welfare; stabilize and improve property values; encourage
rehabilitation and compatible new construction and development; protect and
enhance the Town’s attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and
stimulus to business and industry thereby provided; and promote education and
patriotic heritage of the present and future citizens of the community.



   (B)   In order to achieve the intent of the H-1 Historic District,
as shown on the Official Zoning Map of Collierville, Tennessee, the following
regulations shall apply:



      (1)   Any use permitted by the existing zoning classification
is also permitted by the H-1 Historic District;



      (2)   The H-1 District classification may be superimposed in
addition to existing zoning classification where the following criteria shall
be determined to exist by the Historic District Commission;



      (3)   The quality of significance in American history,
architecture, archeology and culture is present in districts, sites,
buildings and structures that possess integrity of location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and:



         (a)   That are associated with events that have made a
significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history;



         (b)   That are associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past;



         (c)   That embody the distinctive characteristics of a
type, period or method of construction or that represent the work of a
master, that possess high artistic values or that represent a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or



         (d)   That have yielded or may be likely to yield
archaeological information.



(`00 Code, § 11-1301)  (Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-10-03)



§ 151.196  HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Purpose.  The Historic District Commission is organized for
the purposes of preserving historic and/or architectural value, creating an
aesthetic atmosphere, strengthening the economy, promoting cultural welfare,
stabilizing and improving property values, encouraging rehabilitation and
compatible new construction and development, protecting and enhancing the
town’s attractions to tourists and visitors, and promoting education and
patriotic heritage.



   (B)   Membership.



      (1)   The Historic District Commission shall consist of seven
members (hereinafter referred to as “Members” or as a “Member”)
nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. 
The Historic District Commission shall consist of a representative of a local
patriotic or historic organization, an architect (if available), one member
of the Town of Collierville Planning Commission who is a member of the
Planning Commission at the time of his/her appointment to the Historic
District Commission, and one Historic District property owner.  At least two
of the following disciplines shall also be represented on the Historic
District Commission if individuals satisfying these categories are available:



         (a)   Architectural history;



         (b)   Law;



         (c)   History;



         (d)   Archaeology;



         (e)   Landscape architecture;



         (f)   Real estate;



         (g)   Planning; or



         (h)   Engineering;



and the remaining members shall be appointed from the community in general. 
All members shall have a demonstrated interest, experience, or knowledge in
historic preservation. 



      (2)   The terms of all Members shall be five years, and the
Members’ terms shall be arranged so that the term of at least one Member
but not more than two members shall expire each year.  Despite the
expiration of a Member’s terms, he or she shall continue to serve until his
or her successor is elected and qualified.



      (3)   All Members shall serve without compensation.



      (4)   A majority of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may vote
to remove a Member or Members.



      (5)   Any vacancy by reason of death, resignation, or other
cause shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member through
appointment by the Mayor within sixty days of the vacancy, subject to
confirmation by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (C)   Officers.



      (1)   The Historic District Commission shall have a
Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson, a Secretary, a Parliamentarian, and a
Historian (sometimes collectively referred to hereinafter as the
“Officers” or each, individually, as an “Officer”).



      (2)   The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the
Historic District Commission.  The Chairperson shall have the power to
appoint committees, call special meetings and to perform such other duties as
may be ordered by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen or the Historic District
Commission. Subject to division (D)(6), the Chairperson shall have the
privilege of discussing all matters before the Historic District Commission
and to vote thereon.



      (3)   The Vice-Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and
assume all duties and powers of the Chairperson in the absence of the
Chairperson.



      (4)   The Secretary shall oversee staff as they keep the
official minutes, maintain a record of membership attendance, and notify the
membership of the meeting date, time, and location.  In the absence of the
Secretary, the Chairperson shall appoint any Member to serve as temporary
secretary. The Secretary shall preside at all meetings and assume all duties
and powers of the Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson and he
Vice-Chairperson.



      (5)   The Parliamentarian shall advise the Commission during
meetings regarding Robert’s Rules of Order, Revised.



      (6)   The Historian shall advise Town staff and the Commission
during meetings regarding the Town of Collierville’s history.



      (7)   Nomination of Officers shall be made from the Members
and the Members shall elect Officers at an annual organizational meeting to
be held in February.



      (8)   The nominee for each office receiving a majority vote of
the Members present shall be declared elected and shall take office
immediately following election.



      (9)   All officers shall be elected for a term of one year and
shall serve for a term of one year or until his or her successor is
elected.  All Officers shall be eligible to succeed themselves.  Vacancies
shall be filled immediately for any unexpired term by the regular election
procedure.



      (10)   An Officer may resign at any time by delivering his or
her resignation to the Historic District Commission.  An Officer’s
resignation shall be effective when delivered unless it specifies a later
effective date.  If an Officer’s resignation is made effective at a later
date and the Historic District Commission accepts the future effective dare,
the Historic District Commission may fill the pending Officer vacancy before
the effective date if the Historic District Commission provides that the
successor shall not take office until the effective date.



   (D)   Meetings.



      (1)   Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson or
by the majority of the membership.



      (2)   All meetings and the records of such meeting shall be
open to the general public.  the Historic District Commission may request
any member of Town staff, the Town Attorney, or any other individual whose
attendance is deemed desirable, to be present at any meeting of the Historic
District Commission.  Notice of such meeting shall be published in a
newspaper in general circulation within the Town limits at least three days
prior to the date of such meeting.



      (3)   Four Members shall constitute a quorum.  A quorum shall
be present before any business is transacted.



      (4)   Each Member is entitled to cast a vote.  The concurring
vote of a majority of those Members present shall constitute final action of
the Historic District Commission on any matter before the Historic District
Commission.



      (5)   A record of the vote of each Member on each question
shall be kept as a part of the minutes of the Historic District Commission. 
If a Member is absent or it a Member does not vote, the record shall indicate
such fact.



      (6)   If any Member shall have a direct or indirect personal
interest in any business before the Historic District Commission, such Member
shall disclose the interest to the Historic District Commission and shall be
disqualified from voting upon this business.



      (7)   The Historic District Commission shall consider only
such items of business at the meeting that have been presented to the Members
48 hours prior to the meeting.  As an exception to the above, business not
on the agenda may be considered only on the following basis:



         (a)   After the Chairperson considers additional
business not on the agenda deserving of special consideration and presents
the general nature of the business without going into specific details; and



         (b)   After a motion for consideration of the business
in question has been made and has received a majority vote of the Members
present.



      (8)   The order of business at a meeting shall be as follows:



         (a)   Roll call to determine that a quorum is present;



         (b)   Reading and approval of the minutes of previous
meeting;



         (c)   Old business;



         (d)   New business;



         (e)   Committee reports;



         (f)   Other business;



         (g)   Adjournment.



      (9)   During a meeting, the case before the Historic District
Commission shall be presented by the Chairperson, by a Member designated by
the Chairperson, or by the Town’s Development Director or his or her
designee.  Interested parties shall then have the opportunity to submit
comments either in person or in writing.



      (10)   A public record shall be kept of those speaking before
the Historic District Commission at all public hearings or presenting
comments in writing.



   (E)   Meeting attendance.



      (1)   Members shall be removed from membership for three or
more meeting absences in a consecutive 12-month period.



      (2)   Absences due to personal sickness, family death,
business travel or emergencies of like nature, shall be recognized as
approved absences and shall not affect the Member’s status on the Historic
District Commission, except that in the event of a long illness or such other
cause for a prolonged absence, the Member shall be replaced.



   (F)   Adoption and amendments.



      (1)   These by-laws shall be in full force and effect at the
first meeting of the Historic District Commission and all subsequent meetings
of the Historic District Commission that follow the adoption of a Resolution
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen approving these by-laws.



      (2)   These by-laws may be amended or repealed only by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (G)   Order of business.  Roberts Rules of Order, revised, shall
apply at all meetings, unless in conflict with provisions set forth in these
by-laws as adopted and/or amended.



(`00 Code, § 11-1302)  (Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-10-03; Am. Res. 2004-31,
passed 6-28-04)



§ 151.197  DESIGNATION OF LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Procedure.



      (1)   The owner or authorized agent of the owner of a property
or properties may apply to the Historic District Commission for inclusion in
(or removal from) the local historic district.  An application shall be
filed with the Department of Development Services and a public hearing held
at a special or regularly scheduled meeting of the Historic District
Commission.



      (2)   The Historic District Commission shall make a
recommendation in writing to the Planning Commission regarding the creation
of any local historic landmarks or local historic district.  A rezoning
application (for the addition of the historic district overlay) shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission.  The designation of such landmarks or
districts will follow the rezoning process.



      (3)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall review and
consider the recommendations of the Historic District Commission and Planning
Commission prior to the establishment of any local historic landmark or
district.  Any action to rezone historic property shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Criteria.  The following criteria shall be used by the
Commission in considering a property for inclusion in (or removal from) the
local historic district:



      (1)   The presence of qualities significant in American
history, architecture, archaeology, and culture.



      (2)   The subject district, site, building, or structure
possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association, and:



         (a)   Are associated with events that have made a
significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or



         (b)   Are associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past; or



         (c)   Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period, or method of construction or that represent the work of a master, or
that posses high artistic values, or that represent a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or



         (d)   Have yielded, or may be likely to yield
archaeological information.



(`00 Code, § 11-1303)  (Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-10-03)



§ 151.198  DESIGN GUIDELINES.



   The Historic District Commission shall use the Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation as the basis for design guidelines
created for each district or landmark.  Design guidelines are criteria and
standards which the Collierville Historic District Commission and the
Development Director must consider in determining the appropriateness of
proposed work within a historic district.



(`00 Code, § 11-1304)  (Ord. 2002-15, passed 9-9-02; Am. Ord. 2003-03,
passed 2-10-03)



§ 151.199  CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.



   (A)   If a Certificate of Appropriateness has been denied to a
property owner within the Historic Zoning District, then the property owner
has the right to present evidence to the Historic District Commission that
such denial creates an economic hardship for the owner.  To prove the
existence of a condition of economic hardship, the applicant must establish,
and the Commission must find, both of the following:



      (1)   The building or site is incapable of earning a
reasonable economic return.  This finding shall be made by considering, and
the applicant shall submit to the Commission, evidence establishing, each of
the following factors:



         (a)   The applicant’s knowledge of the structure or
property’s designation within the Historic District at the time of
acquisition, or whether the property was designated subsequent to acquisition.



         (b)   That by reason of exceptional deterioration of the
structure or by reason of the particular economics of the proposed project,
the strict application of the district specific design guidelines would
result in peculiar and practical difficulties or undue economic hardship upon
the owner to develop the property in accordance with the district specific
design guidelines.



         (c)   That the relief of the peculiar hardships would
not establish substantial detriment to the public good or substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the Historic Zoning Ordinance.



         (d)   That the peculiar hardship would apply to the
particular land or building regardless of the owner.



         (e)   That the peculiar hardship is not created as the
result of an act on the part of the applicant or previous grantor within the
preceding two years.



         (f)   The current level of economic return on the
property as considered in relation to the following:



            1.   Estimate of the cost of the proposed
construction, alteration, demolition, removal or significant landscaping and
an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the
recommendation of the Historic District Commission for modificaton necessary
for the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness.



            2.   Estimated market value from a licensed real
estate appraiser or the County Tax Assessor of the property:



               a.   In its current condition;



               b.   After completion of the construction,
alteration, demolition or removal;



               c.   After any construction or alteration
recommended by the Historic District Commission; and



            3.   In the case of a proposed demolition, an
estimate from an architect, engineer, licensed general contractor, real
estate consultant, appraiser or other professional experienced in the
rehabilitation of historic structures as to the structural soundness and
integrity of the structure and the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or
rescue of the existing structure on the property.



            4.   If the property is income-producing, the
annual gross income from the property for the previous two years including an
itemization of operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years
and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt
services, if any, during the same period.



            5.   All appraisals obtained within the previous
two years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase,
financing or ownership of the property.



            6.   Any listing of the property for sale or rent,
price asked and offers received, if any within the previous two years.



            7.   Real estate taxes for the previous two years.



            8.   Form of ownership or operation of the
property, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not-for-profit
corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other.



      (2)   That the applicant has the present intent and the
secured financial ability, demonstrated by documentary evidence and by those
plans and materials which would otherwise be required in order to secure a
Building permit from the Building Official, to replace the historic building
or structure with a building of comparable size and architectural character
to that proposed for demolition or relocation.



   (B)   Hearing and determination.



      (1)   The Historic District Commission shall review the
application for Certificate of Economic Hardship and schedule a public
hearing in the same manner it would for a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
The Commission may receive testimony concerning economic hardship of the
property at the hearing.  Furthermore, the Historic District Commission may
solicit expert testimony or require that the applicant or the applicant’s
agent make additional submissions concerning the reasonable use or economic
return of the property.



      (2)   Following review by the Historic District Commission and
prior to the close of the public hearing, the Historic District Commission
shall issue or deny the Certificate of Economic Hardship.  Written notice of
the approval or denial of the application for a Certificate of Economic
Hardship shall be provided to the applicant and to the Building Official if a
building permit is needed.  The Historic District Commission shall state in
written notice, all specific guidelines, requirements and conditions to which
the certificate is subject or reasons for the denial of the application. 
The applicant may resubmit an amended application or reapply for a
Certificate of Economic Hardship that takes into consideration the
recommendations of the Historic District Commission.



(`00 Code, § 11-1305)  (Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-10-03) 



§ 151.200  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Certificate of appropriateness required.



      (1)   Any person undertaking construction, alteration,
renovation, relocation, or demolition within the H-1 Historic District must
apply to the Historic District Commission for a certificate of
appropriateness pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, except for:



         (a)   Work undertaken for the purpose of ordinary repair
and maintenance; or



         (b)   Construction, alteration, renovation, relocation,
or demolition of any sign that is not within the scope of the sign
regulations, as set forth in § 151.175, or that is exempt from the sign
permit requirement as set forth in § 151.176(B); provided, however, that a
Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for the construction,
alteration, renovation, relocation, or demolition of convenience signs and
integral signs as defined in § 151.171; or



         (c)   Those activities that the Development Director is
authorized to approve, as described in this chapter.



      (2)   No building permit shall be issued for construction,
alteration, renovation, relocation or demolition to be conducted within the
H-1 Historic District until there has been a determination with respect to
such proposed activities by the Historic District Commission or the
Development Director, as applicable, and, if subject to review by the
Historic District Commission, the issuance of either a Certificate of
Appropriateness or a Certificate of Economic Hardship by the Historic
District Commission.



      (3)   The failure of a property owner or the property
owner’s representative to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness before
commencing construction, alteration, renovation, relocation, or demolition
within the H-1 Historic District or the failure of said parties to comply
with the requirements of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall constitute a
violation of this section.



   (B)   The Historic District Commission or the Development Director,
as applicable, shall issue a Certificate of Appropriateness if, upon
application and after hearing, it finds:



      (1)   That the property owner or property owner’s
representative has established that the proposed alteration or activity
complies with the standards for review set forth by this chapter and
regulated by the Commission and conforms to the purpose and intent of this
chapter; and



      (2)   That creating, changing, demolishing, or altering the
exterior architectural features of the structure, improvement or site upon
which the work is to be done will not have a substantial adverse impact on
the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of either the
property itself or of the neighboring improvements in the district.



   (C)   Administration shall be by the Department of Development
Services and the Historic District Commission.  All items regulated within
the H-1 District shall be submitted to the Commission through the Department
of Development Services through the office of the Director.



   (D)   Building permit required.



      (1)   The issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall
enable the applicant to obtain the appropriate permit from the Building
Official and to proceed with the proposed alteration or activity.



      (2)   All work that required the issuance of a building permit
prior to the establishment of the H-1 Historic District shall constitute to
require a building permit.



      (3)   The following procedure shall be followed for the
issuance of building permits:



         (a)   Applications for building permits within the H-1
Historic District shall be made to the office of the Development Director and
all such applications shall be referred to the Historic District Commission.
The Historic District Commission shall have broad powers to request detailed
construction plans and related data pertinent to thorough review of any
application.



         (b)   Upon receiving an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness the Historic District Commission shall, within 45 days
following the availability of sufficient data, issue to the office of the
Development Director a letter stating its approval with or without attached
conditions or disapproval with the grounds for disapproval stated in
writing.  In reviewing the proposed project, the Commission may confer with
the applicant or the applicant’s authorized representative.



         (c)   The office of the Development Director shall
additionally review applications for building permits (which have received
written approval from the Historic District Commission) in the same manner
review is performed for building permit applications outside of the H-1
Historic District, and final issuance or rejection shall additionally be
based upon the adopted Building Codes of the Town of Collierville.  The fee
charged for building permits within the H-1 Historic District shall conform
to existing fee schedules for building permits in any other zoning district
within the Town of Collierville.



   (E)   Transfer of Certificate of Appropriateness or Certificate of
Economic Hardship prohibited.  The transfer of a Certificate of
Appropriateness or Certificate of Economic Hardship from one structure,
improvement project, or site to another structure, improvement project or
site or from one person to another is prohibited.



   (F)   Effective period of Certificate of Appropriateness and
Certificate of Economic Hardship.  Each determination of Certificate of
Appropriateness or Certificate of Economic Hardship issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall expire and become null and void if the
alteration, construction, repair, removal, relocation or demolition for which
the determination was issued is not completed as required by the Certificate
of Appropriateness and in accordance with the conditions established by the
Historic District Commission.



(`00 Code, § 11-1306)  (Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2005-01,
passed 2-14-05; Am. Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10)



§ 151.201  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   Every person in charge of an improvement in a historical district shall
keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such improvements and all
interior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to
cause the exterior portions of such improvements to deteriorate, decay or
become damaged or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair.



(`00 Code, § 11-1307)  (Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-10-03)



§ 151.202  REMEDYING OF DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.



   In any case where a Town enforcement agency shall order or direct the
construction, removal, alteration or demolition of any improvement in an
historic district for the purpose of remedying conditions determined to be
dangerous to life, health or property, nothing contained in this chapter
shall be construed as making it unlawful for any person, without prior
issuance of a letter of approval pursuant to this subchapter, to comply with
such order of direction. However, the enforcement agency shall give the
Commission notice of any proposed order or direction which affects or may
affect the exterior appearance of any structure or site on or in the environs
of a historic district. Except in cases affecting public health and safety,
the Commission shall be afforded adequate opportunity to review and provide
written comments upon any action proposed by an enforcement agency within a
historic district prior to the initiation of any said action.



(`00 Code, § 11-1308)  (Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-10-03)



§ 151.203  INJUNCTIVE POWERS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Where it appears that the owner or person in charge of an
improvement on a landmark site or preservation site threatens or is about to
do or is doing any work in violation of this subchapter, the Town Attorney
for the Town of Collierville may apply to an appropriate court for an
injunction against such violation or this subchapter. If an order of the
court enjoining or restraining such violation does not receive immediate
compliance, the Town Attorney shall forthwith apply to an appropriate court
to punish said violation pursuant to law.



   (B)   A violation of this subchapter is punishable by a fine not to
exceed $50, or the maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is
greater.  Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.



(`00 Code, § 11-1309)  (Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-10-03)



§ 151.204 AUTHORITY OF DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision contained herein relative to the
duties and authority of the Historic District Commission, the Development
Director shall have the authority to approve, with no further approval being
necessary, applications relative to property in this Historic District
limited to the following:



      (1)   Replacement of existing materials with similar materials;



      (2)   Relocation of a site feature, such as a fence, light
post, or entry pillar;



      (3)   Extension of an existing fence;



      (4)   Removal of a minor non-compliant architectural element,
such as shutters, wall-mounted light fixtures, and building and then the
addition of and/or replacement with a compliant element;



      (5)   Screening of trash receptacles, mechanical and utility
equipment, and other similar unsightly site features or building elements;



      (6)   Relocation of a sign from one property to another
property if said sign meets the requirements of the Town Code and Historic
District Design Guidelines at the new location; and



      (7)   New signs if said sign meets the requirements of the
Town Code and Historic District Design Guidelines.



   (B)   The applicant may appeal an administrative decision related to
a certificate of appropriateness to the Historic District Commission.



(Am. Ord. 2011-11, passed 12-12-11)



§ 151.205  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this subchapter is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalid unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair any
other section, sentence, clause or phrase.



(`00 Code, § 11-1310)  (Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-10-03)



SINGLE FAMILY DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 151.210  SINGLE FAMILY DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. The single family design standards are
intended to protect and preserve the quality and character of the built
environment for single family detached neighborhoods in certain zoning
districts within the Town. More specifically, the purposes of this section
are to:



      (1)   Encourage high quality development as a strategy for
investing in the Town’s future;



      (2)   Preserve and enhance the character of the parts of
downtown Collierville not included within the Historic District;



      (3)   Establish standards for new residential development on
lots located in portions of the Town that are not intended for development as
attached residential; and



      (4)   Provide residential development standards for detached
residential dwellings that are more reflective of the Town’s existing or
planned character.



   (B)   Applicability. All detached residential structures permitted
after (the adoption date of Ordinance 2011-05) within the TN Traditional
Neighborhood District shall comply with the basic residential design
standards established within this section unless required by the Historic
District Design Guidelines, or where modified through the planned development
process (See §§ 151.150 through 151.160, Planned Developments).



   (C)   Residential developments standards for single family detached
dwellings.



      (1)   Building orientation. All new residential development
shall be located parallel to the associated street or be consistent with
existing development patterns rather than being sited at unconventional
angles, unless irregular lot layouts require alternative orientations or the
Planning Commission approves, on a final subdivision plat, special setbacks
to implement a design theme along a block face.







 



   This image depicts dwellings that are parallel to the street and
consistent with one another.



      (2)   Setbacks. Setbacks shall be in accordance with the table
in § 151.027(D).



      (3)   Facade standards.



         (a)   Primary facade materials shall not change at
outside corners and shall continue along any side facade visible from a
street right-of-way; however, materials may change where side or rear wings
met the main body of the dwelling.







 



   The dwelling on the left demonstrates appropriate exterior wrapping
while the image on the right depicts a dwelling with inappropriate material
changes at the corner of the building.



         (b)   Materials changes may occur along a horizontal
line or where two forms meet. It is acceptable, however, that change of
materials occur as accents around windows, doors, cornices, at corners, or as
a repetitive pattern.



         (c)   Vinyl and aluminum siding are prohibited in the TN
Traditional Neighborhood District.







 



   This image demonstrates how material changes should occur along
straight lines.



      (4)   Foundations.



         (a)   The average finished floor elevation of facades
that face a street or an open space shall be a minimum of 18 inches above
grade.







 



   Residential structures incorporate raised foundations, as depicted in
the photo to the right, to give a vertical orientation and well-proportioned
appearance, as well as to provide privacy for occupants.



         (b)   Exposed foundation walls or piers shall be clad in
face brick, stone, stucco, or some other masonry material accurately
imitating these materials.



         (c)   In cases where piers are used, painted or stained
latticework screening shall be installed between piers on front and side
building facades.



         (d)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the use of
slab foundations, provided:



            1.   The outer edge of the slab is clad in the
materials required in this section; and



            2.   It extends to the minimum required height
above grade.



      (5)   Porches. If porches are provided, they shall have a
minimum useable depth of at least six feet.



      (6)   Windows.



         (a)   Windows on primary facades shall be vertically
proportioned so that the vertical dimension is greater than the horizontal
dimension, and vertically aligned between floors. Exceptions may be approved
to accomplish a particular architectural theme, such as in the prairie style.



         (b)   Where used, shutters shall be proportioned to
cover one-half the width of the window from each side or the total window
from one side.







 



   The drawing on the right demonstrates appropriate vertical alignment
for windows.



      (7)   Materials.



         (a)   Single family detached dwellings located in a
recorded subdivision shall use materials that are compatible with other
dwellings within that subdivision.



         (b)   The use of aluminum siding, corrugated metal
siding, or exposed smooth-faced concrete block is prohibited. High-quality
metal siding (e.g., stainless steel, copper, brushed nickel, brass, and the
like) may be approved on a case-by-case basis by the Development Director or
his/her designee.



         (c)   Vinyl siding and synthetic stucco (EIFS) shall be
prohibited in the TN Traditional Neighborhood District.



         (d)   Where two or more materials are proposed to be
combined on a facade, the heavier and more massive elements shall be located
below the lighter elements (i.e., brick shall be located below stucco). It is
acceptable to provide the heavier material as a detail on the corner of a
building or along cornices or windows.







 



   These homes demonstrate how heavier materials (brick) should be located
below lighter materials (wood siding).



      (8)   Chimneys. If visible from a street or alleyway, the
exterior building material of chimneys shall meet the following.



         (a)   Chimneys located on an exterior wall shall match
the building material of the foundation, or be stone or brick.



         (b)   Chimneys located on a roof may be of stone, brick,
fibrous cement or stucco.



      (9)   Colors.



         (a)   Detached residential structures shall not use more
than three main colors.



         (b)   Accent or trim colors shall not be included within
the three color limit.







 



   The detached residence above uses two main colors and one trim color.



         (c)   Overly bright, neon, or “day-glow” colors
shall not be used as main or accent colors on a detached residential
structure.



      (10)   Reverse frontage. Reverse frontage lots shall be
prohibited in the TN Traditional Neighborhood District unless there are
topographic constraints that prevent otherwise. In the Historic District a
certificate of appropriateness shall be required for any reverse frontage
design. Any reverse frontage lots shall include a full streetscape along the
nonaccessible side of the development, to include, at a minimum, street
trees, fences and/or walls, evergreen shrubs, street furniture, and
sidewalks. (See Landscape Plates in the Town of Collierville Design
Guidelines.)







 



   The image above shows how reverse frontage lots can be screened with
evergreen landscaping and fencing.



      (11)   Primary entrance orientation.



         (a)   Dwellings shall be oriented so that the primary
entrance faces either the street or an open space, such as a square.







 



   The primary entrances to the dwellings above face an open space.



         (b)   In the case of corner lots, the primary entrance
shall face the street from which the structure derives its street address.



         (c)   Alternative orientations may be considered by the
Development Director or his/her designee in cases where such alternative
orientations are consistent with existing adjacent development.



      (12)   Garage standards. Attached and detached garages and
carports shall incorporate exterior materials, design features, and roof
forms compatible with the dwellings they serve, and shall comply with the
following standards.



         (a)   Garage dimensions.



            1.   Individual garage doors intended for vehicles
shall be at least nine feet in width.



            2.   The inside dimensions of garages shall be at
least ten feet wide by 20 feet deep per vehicle.



         (b)   Street-facing garages.



            1.   Any street-facing garage shall include a
minimum of at least three architectural features on the side including the
garage door(s). Examples of such features include, but are not limited to,
the following.



               a.   Carriage house garage doors (counts as
two architectural features);



               b.   Garage detached from principal dwelling
and behind the rear facade (counts as two architectural features);



               c.   Garage doors painted to match the main
or accent color of the structure;



               d.   Ornamental light fixtures flanking the
doors;



               e.   Arbor or trellis flanking garage doors;



               f.   Columns flanking doors;



               g.   Portico treatment;



               h.   Windows (equal to quantity of vehicle
spaces within garage);



               i.   Dormers;



               j.   Overhangs over garage doors;



               k.   Eaves with exposed rafters and/or with
a minimum six-inch projection from the facade plane;



               l.   Roof line changes;



               m.   Decorative gable vent covers; or



               n.   Dentil or other molding.







 



   Street-facing garages that include a variety of architectural features
help the garage blend with the dwelling and reduce garage-dominated views
from the street.



            2.   Garages on corner lots with sides visible
from a street right-of-way shall include architectural details and windows
that mimic the features of the living portion of the building they serve.



            3.   Street-facing garage and carport facades
shall not exceed 50% of the total area of the front facade elevation of the
dwelling, as measured from the ground level to the eave of the roof. In the
case of carports, the perimeter of the carport facade shall define the area
measured, and shall not exceed 50% of the front facade elevation.



            4.   When multiple garage doors on the same facade
are used, a minimum separation of at least one foot shall be provided between
each garage door.



         (c)   Garage location. Street-facing garages shall be a
minimum of 20 feet behind the front facade of the dwelling they serve.







 



   This image demonstrates appropriate street-facing garage placement
behind the front facade.



         (d)   Street-loaded lots. Street-loaded detached
residential lots are lots where garages are accessed from a driveway
extending from the street. These are often used for large lots, such as those
greater than 50 feet in width, or when topography or other site constraints
prohibit alleys.



            1.   Driveways for street-loaded residential lots
shall be no wider than ten feet when in the front yard. Hollywood drives are
encouraged. Houses on corner lots shall have access from a parking courtyard
and shall screen parking areas from the street with hedges, fences or low
walls.



            2.   Street-facing garages shall be a minimum of
20 feet behind the front facade of the dwelling they serve (excluding any
porches, stoops or bay windows).



         (e)   Side-loaded garages.



            1.   Side-loaded garages shall be located a
minimum of three feet behind the front facade of the dwelling they serve.



            2.   Side-loaded garages shall not be located
between the primary entrance to the dwelling and the street providing access
to the lot.



            3.   Side-loaded garages shall be oriented so that
the vehicular entry (garage door) into the garage structure is perpendicular
to the street providing access to the lot.







 



   This image demonstrates appropriate side-loaded garage placement.



         (f)   Garages serving narrow lots. Alley-loaded
residential lots are lots where garages are accessed from an alley rather
than a front driveway, and are especially common where narrower lot widths,
such as 50 feet or less, are desired. Garages serving detached dwellings on
lots with a width of 50 feet of less shall be:



            1.   Located to the rear of the dwelling; and



            2.   Served by either an alley or a street-loaded
driveway running beside the primary dwelling to the rear of the dwelling. If
served by an alley, the garage shall be set back either:



               a.   A minimum of 20 feet from the edge of
the alley pavement so as to create an outdoor parking pad between the garage
and the alley;



               b.   Five feet from the edge of the alley
pavement with an additional ten-foot by 20-foot paved parking pad adjacent to
the garage; or



               c.   Five feet from the edge of the alley
pavement with no parking between the garage and the alley.







 



   Alley-loaded garages should be located so as to ensure that parked
vehicles do not encroach into the alley.



         (g)   Garage access. Regardless of the location or
orientation of a garage, the paving area associated with the garage shall be
sufficient to allow a vehicle to maneuver into or out of the garage.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-23-11)



DESIGN REVIEW COMMISSION



§ 151.240  CREATION AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   A Design Review Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
“Commission,” is established to develop specific review procedures for
the construction and development of all structures, including accessory
structures having an influence upon the appearance and environment of the
Town of Collierville, except for single family residential detached homes.
Signage is not included in those structures reviewed by the Commission.



   (B)   It is the purpose of the Commission to ensure that proposed
structures conform to proper design standards and the general character of
the area in which they are located in order to accomplish the following
objectives:



      (1)   Proper development of the Town and its existing
environment in an effort to prevent the harmful effects of improper
appearances of buildings erected in the Town and thus to promote the health,
safety, comfort, general welfare and prosperity of the community;



      (2)   Promotion of the community’s attractiveness and
functional utility as a place to live and to work;



      (3)   Conservation of property values and protection for the
public investment within the Town;



      (4)   Maintenance of a balance among land uses through the
implementation of appropriate  community appearance standards to ensure that
new development does not impair existing property values; and



      (5)   Protection of the special and unique architectural and
educational characteristics located in the Town’s older sections.



(`00 Code, § 11-1501)  (Am. Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10)



§ 151.241  MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT, TERMS AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Commission shall consist of seven members and shall be appointed or
reappointed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen for a term of one year which
shall expire on December 31 of each year or until their successors are
appointed. The membership shall include one Alderman and at least four
members shall be recognized practitioners in any one of the following fields:
architecture, engineering, landscape architecture, urban planning or retail
business.  The Mayor shall designate one of the members of the Commission to
be Chairperson. Members shall be removed from membership for three or more
absences from regular scheduled meetings in a consecutive 12-month period. A
member may be removed from membership by a majority vote of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen. If a vacancy is created or a new appointment is
necessary, resulting from an increase of the membership, the Mayor shall
appoint a replacement member to fill the unexpired term or the additional
member.



(`00 Code, § 11-1502)  (Ord. passed 5- -02)



§ 151.242  MEETINGS.



   Meetings of the Commission shall be held at least one time per month
and at such other times as the Commission may determine necessary. A majority
of the membership shall constitute a quorum, and a quorum shall be required
to transact any business of the Commission. The Commission shall keep minutes
of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if
a member is absent or fails to vote, indicating such fact. Copies of these
minutes shall be transmitted to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen monthly. The
Commission, by majority vote, may adopt rules and regulations governing its
procedures.



(`00 Code, § 11-1503)



§ 151.243  DEVELOPMENT SUBJECT TO COMMISSION REVIEW.



   (A)   Whether or not a building permit is required pursuant to this
chapter, plans, in form and substance, as specified by the Commission and as
required in § 151.246, shall be submitted to the Commission or the
Development Director in the case of a minor site plan for:



      (1)   Changes in exterior appearance, exterior alteration,
moving, demolition or change in use for either land, buildings or buildings
and land of all categories other than single family residential detached
construction;



      (2)   Planned unit developments, as defined by §§ 151.150et
seq.;



      (3)   Fences, signs, landscaping requirements and curb cuts
not otherwise reviewable pursuant to the foregoing subsections.



   (B)   Pursuant to specific provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Town, the Development Director shall have the authority to review and approve
certain applications relating to the development and improvement of property,
with the applicant having the right to seek approval of the Design Review
Commission if approval is not granted by the Development Director.  The
approval process described herein shall apply without regard to whether a
building permit is required pursuant to this chapter, but in no case shall a
building permit be issued prior to Commission review and approval of these
plans. For categories of development for which Planning Commission review is
also required, applicants shall, at the time of submission of plans to the
Commission, also submit to the Planning Commission such plans, plats or
sketches as may be required by law. Plans subject to the approval both by the
Planning Commission and by the Design Review Commission shall ordinarily be
reviewed first by the Planning Commission, or by the Development Director in
the case of minor site plan.



(`00 Code, § 11-1504)  (Ord. 2005-01, passed 2-14-05; Am. Ord. 2009-12,
passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10)



§ 151.244  DEVELOPMENT EXEMPT FROM DESIGN REVIEW.



   Reconstruction or repairs required for immediate public health or
safety reasons, as determined by the Mayor or his or her designee, are
expressly exempted from the requirements of this subchapter.



(`00 Code, § 11-1505)



§ 151.245  DESIGN GUIDELINES.



   In order to facilitate the purposes of this subchapter, the
Collierville Design Guidelines are incorporated herein by reference. Any
amendment to the Design Guidelines shall be made by resolution approved by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen upon recommendation of the Commission.



(`00 Code, § 11-1506) (Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 10-26-09)



§ 151.246  PROCEDURE; APPLICATION AND REVIEW.



   (A)   Following preliminary site plan review by the Planning
Commission, if required by ordinance, all plans for non-single family
residential detached structures and accessory structures shall be submitted
to the Commission for examination and determination of whether the proposed
structure(s) will conform to proper design guidelines and the general
character of the area and be conducive to the proper development of the Town
and its existing environment. Pursuant to certain provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance, the Development Director is vested with authority to grant
approval, in lieu of the Design Review Commission, of certain contemplated
improvements to property.  Review and approval by the Development Director
and the Commission is a prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit
and/or an occupancy permit. The review process outlined in subsections (1),
(2) and (3) of this section shall apply to every application, except the
provisions of subsection (1), which shall be optional upon the request of the
applicant and approval of the Commission.



      (1)   Applicants for design review certification shall submit
to the Town planning staff photographs, site plans, site landscaping plans,
photometric plans and building elevation plans as specifically required by
the Design Guidelines. The Town planning staff shall review such materials
and make available to the applicant its report and recommendation one week
prior to the date of the hearing before the Commission.



      (2)   Within 45 days following the submission of the
application, the Commission, or Development Director if the matter is one
which can be approved by the Development Director, shall approve, approve
with conditions or disapprove an application for design review certification
unless the Commission or the Development Director, as applicable, and the
applicant agree to a greater time period. Absent such an agreement, all
applications not acted upon by the Commission, as applicable, within 45 days
shall be deemed approved. Minutes shall be kept of the Development Director
or Commission’s proceedings reflecting the findings of the Commission and
reasons for its decisions shall be clearly stated in the record. An approved
application and its supporting exhibits shall be endorsed as approved by the
Commission or its authorized representative.  When a matter is approved by
the Development Director, a writing evidencing such approval shall be made a
part of the permanent records of the Town.



   (B)   Upon approval by the Development Director or the Commission,
as the case may be, the Building Official may issue a building permit and/or
occupancy permit, provided that the applicant has complied with all other
codes, ordinances, regulations and procedures required for such permits. The
reasons for disapproval shall be certified to the applicant in writing along
with the recommended changes to bring the plan into conformance with the
criteria considered. When an application is disapproved by the Development
Director, the applicant shall be advised of his or her right of appeal to the
Commission, and if not approved by the Commission, the applicant shall be
advised of his or her further right to appeal.



(`00 Code, § 11-1507) (Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 2010-01,
passed 8-23-10)



§ 151.247  STANDARDS.



   In addition to such further elements as may be required by the Design
Guidelines, the criteria to be considered by the Development Director or the
Commission in determining whether proposed developments will conform to
proper design standards and the general character of the area are as follows:



   (A)   The plan for the proposed development is in conformity with
the appropriate and acceptable architectural standards, of the general
character of the surrounding neighborhood in the community and the orderly
development of the community;



   (B)   The plan for the proposed development indicates that it is
reasonably protected against external and internal noise, vibrations and
other conditions which might tend to make the environment less desirable;



   (C)   The proposed development is not, in its exterior design and
appearance, of inferior quality such as to cause the nature of local
environment to materially depreciate in appearance and value;



   (D)   The proposed development is in compliance with all applicable
ordinances and statutes governing the location and appearance of buildings
and structures.



(`00 Code, § 11-1508) (Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 10-26-09)



§ 151.248  APPEALS.



   In the event an application is conditionally approved or is disapproved
by the Commission, the applicant may appeal the Commission’s action to the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board not
more than 45 days after the date of the Commission’s action. The Board of
Mayor and Aldermen, at such hearing, shall listen to all parties who desire
to be heard, consider all evidence, deliberate and approve, approve with
conditions or disapprove the application by written statement setting forth
its reasons for its action. If the Board of Mayor and Aldermen approves or
conditionally approves the application, the Building Official may issue a
building permit and/or occupancy permit forthwith, provided the applicant has
complied with all other codes, ordinances, regulations and procedures
required for building permits.



(`00 Code, § 11-1509)



§ 151.249  CONTINUING MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Following the construction or modification of any development
the design of which is approved pursuant to this subchapter, the development
shall be maintained in accordance with the following standards:



      (1)   Buildings and appurtenances shall be cleaned and painted
or repaired as required to maintain an attractive appearance;



      (2)   Illuminated elements of buildings shall be replaced as
required to maintain the effect for which designed;



      (3)   Landscape materials, other than plantings, which have
deteriorated shall be reconstituted or replaced;



      (4)   Plantings shall be kept watered, fed, cultivated and
pruned to give a healthy appearance during all seasons. Plant materials which
have deteriorated shall be replaced with healthy plantings;



      (5)   Parking areas shall be kept in an orderly state,
properly marked and clear of litter and debris; and



      (6)   Vacant property shall be kept free of refuse and debris
and shall have the vegetation cut periodically during the growing season.



   (B)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this section after
a notice of noncompliance has been issued by the Building Official, with a
stated time frame for compliance, shall be deemed a violation of this
subchapter and shall be subject to the revocation of any permit, license,
certificate or other approval initially issued by the Town as a basis for
construction and/or occupancy of the development on which the violation has
occurred.



(`00 Code, § 11-1510)  (Am. Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10)



§ 151.250  PROJECT DEVELOPMENT CONTRACTS.



   A project development contract, incorporating, among other elements,
any conditions or requirements imposed on the applicant pursuant to this
subchapter, must be executed by and between the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
and the applicant before a building permit can be issued for any development
for which Town ordinances or any other law requires a project development
contract.



(`00 Code, § 11-1511)



TREE PROTECTION AND GRADING



§ 151.265  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to promote the
health, safety and public welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of
Collierville and consistent with forestry policy and practice for urban areas
promulgated by the Division of Forestry of the State of Tennessee. This
subchapter is based on the premises that trees are part of our heritage and
our future and that they are an essential part of the quality of life within
the Town.



   (B)   The standards herein are established in order to create
greater human comfort by providing shade, to cool the air and otherwise
temper the effects of summer heat, to restore oxygen to the atmosphere, to
reduce glare and noise levels, to promote clean air quality by increasing
dust infiltration, to improve surface drainage and minimize flooding, to
ensure that activities in one area do not adversely affect activities within
adjacent areas, to emphasize the importance of trees as a visual screen, to
beautify and enhance improved and undeveloped land, to maintain the ambience
of the Town and to ensure that tree planting and removal does not reduce
property values, all of which aide in protecting the health, safety and
general welfare of the Town.



   (C)   This subchapter shall apply to all public as well as private
developments to include developers, builders and/or owners of real property
involved with the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building or
structure, as well as the grading in anticipation of such development.
Exclusions to this subchapter are homeowners of an existing single family
residence on parcels of land within an approved and recorded subdivision.



(`00 Code, § 11-1601)



§ 151.266  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be administered by the Development
Director. The Development Director shall be supported by other departments
and divisions within the Town.



   (B)   Specific areas of responsibility are assigned as follows.



      (1)   Department of Development Services.



         (a)   Provide overall enforcement of this section
through the Building Official.



         (b)   Provide inspection of tree planting requirements
in new residential areas.



      (2)   Planning and Engineering Divisions.



         (a)   Review development plans in accordance with the
provisions of this section as a part of the review process of site
development plans.



         (b)   Provide inspection of development sites to ensure
compliance with grading and tree protection requirements.



   (C)   Planning Commission and Design Review Commission review
development plans for conformance of this subchapter.



(`00 Code, § 11-1602)



§ 151.267  PROTECTION OF EXISTING TREE COVER.



   (A)   In all developments due regard shall be shown for landmarks
and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and
value to the property, as well as reflect the Town’s commitment to trees.
This includes the preservation of existing trees whenever practical and the
judicious planting of new tree materials.



   (B)   No trees shall be removed from any development unless the
trees are within a dedicated street right-of-way, within a recorded utility
or drainage easement or are required to be removed in accordance with grading
plans approved by the Town’s development staff.



   (C)   Residential: within any Tree Protection Zone, no existing
trees eight inches in diameter at a point four and one-half feet above the
ground level shall be removed. A Tree Protection Zone being any distance
beyond ten feet from the foundation of a residence for the front and rear
yards.



   (D)   Adequate protection shall be given to trees to be preserved on
a construction site and shall follow guidelines referenced in the Town of
Collierville Urban Forestry Plan.



      (1)   Grading, filling and trenching should be adjusted to
reduce root or soil compaction.



      (2)   Prior to any tree removal or commencement of
construction all trees on public or private construction sites that are
scheduled for preservation shall be flagged by a colored ribbon and be
guarded by a temporary barrier and shall remain until completion of work. The
temporary barrier shall be placed a minimum of three feet high and shall
protect as much as possible the drip-line of any protected tree or cluster of
trees.



      (3)   No materials, trailers, vehicles, equipment or chemicals
shall be stored, operated or dumped within the protected area.



      (4)   When removing branches from protected trees to clear for
construction or pruning to restore the nature shape of the tree, the
guidelines of the National Arborist Association Pruning Standards shall be
followed. Protected trees shall be pruned, sprayed and fertilized as
necessary to compensate for any loss of roots and to stimulate root growth
and prevent disease. Any damage to tree crowns or root systems shall be
repaired immediately after damage occurs.



(`00 Code, § 11-1603)



§ 151.268  TREE PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Residential subdivision development. In new residential
subdivisions where front yard setbacks are void of trees, the
developer/builder shall install street trees to the following specifications.



      (1)   General. The minimum tree planting requirements within
the required front yard setback shall include a deciduous tree two inch
caliper measured at a point six inches above the ground level (American
Association of Nursery Standards of Measurement) for every 40 feet of
frontage. A maximum of two trees shall be required per lot with the actual
number depending on lot width as specified on the final subdivision plan.



      (2)   Species selection. All street trees shall be of a kind
(species) referenced in the Town’s Urban Forestry Plan and Design Review
and Guidelines Manual. Trees scheduled for planting must be quality specimens
whose physical site requirements are compatible to the intended
development.  When practical, builders shall confer with prospective home
builders on their preference of tree specimens.



      (3)   Installation/maintenance.



         (a)   Residential subdivisions.  All trees planted
under the provisions of this subchapter must be installed within the
guidelines of the International Society of Arboriculture. If a tree results
in death as a result of improper installation within 60 days from the date
the tree is installed, then the developer or builder will be responsible for
replacement.



         (b)   Other than single family. Tree replacement for all
land uses other than single family shall be in conformance with § 151.249
and Section 2.6, Landscape, of the Design Guideline Manuals for the Town of
Collierville.



   (B)   Utility easement reservation.



      (1)   No street trees other than those with a mature height of
less than 25 feet shall be planted within 20 feet of any overhead utility
wire.



      (2)   No street tree shall be planted over or within ten
lateral feet of any dedicated easement, including underground water line,
sewer line, transmission line or other utility, excluding telephone, cable TV
and individual service lines.



   (C)   Location requirements.



      (1)   In street plantings, no tree shall be planted closer
than ten feet to a fire hydrant, utility pole or street light. No tree shall
be planted within 15 feet of a driveway/street intersection or within a
visibility triangle as defined under Article III A J 2 of the Town of
Collierville Subdivision Regulations.



      (2)   Trees planted adjacent to sidewalks or curbs should not
be planted any closer than three feet for small trees, five feet for medium
trees and seven feet for large trees.



(`00 Code, § 11-1604)  (Ord. 95-13, passed - -)



§ 151.269  GRADING PLAN PERMIT.



   (A)   General. It shall be unlawful to remove any tree or to
commence any grading, earthmoving or changing of elevation of property
without first having applied for and received a permit in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   When required. A permit shall be required for all grading,
earthmoving, changing of elevation of property or removal of 15% or more of
trees eight inches or greater in a diameter at a point four and one-half feet
above the ground level.



(`00 Code, § 11-1605)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.270  SUBMITTAL OF APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a permit for grading or tree removal,
an applicant must submit a development plan to the Planning Commission with a
written statement of the proposed work to be accomplished and a site plan
prepared by a licensed surveyor, landscape architect, architect or engineer
which shall include:



      (1)   The general location of tree covered areas within the
site, which shall be shown on all preliminary master subdivision plans and
preliminary site plans;



      (2)   Location, size and variety of all trees proposed to be
removed with a diameter of eight inches or greater at a point four and
one-half feet above the ground level shall be included on all construction
drawings and final site plans;



      (3)   The nature and extent of the proposed grading,
earth-moving or change in elevation; and



      (4)   Applicant’s plan for controlling on-site generated
sedimentation, erosion and runoff;



      (5)   Tree protection measures consistent with the
requirements of this subchapter;



      (6)   The number, species, size (DBH) and location of
additional trees will be planted on the site.



   (B)   A grading permit application shall be approved if it can be
determined that:



      (1)   The grading plan will be performed in accordance with
good flood, erosion and sedimentation control practices and good forestry
practices;



      (2)   The application addresses the preservation of existing
trees;



      (3)   The application provides for sufficient and timely
replanting of trees to compensate for the removal of trees and other
vegetation;



      (4)   The applicant intends to complete development according
to a reasonable time schedule and will take steps to prevent any negative
impacts resulting from the work proposed.



(`00 Code, § 11-1606)



§ 151.271  APPROVAL.



   The Planning Commission shall review and approve or deny the
application within 30 working days after the day same is submitted. In the
event of denial of the application, the specific reasons for denial of same
shall be set forth in writing and a copy of same shall be furnished to the
applicant.



(`00 Code, § 11-1607)



§ 151.272  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   Any dissatisfied applicant shall appeal such denial of his or her
application to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Collierville
within ten days after the date of the notice of denial and shall make written
application to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Collierville to
consider his or her application.



(`00 Code, § 11-1608)



§ 151.273  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this subchapter shall be fined no more than $50 or the maximum
amount permitted by law for each tree and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day of violation of this subchapter. The foregoing
provision relative to a fine shall not in any way prevent the Town of
Collierville from seeking injunctive relief against a violator of this
subchapter, and the violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a nuisance
for injunctive relief purposes.



(`00 Code, § 11-1609)



WELL HEAD OVERLAY PROTECTION DISTRICT



§ 151.285  STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDING OF FACT, PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   Statutory authority.



      (1)   The Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, Section 1428,
requires each state to protect public water supplies which use a groundwater
source. Pursuant to the Act, The United States Environmental Protection
Agency authorized the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation to
enforce the Act, and the Department has adopted rules and regulations.



      (2)   Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-201 et seq., delegated the
responsibility to local governments to adopt regulations to protect public
water supplies.



   (B)   Finding of facts.



      (1)   Protection of ground water supplies can be achieved by
designating areas around well heads within which land use activities are
restricted or prohibited.



      (2)   An area immediately surrounding the water source, which
represents an eight week  capture zone, is necessary and requires a higher
degree of regulation. This area shall be designated Zone 1.



      (3)   An area incorporating and adjacent to Zone 1, which
represents a 40 year capture zone that is determined on the basis of
groundwater flow and direction, is designated as Zone 2.



      (4)   A potential contaminant source inventory has been
completed for wellheads and within the corporate limits of Collierville.
Possible contaminant sources have been identified.



   (C)   Statement of purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public
water supply for the Town of Collierville from land uses which pose a threat
to quality and quantity of groundwater being extracted from Town wells within
the Wellhead Protection Area, Zone 1 and 2. The Town of Collierville creates
the Wellhead Protection Overlay District to implement the stated purposes.



      (2)   The Wellhead Protection Overlay District shall be deemed
an overlay on the existing zoning districts as described and mapped by the
Town of Collierville Zoning Code. 



      (3)   This subchapter is designed to prevent the contamination
or excessive extraction of groundwater resources. The subchapter is also
enacted to prohibit or restrict land use activities that store, handle or
produce regulated substances. This subchapter also requires the use of best
management practices for the protection of ground water sources. The Town of
Collierville designates the Town Engineer as the responsible agent to act for
the Town.



      (4)   The Wellhead Protection Overlay District is enacted to
carry out the objectives of  Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-201 et seq. and to
implement the requirements of state law for protecting groundwater by state
law. The objectives and requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-201 et seq.
are adopted and incorporated by reference.



(`00 Code, § 11-1701)



§ 151.286  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AQUIFER. A geologic formation, group of formations or part of a
formation capable of storing and yielding groundwater to wells or springs.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Operational procedures for handling, storage
and disposal of regulated substances and procedures which are designed to
minimize the impact of certain activities or land uses on groundwater quality
and quantity.



   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS (BZA). The Board of Zoning Appeals is the
quasi-judicial body which determines whether variances may be issued for the
use of property within the Town of Collierville corporate limits.



   CERTIFICATE OF CONFORMANCE. A document issued by the Town Engineer for
the Town of Collierville which certifies that the proposed development meets
or exceeds the requirements of this subchapter.



   CONSTRUCTION. Includes building, erecting, moving or any physical
operations on the premises which are required for construction. Excavation,
fill, paving and the like shall be considered part of construction.



   CONTAMINATE. To have unwanted chemicals or bacteria mixed into a water
system formerly void of such substances.



   EXCESSIVE EXTRACTION. A nonmunicipal withdrawal of groundwater from an
aquifer that results in or may result in the lowering of the water level or
piezometric surface to such an extent as to interfere with the normal
operation of existing private, industrial or municipal water wells. Excessive
extraction is also defined as withdrawal from an aquifer which will lead to
desaturation of the aquifer or desaturation to a point where consolidation of
the aquifer material occurs, preventing any further recharge of the aquifer
from occurring.



   GROUND WATER. The water contained within the earth’s surface that has
penetrated from precipitation and from infiltration by streams, ponds and
lakes.



   GROUND WATER CONTAMINATION. Presence of any substance designated by the
U.S. EPA or the State of Tennessee as a primary or secondary water quality
parameter in excess of the maximum allowable contaminant level (MCL) or as
regulated under the Primary Drinking Water Standards of the Safe Drinking
Water Act.



   GROUND WATER INSTITUTE (GWI). A research organization within the Herff
College of Engineering at the University of Memphis, established as a center
of expertise in ground water science for the mid-south area.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. A material which is defined in one or more of the
following categories.



      (1)   Ignitable. A gas, liquid or solid which may cause fires
through friction, absorption of moisture or which has low flash points.
Examples: white phosphorous and gasoline.



      (2)   Carcinogenic. A gas, liquid or solid which is normally
considered to be cancer causing or mutagenic.  Examples: PCBs in some waste
oils.



      (3)   Explosive. A reactive gas, liquid or solid which will
vigorously and energetically react uncontrollably if exposed to heat, shock,
pressure or combinations thereof. Examples: dynamite, organic peroxides and
ammonium nitrate.



      (4)   Highly toxic. A gas, liquid or solid so dangerous to man
as to afford an unusual hazard to life.  Examples: parathion and chlorine
gas.



      (5)   Moderately toxic.  A gas, liquid or solid which,
through repeated exposure or in a single large dose, can be hazardous to
humans.  Examples: atrazine.



      (6)   Corrosive. Any material, whether acid or alkaline, which
will cause severe damage to human tissue, or in case of leakage might damage
or destroy other containers of hazardous materials and cause the release of
their contents. Examples: battery acid and phosphoric acid.



   LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT. The Town of Collierville is the local government
unit responsible for protecting the ground water resources regulated by this
subchapter.



   PERCOLATION RATE. The rate at which water flows or trickles through
porous soils, as determined by a percolation test.



   POLLUTANT TRAVEL TIME. The time required by pollutants to travel from
one point to another.



   POTABLE WATER. Water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes, meeting current state and federal drinking water standards.



   RESPONSIBLE AGENT OF THE TOWN. The Town of Collierville Town Engineer,
as the responsible agent for the Town, reviews all development plans within
the Wellhead Protection Area, makes any necessary interpretation of Wellhead
Protection Area, Zone 1 and Zone 2 and reviews any other related matters that
may arise in the administration of this subchapter.



   SHELBY COUNTY GROUND WATER QUALITY CONTROL BOARD (SCGWQCB). A
regulatory Board consisting of appointed individuals which has jurisdiction
within Shelby County to manage Wellhead Protection Guidelines, developed by
TDEC, pertaining to the protection of the public water supplies which utilize
a ground water source within the boundaries of Shelby County.



   STORM WATER DRAINAGE. A sewer or other system for conveying surface
runoff due to storm events and unpolluted groundwater or surface water,
including that collected by cellar drains, but excluding sanitary sewage and
industrial waste.



   SURFACE RUNOFF. That part of the precipitation that passes over the
surface of the soil to the nearest surface stream without first passing
beneath the surface.



   TENNESSEE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION (TDEC). A state
agency, authorized by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to
adopt and enforce Section 1428 of the amendments to the Federal Safe Drinking
Water Act which mandates the protection of public water supplies that utilize
a ground water source.



   TOWN OF COLLIERVILLE WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY MAP. A map generated
by the Town of Collierville illustrating the location of Wellhead Protection
Areas, Zone 1 and Zone 2.  The map is available for inspection at the office
of the Collierville Department of Development.



   TRAVEL TIME CONTOUR. Locus of points from which water takes an equal
amount of time to reach a given destination such as a well or wellfield. 



   WASTEWATER. Any combination of water carried wastes from institutional,
commercial and industrial establishments and residences, together with any
storm, surface water or groundwater as may be present.



   WATER TABLE. The upper surface of a zone of saturation except where
that surface is formed by an impermeable barrier.



   WELL, ABANDONED. An abandoned or unused well may be defined under one
or more of the following:



      (1)   A well which has been out of service continuously for
one year or more and does not meet the definition of an inactive well;



      (2)   A monitoring well from which no measurement or sample
has been taken for a period of three years;



      (3)   A well which is in such a state of disrepair that it
cannot be made operational;



      (4)   A test hole or exploratory boring 24 hours after
construction and testing work has been completed;



      (5)   A cathodic protection well that is no longer functional
for its original purpose;



      (6)   Any boring that cannot be satisfactory completed as a
well.



   WELL, ACTIVE. A well that has been utilized at least once in the
preceding 12 months for the extraction of groundwater.



   WELL, INACTIVE. An inactive well or standby well means a well that has
not been used for a period of one year or more for the production of
groundwater, but is maintained in such a condition that it could be so used,
a monitoring well maintained for such use or a cathodic protection well
maintained for such use. 



   WELLFIELD. A tract of land, either continuous or disjointed, which
contains a number of existing or proposed wells for supplying water as
specified in the wellfield protection maps.



   WELLFIELD AREA OF CONTRIBUTION. Area of the aquifer where groundwater
flow is diverted to a pumping well due to a lowering of the water table.



   WELLFIELD RECHARGE AREA. The area from which groundwater flows directly
to the wellfield area of contribution.



   WELLHEAD. The specific location of the source area for water which is
withdrawn from a well or spring.



   WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA (WPA). The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water well or wellfield, supplying a public water system,
through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and reach
such well or wellfield. The areas of Collierville, designated as Wellhead
Protection Area, Zone 1 and Zone 2.



   WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT. An overlay district on the
existing zoning districts which represents the area covered by Wellhead
Protection Areas, Zone 1 and Zone 2.



   ZONE OF CONTRIBUTION. The area from which groundwater flows to a
pumping well.



(`00 Code, § 11-1702)



§ 151.287  AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Application. The regulations set forth in this subchapter
shall apply to all land uses and activities located or proposed within the
area delineated as the Wellhead Protection Area in the Town of Collierville
on a map available for inspection at the office of the Department of
Development and as defined in § 151.286. The Wellhead Protection Area
consists of Wellhead Protection Area Zone 1 and Wellhead Protection Area Zone
2.



   (B)   Basis for establishing the Wellhead Protection Area.



      (1)   The Tennessee Wellhead Protection Regulations (Rule
1200-5-1-.34) require that every Public Water System (PWS) in the state set
up a two-zone protection system for its groundwater source.



      (2)   The Ground Water Institute (GWI) at the University of
Memphis and the Mayor and Board of Collierville, utilizing the groundwater
flow model, have established a two-zone protection system for the Town of
Collierville’s groundwater resources.



   (C)   Requirement for development permit.



      (1)   Prior to site plan approval by the Planning Commission,
the applicant shall obtain a certificate of conformance with this chapter
from the Town Engineer of the Town of Collierville in a timely manner for all
proposed land-use activities in Wellhead Protection Areas, Zone 1 and Zone 2
within the Town of Collierville.



      (2)   If, upon review of the site plan, the Town Engineer
determines that additional information is necessary to completely evaluate
the proposed development, the Town Engineer may defer the development plan to
the Shelby County Ground Water Quality Control Board (SCGWQCB) for review and
recommendation prior to approval of the plan for a certificate of conformance.



      (3)   A building permit shall be required in conformity with
this subchapter prior to the commencement of any development activity. No
building permit shall be issued without first obtaining a certificate of
compliance from the Town Engineer.



   (D)   Compliance. No structure or use shall hereafter be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations.



   (E)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this
subchapter, all provisions shall be:



      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;



      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the Board; and



      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes.



   (F)   Interpretation of Wellhead Protection Area.



      (1)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location
of any boundary of Wellhead Protection Area, Zone 1 and Zone 2, the Town
Engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. The Department of
Development shall also be responsible for review of all development plans
within Wellhead Protection Areas and other related matters that may arise in
the administration of this subchapter.



      (2)   The person contesting the location of the Wellhead
Protection Area, Zone 1 and Zone 2, shall be afforded reasonable opportunity
before the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) to present any technical evidence he
or she may wish to support his or her position.  Any proposed adjustments
shall be based on the same modeling techniques defined in Zone 1 and Zone 2
reports approved by TDEC (November 1995) and the latest approved delineation
of Zone 1 and Zone 2 by TDEC. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not consider
any application for a variance from the provisions of this subchapter until
the Department of Development has had an opportunity to review the
application and make a written recommendation to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
The Department of Development shall have 45 working days from the filing of
any application for a variance from this subchapter to review and issue its
recommendation. The application shall be advertised for public hearing for
the next regularly scheduled Board of Zoning Appeals meeting following the
expiration of the 45-day period.



   (G)   Warning and disclaimer of information. The levels of wellhead
protection required by this subchapter are considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations
approved by TDEC. This subchapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Town of Collierville or by any officer or employee thereof of the Ground
Water Institute (GWI) at the University of Memphis and the Shelby County
Ground Water Quality Control Board (SCGWQCB) for any damages to groundwater
resources that result from reliance on this subchapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.



   (H)   Conflict with other provisions.



      (1)   The requirements of Wellhead Protection Area, Zone 1 and
Zone 2, are additional to those contained in the basic underlying zoning
districts.



      (2)   Where any conflicts exist between the provisions of this
subchapter and any other provisions of this chapter and any other article,
code, law and the like of the Town of Collierville, these provisions shall
govern; provided, however, that these provisions shall not be construed as
permitting any use which is prohibited or permitted only as a special
exception within the base zoning district.



   (I)   Applicant’s responsibility. It shall be the responsibility
of any person owning real property and/or owning or operating a business
within the Town of Collierville to make a determination of the applicability
of Wellhead Protection Area Overlay Districts as it pertains to the property
and/or business under his or her ownership or operation and his or her
failure to do so shall not excuse any violations of the sections.



   (J)   Injunctive relief. If any person who engages in nonresidential
activities and stores, handles, uses and/or produces toxic substances listed
in 40 CFR 116 (Designation of Hazardous Substances) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, within the Zone of Contribution, as indicated on the
Town of Collierville Wellhead Protection Overlay Map, without having obtained
a permit as provided for herein or continues to operate in violation of the
provisions of this subchapter, then the Town of Collierville may file an
action for injunctive relief in the circuit court.



   (K)   Severability. Should any part or provision of this subchapter
be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same
shall not effect the validity of this subchapter as a whole or any part
thereof other than the part held to be invalid.



   (L)   Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this
subchapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants
of variance or special exceptions, shall be punishable as provided in §
151.312.



   (M)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This subchapter is not
intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. However, where this subchapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail.



(`00 Code, § 11-1703)



§ 151.288  EXTENT AND DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   Extent of Wellhead Protection Area. The Wellhead Protection
Area (WPA) consists of two areas (WHPA Zone 1 and Zone 2) which are listed
and described below.



      (1)   WPA Zone 1. WPA Zone 1 area extends approximately 100
feet radially from the wellhead, representing an eight week capture zone that
is determined on the basis of groundwater flow direction and recharge.



      (2)   WPA Zone 2. WPA Zone 2 Area extends from the wellhead,
including WPA Zone 1, to include the 40 year capture zone that is determined
on the basis of groundwater flow direction and recharge.



   (B)   Wellhead Protection Area delineation. Boundaries for the
Wellhead Protection Area zones for the Wellhead Protection Overlay Districts
are shown on published maps entitled “Town of Collierville Wellhead
Protection Overlay Map” and are adopted by reference as part of this
subchapter as if the maps were fully described herein. The boundaries of the
Wellhead Protection Areas, Zone 1 and 2, were based on the predicted
groundwater flow pattern in the vicinity of the Town of Collierville
Wellfields.



   (C)   Delineation methodology.



      (1)   Wellhead Protection Areas, Zone 1 and Zone 2, were
delineated using the numerical method to predict the groundwater flow
patterns surrounding the wellhead, using a county wide regional flow model as
defined in Zone 1 and Zone 2 reports approved by TDEC (November 1995). The
eight week capture zone (Zone 1) and the 40 year capture zone were delineated
through the simulation of groundwater flow or movement as a function of
pumping rates, acquifer characteristics and static water table/piezometric
surface conditions.



      (2)   The aquifer characteristics were determined from
geophysical well logs generated for the Town of Collierville, at the time the
wells were drilled, combined with data from adjacent municipalities.



   (D)   Amendment of Wellhead Protection Area.



      (1)   The Wellhead Protection Areas may be reviewed and
modified annually by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, at the beginning of
each calendar year, and the Wellhead Protection Overlay Map may be revised
accordingly.



      (2)   Every three years, substantial changes may be made to
the Wellhead Protection Overlay Map by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, in
order to show the location of new wells, update the Town’s Contaminant
Source Inventory, adopt better modeling techniques and incorporate recent and
more accurate hydrogeologic data.



   (E)   Location of properties. In determining the location of
properties within the Wellhead Protection Areas, Zone 1 and Zone 2, depicted
on the Wellhead Protection Overlay Map, the following rules shall apply.



      (1)   Properties located wholly within one zone reflected on
the Wellhead Protection Area Overlay Map shall be governed by the
restrictions applicable to that particular zone.



      (2)   Properties having parts lying within more than one zone
as reflected on the Wellhead Protection Area Overlay Map shall be governed by
the restrictions applicable to the zone in which that part of the property is
located.



      (3)   Where a time-travel contour which delineates the
boundary between two zones of influence passes through a building, the entire
building shall be considered to be in that zone with the greatest
restrictions as of April 1, 1998.



      (4)   Where any capture zone extends beyond the corporate
limits of the Town of Collierville, the portion of the capture zone within
the adjacent municipality, per prior agreement between the subject
municipality and the Town of Collierville, shall review any proposed or
existing land use utilizing this subchapter.



(`00 Code, § 11-1704)



§ 151.289  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses are allowed in the underlying
zone, subject to the procedures and restrictions in the underlying zone, and
subject to the following additional limitations and restrictions:



      (1)   Permitted uses or changes in use or the enlargement and
alteration of permitted uses existing as of the effective date of this
subchapter and permitted outright in the underlying zone are permitted in the
Wellhead Protection Overlay District when no chemicals or other products are
used, produced by or commonly associated with the activity which, in the
event of introduction of a large quantity thereof into the groundwater might
cause, materially contribute to or create a material risk of any adverse
effect upon the municipal water source;



      (2)   In order to justify a change in permitted uses or the
enlargement and alteration of permitted uses for a property or portion of a
property, a study shall be prepared under the supervision of a Tennessee
registered professional engineer trained and experienced in hydrogeology to
examine the impact of the use upon the municipal water source, under
reasonably possible hydrologic or geologic conditions. Technological evidence
shall be based on the modeling techniques defined in Wellhead Protection
Area, Zone 1 and Zone 2 reports, approved by TDEC (November 1995). The report
from the study shall be submitted to the Town Engineer;



      (3)   To assure that the quality of groundwater shall be
maintained, a groundwater monitoring program shall be established as part of
the report prepared pursuant to subsection (b) above.  The program shall
establish the number of wells to be installed, as well as the duration and
frequency regarding the monitoring of the wells to be installed. All
laboratory test results shall be submitted to the Town Engineer in order to
assure the that satisfactory water is maintained.



   (B)   Prohibited uses.



      (1)   Within the Wellhead Protection Overlay Districts uses
prohibited in the underlying zoning district are also prohibited in the
Wellhead Protection Overlay District.



      (2)   The following uses remain prohibited in the Wellhead
Protection Overlay District, even if they shall be allowed by right in the
underlying zoning district. Manufacturing and production of hazardous
materials, excluding production for on-site usage only. These materials
include:



         (a)   Any hazardous substance or hazardous waste as
listed in the following federal regulations:



            1.   Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act
(SARA) of 1986, Section 302, Extremely Hazardous Substances List (40 CFR 300,
App. A and B);



            2.   Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act Superfund (CERCLA) of 1980, Hazardous
Substances List (40 CFR 302, Table 302.4);



            3.   SARA of 1986, Section 313, Toxic Chemicals
List (40 CFR 372.45); and



            4.   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
of 1976 and 1984 Amendments, Hazardous Wastes List (P and U Categories) (40
CFR 261.33 (e) and (f)).  Note: The lists referenced in subsection (B)(2)
are summarized on the Title III List of Lists - Chemicals Subject to
Reporting Under Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization
Action (SARA) of 1986, published July 1987, U.S. EPA.



         (b)   Nuclear or radioactive materials or wastes.



      (3)   The Town of Collierville shall maintain the right to
determine and document when necessary the contaminants subject to the
provisions of this subchapter.



      (4)   The uses prohibited by this overlay district represents
the state of present knowledge and most common description of the uses. As
other polluting uses are discovered, or other terms of description become
necessary, it is the intention to add them to the list of uses prohibited by
this overlay district. To screen for such other uses or terms for uses, no
use shall be permitted in this overlay district without first submitting its
building, site and operational plans for review and approval under § 151.291.



      (5)   Any request to delete a use from the prohibited list or
allow a use conditionally shall be accompanied by a study as required in
subsection (A)(2) to examine the impact of the use upon the municipal water
source, under reasonably possible hydrologic or geologic conditions.
Technological evidence shall be based on the modeling techniques defined in
Wellhead Protection Area, Zone 1 and Zone 2 reports, approved by TDEC
(November 1995). The report from the study shall be submitted to the Town
Engineer.



   (C)   Special exemptions and limited exclusions. Special exemptions
and limited exclusions from the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this
section are authorized for:



      (1)   Fire, police, emergency medical services, emergency
management center facilities and public utilities of this subchapter;



      (2)   Transportation of any regulated substances through
Wellhead Protection Area, Zone 1, provided the transporting vehicle is in
continuous transit;



      (3)   Storage of fuel and lubricants for vehicle operations,
either in above ground storage tanks meeting EPA regulations for such
facilities or underground storage tanks meeting the requirements of this
subchapter; 



      (4)   Use of certain regulated substances such as pesticides,
herbicides and fungicides in recreational, agricultural, pest control and
aquatic weed control activities shall be allowed, provided that:



         (a)   In all zones, the use is in strict conformity with
the use requirements as set forth in the substances EPA registries and as
indicated on the containers in which the substances are sold;



         (b)   In a Wellhead Protection Area, Zone 1, the use of
any of the regulated substances shall be flagged in the records of the
certified operator supervising the use. The certified operator shall provide
specific notification in writing to the applicators under his or her
supervision that they are working at a site located in a Wellhead Protection
Area, Zone 1, for which particular care is required.  Records shall be kept
of the date and amount of regulated substances used at each location. Records
shall be made available for inspection by the Town Engineer;



         (c)   In Wellhead Protection Area, Zone 1, the regulated
substances shall not be handled during use in a quantity exceeding 700
gallons of formulation; and



         (d)   All nonresidential uses of regulated substances in
Wellhead Protection Areas, Zone 1 and Zone 2, shall comply with all the
provisions of this section. The use of regulated substances on nonresidential
landscape areas smaller than 5,000 square feet shall be exempted from the
provisions of this subchapter. However, commercial, government, institutional
services or the railroad in all zones shall not be required to obtain
individual licenses for every site at which they use the regulated
substances, and these services shall be exempt from the provisions of this
subchapter with regard to the sites they serve, provided the use is in
accordance with subsections (a), (b) and (c) above. 



      (5)   Use, storage, handling and/or production of regulated
substances, associated with non- routine maintenance or repair of property or
equipment, shall be limited to:



         (a)   The aggregate of regulated substances in use,
storage, handling and/or production not to exceed 50 gallons or 400 pounds at
any time; and



         (b)   The total use, storage, handling and/or production
of regulated substances not to exceed 100 gallons or 800 pounds in any 12
month period;



      (6)   Regulated substances associated with medical and
research laboratory uses shall be stored, handled or used in containers not
to exceed five gallons or 40 pounds of each substance and the aggregate
inventory of regulated substances shall not exceed 250 gallons or 2,000
pounds;



      (7)   Regulated substances which are cleaning agents shall be
packaged for personal or household use or be present in the same form and
concentration as a product packaged for use by the general public. The
aggregate inventory of such cleaning agents shall not exceed 100 gallons or
800 pounds at any time. In no case shall regulated substances claimed under
this exclusion include hydrocarbon or halogenated hydrocarbon solvents;



      (8)   Regulated substances associated with construction for
which a permit has been issued, paving or the pouring of concrete shall be
excluded from regulation while present on the construction site, provided
such regulated substances do not pose a real and present danger of
contaminating surface and/or groundwater;



      (9)   Office supplies that are used solely for the operation
of on-site administrative offices, provided such supplies are prepackaged in
a form ready for use;



      (10)   Retail sales establishments that store and handle
hazardous substances for resale in their original unopened containers;



      (11)   Geotechnical borings;



      (12)   Residential activities;



      (13)   Public utility emergency generating facilities above
ground, except that permanently installed fuel storage facilities shall meet
EPA regulations for such facilities; and



      (14)   Provided, however, that the Town of Collierville may at
its option delete in whole or in part any of the above described exemptions,
but in no case shall include any additional exemptions in this subchapter
adopted, pursuant to this section, unless otherwise approved by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.



   (D)   Performance standards. All permitted uses, special exemptions
and limited exclusions may be approved by the Town Engineer, provided they
can meet performance standards outlined for the Wellhead Protection Overlay
District.



   (E)   Nonconforming uses.



      (1)   Nonconforming uses may continue in the overlay district
in the form in which they exist at the time of the adoption of this
subchapter in accordance with §§ 151.130et seq. In the event such
nonconforming use shall pose a direct hazard to the public water supply, the
Town of Collierville may take any action permitted by law to abate the hazard.



      (2)   An addition or expansion does not increase the
nonconformity of the use or activity. 



      (3)   The expansion of the nonconforming use may not be for
the purpose of changing that use to another nonconforming use unless the
applicant can demonstrate that the new use poses a lesser threat to
groundwater than the current use.



(`00 Code, § 11-1705)



§ 151.290  VARIANCE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply exclusively to
areas of Wellhead Protection Overlay Districts. In applying for a variance,
the following additions apply.



   (B)   Board of Zoning Appeals:



      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall not consider any application for a variance
from the provisions of this subchapter until the development staff has had an
opportunity to review the application and make a written recommendation to
the Board of Zoning Appeals;



      (2)   Variances may be issued for the use of property upon a
determination from the Board of Zoning Appeals that the proposed use will not
cause, materially contribute to or create a material risk of any adverse
effect upon the municipal water source, under reasonably possible hydrologic
or geologic conditions. All technological evidence shall be based on the
modeling techniques defined in Wellhead Protection Area, Zone 1 and Zone 2
reports, approved by TDEC (November 1995);



      (3)   In reviewing a variance application, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all
standards specified in other sections of this subchapter, and:



         (a)   The practical difficulty and hardship on the
property owner related to the use and enjoyment of the property caused by the
regulation or restriction as enacted within the Wellhead Protection Areas,
Zone 1 and Zone 2;



         (b)   When it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision or determination made by the Town Engineer in the
enforcement or administration of this subchapter;



         (c)   That no variance may be requested nor granted as a
means to circumvent the intentions of this subchapter or as a remedy for a
violation of this subchapter;



         (d)   May attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
subchapter;



      (4)   In reviewing a variance application, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall consider the recommendation of the Shelby County Ground Water
Quality Control Board (SCGWQCB).



(`00 Code, § 11-1706)



§ 151.291  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Use of regulated substances in conjunction with municipal
water supply and treatment activities shall not be restricted by this
subchapter.



   (B)   Use of regulated substances in conjunction with public parks,
playgrounds, golf courses and community centers.



   (C)   Storage of regulated substances in conjunction with municipal
water supply and treatment activities shall not be restricted by this
subchapter.



   (D)   Storage of fuel and lubricants for vehicle operations in
conjunction with permitted uses shall be either in above ground storage tanks
meeting EPA regulations for such facilities or underground storage tanks
meeting the requirements of this subchapter. Underground storage tanks shall
not be allowed in Zone 1 areas. Underground storage tanks located in Wellhead
Protection Area, Zone 2, shall meet all EPA regulations for underground
storage tanks and be double wall with monitoring of the space between the
tank walls. All piping shall be double wall. Ground water monitoring shall be
as per the current EPA regulation for underground storage tanks and shall
include one monitoring well in the excavation where the tank is located. All
monitoring results for underground storage tanks in a Wellhead Protection
Area, Zone 2, (ground water, product, vapor space and the like) shall be
provided to the Department of Development on a monthly basis.



   (E)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this subchapter,
nonconforming uses in this district presently utilizing underground storage
tanks for fuel and lubricants for vehicle operations shall be permitted to
replace existing tanks with those constructed as per the specifications of
division (D) of this section and not exceeding the capacity of existing
tanks. Replacement of underground tanks for regulated substances other than
fuel and lubricants for vehicle operations is not permitted.



   (F)   Storage of regulated substances other than fuel and lubricants
for vehicle operations in conjunction with permitted and conditional uses in
this district is prohibited.



(`00 Code, § 11-707)



§ 151.292  SITE PLAN SUBMISSION AND ADMINISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Preliminary plan.



      (1)   The applicant shall submit a preliminary site plan
describing the concept for the development of the entire tract to the
Planning Commission.



      (2)   The preliminary site plan shall conform with the site
plan requirements set forth in this chapter and include the following
additional requirements:



         (a)   Be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet;



         (b)   Including the following:



            1.   Location of all existing public water supply
wells within 1,000 feet;



            2.   Location of Wellhead Protection Zone 1 and
Zone 2 areas within 500 feet of property; and



            3.   Location of septic tanks (including size and
capacity) and/or sewage lift stations, force mains and grease traps.



         (c)   Provide the regulations used to control the uses
permitted in the project and the uses specifically prohibited;



         (d)   Provide a complete list of the types and volumes
of all hazardous materials (including fuels) used, stored, processed, handled
or disposed, other than those volumes and types associated with normal
household use;



         (e)   Provide a description of the types of wastes
generated and method of disposal including: solid wastes, hazardous wastes,
sewage and non-sewage wastewater discharges;



         (f)   Provide plans and documents containing information
to show compliance with the performance standards;



         (g)   Provide other additional information as may be
required by reviewing agencies regarding: the proposed use, its potential
impact to water quality, hydrogeologic information, monitoring and mitigation
measures.



   (B)   Final plan.



      (1)   After approval of the preliminary plan, but prior to the
issuance of any building permit and/or commencement of construction, the
applicant shall have approval of the Planning Commission and a final plan
covering the entire tract or that portion proposed for development.



      (2)   The final plan shall:



         (a)   Provide a complete list of the types and volumes
of all hazardous materials (including fuel) used, stored, processed, handled
or disposed, other than those volumes and types associated with normal
household use;



         (b)   Provide a description of the types of wastes
generated and method of disposal including: solid wastes, hazardous wastes,
sewage and non-sewage wastewater discharges;



         (c)   Provide plans and documents containing information
to show compliance with the performance standards;



         (d)   Provide other additional information as may be
required by reviewing agencies regarding: the proposed use, its potential
impact to water quality, hydrogeologic information, monitoring and mitigation
measures.



      (3)   The applicant may, if desired, submit only one final
plan for the purpose of securing approval of the development plan if the plan
submitted complies with all the requirements of the final plan. The Planning
Commission may grant final approval to such a plan after only one review.



(`00 Code, § 11-1708)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 151.305  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.



   (A)   Administrative Officer. The provisions of this chapter shall
be administered by the Development Director or an appropriate designee
selected by the Town Administrator.



   (B)   Administrative Officer authority and responsibilities. The
Development Director shall administer and enforce this chapter and in
addition shall:



      (1)   Conduct inspections of building, structures and use of
land to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter
and subsequent amendments, including, but not limited to, all maps,
amendments, conditional uses, variances, appeals and applications therefore;



      (3)   Provide information to the public on all matters
relating to this chapter;



      (4)   Receive, file and forward to the Planning Commission all
applications for amendments to this chapter;



      (5)   Receive, file and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals
all applications for variances, conditional use permits and all other matters
on which such Board is required and authorized to consider under the
provisions of this chapter;



      (6)   Initiate, direct and review, from time to time, a study
of the provisions of this chapter and make reports of recommendations to the
Planning Commission and Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



(`00 Code, § 11-1001)



§ 151.306  BUILDING OFFICIAL, BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF
OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Powers and duties of the Building Official.



      (1)   The Building Official shall in furtherance of authority
granted under the Standard Building Code and related codes:



         (a)   Issue all building permits and make and maintain
records thereof;



         (b)   Issue all use and occupancy permits and make and
maintain all records thereof.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the Building Official to
approve any plan or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any
excavation or construction work until plans have been fully inspected and
found to conform with this chapter and other applicable regulations of the
Town.



      (3)   Under no circumstances is the Building Official
permitted to make changes in this chapter nor to vary its terms and
provisions in carrying out the duties and responsibilities assigned to the
Building Official.



      (4)   The Building Official shall not refuse to issue a permit
when the applicant complies with conditions imposed by this chapter even
though compliance with the permit might result in the violation of private
agreements such as restrictive covenants.



   (B)   Building permit required.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to commence any site excavation,
site grading or other land disturbing  activity or public improvements or to
commence the excavation for the construction of any building or other
structure, including accessory buildings and structures, or to commence the
moving or alteration of any building or other structure, including accessory
buildings and structures, until the Building Official has issued a building
permit for such work. The permit requirement for land disturbing activities
shall not apply to agricultural farming operations, commercial nursery
operations or to residential landscaping or gardening activities.



      (2)   Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to
the use of land or buildings shall be issued by an officer, department or
employee of the Town of Collierville, unless the application for such permit
has been examined by the Building Official and has affixed to it a
certificate from the Building Official indicating that the proposed building
or structure complies with all the provisions of this chapter. Any building
permit or use and occupancy permit issued in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter shall be null and void.



   (C)   Plot plan required for building permits.  When deemed
necessary by the Building Official, all applications for building permits be
accompanied by plans and specifications, including a plot plan in triplicate,
drawn to scale no less than one inch equals 100 feet and showing the
following information.



      (1)   Residential buildings or other structures involving two
units or less located on one parcel.  The plot plan of any residential
building or other structure of residential activity with two dwelling units
or less on one parcel shall indicate:



         (a)   The actual shape, location and dimension of the
parcel;



         (b)   The shape, size and location of all buildings or
other structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any building or other
structure already on the parcel;



         (c)   Such other information concerning the parcel or
adjoining parcels as may be essential for determining whether the provisions
of this chapter are being observed;



         (d)   Any fences to be built during the construction of
a residence or to be built on the parcel of an existing residence must be
shown on a plot plan. The plan shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate the
location and the height of the proposed fence. The Building Official shall
use this information and may request any additional information deemed
necessary in order to determine that the proposed fence does not constitute a
traffic hazard and otherwise conforms to the ordinances and regulations of
the Town.  If the Building Official determines that the fence may create a
hazard to traffic and/or is not otherwise in compliance with the ordinances
and regulations of the Town, the Building Official shall refuse to issue a
building permit until changes required are made to the plot plan to correct
any hazardous condition.



      (2)   All other buildings, structures and activities. The plot
plan of any other building, structure or activity shall indicate, at a
minimum, the following information:



         (a)   The actual shape, location and dimensions of the
parcel;



         (b)   The shape, size, height and location of all
buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any
building or other structure already on the parcel;



         (c)   The existing and intended use of the parcel and of
all such structures upon it, including, for residential activities, the
number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate;



         (d)   Topographic features (contours not greater than
five foot intervals);



         (e)   Location of all driveways and entrances;



         (f)   Location of all accessory off-street parking areas
to include a plot plan showing design and layout of such parking facilities
where five or more accessory off-street parking spaces are to be provided;



         (g)   Location of all accessory off-street loading areas;



         (h)   Location of open space, including a notation of
the percentage of open space exclusive of pervious surfaces in relation to
total land area contained in the parcel;



         (i)   Proposed ground coverage, floor area and building
height;



         (j)   Position of fences and walls (materials to be
specified on plan);



         (k)   Position of screen planting (type and size of
plant materials to be specified on plan);



         (l)   Location of windows and courts;



         (m)   Location, type and size of proposed signage (if
allowed);



         (n)   Proposed means of surface drainage and storm water
management;



         (o)   Location of all easements and rights-of-way;



         (p)   Location of all areas subject to flooding,
including floodplains, floodways and floodprone areas;



         (q)   Location of all existing and proposed utilities
(for example, electrical (with notation for above ground or underground
service), water, sewer and natural gas);



         (r)   Percolation test or soil analysis results from
County Health Department indicating that subsurface sewerage disposal is
authorized if public sewer is not to serve the parcel.



   (D)   Certificate of occupancy required. No building or addition
thereto, constructed after the effective date of this chapter, and no
addition to a previously existing building or accessory structure shall be
occupied, and no land shall be used for any purpose until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Building Official. No change in a use other
than that of a permitted use shall be made until a certificate of occupancy
has been issued by the Building Official.



   (E)   Application for a certificate of occupancy. Every application
for a new building permit shall be deemed to be an application for a
certificate of occupancy. Every application for a certificate of occupancy
for a new use of land where no building permit is required shall be made
directly to the Building Official.



   (F)   Issuance of certificate of occupancy. The following shall
apply to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy.



      (1)   Permits not to be issued. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use
of any land, which is not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Certificate of occupancy for existing buildings. A
certificate of occupancy may be issued for existing buildings, structures or
parts thereof, or existing uses of land, if, after inspection, it is found
that such buildings, structures or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in
full conformity with all the provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   Temporary or partial certificate of occupancy. Nothing
in this chapter shall prevent the issuance of a temporary or partial
certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building or structure in the
process of erection or alteration, provided that such temporary permit shall
not be effective for a time period in excess of six months, and provided
further that such portion of the building, structure or premises is in full
conformity with all the provisions of this chapter. A cash bond may be
required by the Town as surety for completion of remaining improvements and
shall include a specified time period within which all remaining improvements
shall be completed satisfactorily.



      (4)   Permits for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings
accessory to dwellings shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy
but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when
shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as the principal
dwelling unit on the parcel.



   (G)   Records of certificates of occupancy. A record of all
certificates of occupancy issued shall be kept on file in the office of the
Building Official.



   (H)   Final inspections. No certificate of occupancy for a building,
structure or an addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of
this chapter, shall be issued until construction has been completed and the
premises inspected and certified by the Building Official and other officials
of the Town to be in conformity with the applicable plans and specifications
upon which a building permit was issued.



(`00 Code, § 11-1002)



§ 151.307  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Collierville Planning Commission, for the purposes of this
subchapter, shall be referred to as the Planning Commission.



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall, in addition to other duties
imposed upon it by ordinance:



      (1)   Establish such rules of procedure as are necessary to
the performance of its functions hereunder;



      (2)   Study and report on all proposed amendments to this
chapter, including amendments to the Official Zoning Map;



      (3)   Review on an annual basis this chapter periodically,
and, on the basis of such review, recommend amendments thereto;



      (4)   Review and make a recommendation to the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen on all applications for planned unit developments in accordance
with §§ 151.150et seq. and recommend to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to
approve, disapprove or approve subject to conditions;



      (5)   Review and decide all applications for erosion and
sediment control measures;



      (6)   Review and decide all applications for tree protection
and preservation and grading measures in accordance with §§ 151.265 through
151.273;



      (7)   Review and make recommendations to the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen on site development plans;



      (8)   Review and decide all applications for subdivision plat
approval in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Collierville;



      (9)   Review and make recommendations to the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen on requests for conditional use permits.



      (10)   To call on any department for assistance in its duties;
and it shall be the duty of such department(s) to render all such assistance
as may be reasonably required.



(`00 Code, § 11-1003) (Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08)



§ 151.308  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation and appointment. The Board of Zoning Appeals is
established as authorized under this chapter and as provided by Tenn. Code
Ann. § 13-7-205. 



      (1)   Membership and term of office. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall consist of five members, not more than one of whom shall be
members of the Collierville Planning Commission. They shall be appointed by
the Mayor of the Town of Collierville and confirmed by a majority vote of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The terms of membership shall be one year and
shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year, except that the terms of
those members serving on the Board at the time of adoption of this chapter
shall be permitted to serve the remainder of their unexpired term after which
time persons appointed to that respective position shall serve a one year
term. Members may be reappointed to serve more than one year upon appointment
and confirmation by a majority vote of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. 
Members shall be removed from membership for three or more absences from
regular scheduled meetings in a consecutive 12-month period. A member may be
removed from membership by a majority vote of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



      (2)   Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired
term by appointment by the Mayor and confirmation by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.



      (3)   Appointment of special members to fill temporary
vacancies. The Mayor may, with the concurrence of a majority of the Board,
appoint special members to the Board of Zoning Appeals to fill temporary
vacancies at any regular scheduled or special called meeting to insure that a
quorum is present. The special appointments shall be in writing signed by the
Mayor, stating the date of the meeting(s), not to exceed two, for which the
appointment is to be effective.



      (4)   Compensation and removal. All members of the Board shall
serve with such compensation as may be fixed by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.



   (B)   Powers of the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals is vested with the powers to:



         (a)   Hear and decide appeals from any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by any Town official charged with
the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, whereby it is
alleged in writing that such official is in error or has acted in an
arbitrary manner.  An appeal shall be filed with the Planning Division not
later than 30 calendar days from the date of any written order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by a Town Official charged with the
responsibility of applying and enforcing the provisions of this chapter;



         (b)   Hear and act upon application for variances,
including those parcels located within approved Planned Unit Developments, in
accordance with § 151.309, to alleviate hardships by virtue of the inability
of the landowner to comply strictly with the provisions of this chapter by
reasons of unique shape, topography or physical features of the property,
provided that relief to the applicant may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent
of this chapter;



         (c)   Hear and decide all matters referred to it on
which it is required and authorized to act under this chapter;



         (d)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, a request for interpretation of the Zoning Code
or Official Zoning Map of the Town of Collierville; and



         (e)   To call on any department for assistance in its
duties; and it shall be the duty of such department(s) to render all such
assistance as may be reasonably required.



      (2)   The Board of Zoning Appeals, in either approving,
granting or denying a conditional use, variance, or otherwise when proper,
will consider whether or not the approval will impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, unreasonably increase the traffic
congestion within public streets, increase the danger of fire and endanger
public safety, or in any other way impair the public health, safety, comfort
or welfare of the inhabitants of the Town.  Such consideration further may
relate to screening, landscaping, location or other conditions necessary to
protect property in the vicinity of the subject site.



      (3)   In the Board of Zoning Appeals' evaluation of whether to
approve, grant or deny a conditional use, variance or otherwise, it may
consider whether adequate public facilities and services are available in the
applicable area and whether existing public infrastructure, including but not
limited to road existence, road width, sewage treatment capacity, water
treatment capacity, or utility capacity, is not yet, or will not be, adequate
to serve the applicable area.



   (C)   Election of officers. The Board shall elect from its members
its own Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary who shall serve for one year and may
upon election serve succeeding terms.



   (D)   Conflict of interest. Any member of the Board who shall have a
direct or an indirect interest in any property which is the subject matter of
or will be affected by a decision of the Board shall be disqualified from
participation in the discussion, decision and proceedings of the Board in
connection therewith. The burden of revealing any such conflict rests with
individual members of the Board.  Failure to reveal any such conflict shall
constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board.



   (E)   Meetings of the Board. Meetings shall be held at the call of
the Chair and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chair, or
in his or her absence, the Vice-Chair, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public and proper
public notice of such meetings shall be given.



   (F)   Rules and proceedings of the Board. The Board shall adopt
rules for the conduct of its meetings.  The rules shall, at a minimum,
require that:



      (1)   The presence of three members shall constitute a quorum
and the concurring vote of at least two members of the Board shall be
necessary to deny or grant any application before the Board;



      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Board on any case until
after a public hearing and notice thereof has been provided. The notice of
public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation to
the Town of Collierville at least ten days before the date set for a public
hearing. A written notice of the hearing shall be sent by mail to the
appellant and all affected property owners located within 300 feet of the
subject parcel on all sides at least ten days before the hearing. The notice
to the appellant shall be sent by certified mail;



      (3)   The Board may call upon any other office or agency of
the Town government for information in the performance of its duties and it
shall be the duty of such other agencies to render such information to the
Board as may be reasonably required;



      (4)   The Collierville Planning Commission shall be permitted,
if the request to the Board is made in writing, to submit an advisory opinion
on any matter before the Board and such opinion shall be made part of the
record of such public hearing;



      (5)   Any officer, agency or department of the Town of
Collierville or other aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board to
a court of competent jurisdiction as provided for by state law;



      (6)   In any decision made by the Board on a variance, the
Board shall:



         (a)   Indicate the specific section of this subchapter
under which the variance is being considered and shall state its findings
beyond such generalities as interest of public health, safety and general
welfare;



         (b)   In cases pertaining to hardship, specifically
identify the hardship warranting such action by the Board;



      (7)   Requests will be assigned for hearing in the order in
which they appear on the calendar thereof, except that requests may be
advanced for hearing by order of a majority of the Board, good and sufficient
cause being shown;



      (8)   During the public hearing of the case before the Board,
the applicant shall be entitled to be heard or may be represented by counsel
or agent. The applicant’s side of the case shall be heard first and those
in objection shall follow. To maintain orderly procedure during meetings,
each side shall proceed without interruption from the other.



(`00 Code, § 11-1004)  (Ord. passed 5- -02; Am. Ord. 2006-04, passed
4-24-06; Am. Ord. 2008-20, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2009-08, passed 6-22-09)



§ 151.309  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Authority. In accordance with § 151.308, the Board of Zoning
Appeals has the authority to hear and act upon applications for variances to
alleviate hardships by virtue of the inability of the landowner to comply
strictly with the provisions of this chapter by reasons of unique shape,
topography or physical features of the property.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of the variance is to modify the strict
application of the specific requirements of this chapter in the case of
exceptional irregular, narrow, shallow or steep lots or other exceptional
physical conditions, whereby strict application would result in practical
difficulty or undue hardship which would deprive an owner of the reasonable
use of his or her land. A variance may only be granted if it will not cause
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing
the intent of the Zoning Code.



   (C)   Application for variance; submission deadline and fee.



      (1)   A written application for a variance shall be filed
along with payment of an application fee as prescribed in Resolution 98-28
(as amended) with the Board of Zoning Appeals by the property owner or his or
her designated agent on a form provided by the Town. The application shall
contain information and exhibits as may be required. An incomplete
application or an application that fails to meet minimum submittal
requirements shall be returned to the applicant by the Town and shall include
a written statement enumerating the deficiency(ies) in the application. The
completed application and any proposed supplement thereto shall be submitted
in compliance with the then existing required deadlines as set periodically
by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (2)   The Development Director may grant an administrative
variance of up to 5% of an applicable yard setback for all lots of record.
The person seeking the administrative variance must submit an application and
fee as is required for other variances. Public notice shall not be required.
Appeals shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Public notice of the Board
of Zoning Appeal’s hearing on such appeal shall be the same as other
variances. Such administrative variance may be granted only when it is
determined that a field error has occurred regarding the placement of the
principal building on the lot. If the Development Director denies an
application for a variance and the Board of Zoning Appeals denies any
subsequent appeal of same, a reapplication pertaining to the same property
and requesting the same variance may not be filed within one year of the date
the Board of Zoning Appeals took final action on the previous application,
unless the Department of Development Services initiates such reapplication or
unless the Board of Mayor and Alderman authorizes such reapplication.



   (D)   Time limit.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall, on a periodic
basis, set the dates for its future meetings and contemporaneously establish
a date that shall be the last date that an application to be heard at a
particular meeting must be filed (the “Deadline Date”).  All
applications shall be finally acted upon by the Board of Zoning Appeals
within 60 days of their respective Deadline Date unless the applicant agrees
that such time period may be extended.



   (E)   Notice of hearing. Notice to affected property owners and to
the general public shall be given in conformance with the procedure set forth
in § 151.308(F)(2).



   (F)   Standards for variances.



      (1)   The Board shall not grant a variance unless it makes
findings based upon evidence presented to it as follows:



         (a)   The particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographic conditions of the specific property involved would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional or undue
hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if strict
application of this chapter were carried out;



         (b)   The conditions upon which the petition for a
variance is based would not be applicable, generally, to other property
within the same zoning district;



         (c)   The variance will not authorize activities in a
zoning district other than those permitted by this chapter;



         (d)   Financial returns only shall not be considered as
a basis for granting a variance;



         (e)   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been
created by any person having an interest in the property after the effective
date of this chapter;



         (f)   The variance is the minimum variance that will
make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure;



         (g)   The granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the area in which the property is located;



         (h)   The proposed variance will not impair an adequate
supply of light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase the
congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the
public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
area; and



         (i)   The variance shall not interfere with or encroach
upon a recorded public or private easement unless a written waiver has been
executed by the owner of the public or private easement allowing the
interference or encroachment.



      (2)   Sign-related variances shall be reviewed according to
the standards listed in § 151.309(F)(1).



   (G)   Nonconformity does not constitute grounds for granting of a
variance. Under no circumstances shall nonconforming uses of neighboring
lands, structures or buildings in the same district, nor permitted or
nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts be
considered as the basis upon which a variance is granted by the Board.



   (H)   Prohibition of use variances and exceptions to permitted and
conditional uses. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Zoning Appeals
grant a variance or conditional use (for example, special exception) to allow
a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the zoning district
involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of
this chapter in the zoning district.



   (I)   Conditions and restrictions by the Board. The Board may impose
such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as
may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this section to reduce or
minimize the injurious effect of such variation upon surrounding property and
better carry out the general intent of this subchapter. The Board may
establish expiration dates as a condition or as a part of the variance(s)
granted.



   (J)   Appeal of decision of Administrative Official. In exercising
its powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, so long as such action is in
conformity with the terms of this chapter, reverse or affirm or modify,
wholly or partially, the order, requirement, decision or determination before
it.



   (K)   Appeal of decision of Board of Zoning Appeals. Any person,
including any agency of the Town government, aggrieved by a decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal by certiorari to a court of competent
jurisdiction. The judgment and findings of the Board on all questions of fact
that may be involved in any appeal, cause, hearing or proceeding under this
chapter shall be final and subject to review only for illegality or want of
jurisdiction.



   (L)   Limitation on reapplications.  If the Board of Zoning Appeals
denies an application for a variance, a reapplication pertaining to the same
property and requesting the same variance may not be filed within one year of
the date the Board of Zoning Appeals took final action on the previous
application, unless the Department of Development Services initiates such
reapplication or unless the Board of Mayor and Aldermen authorizes such
reapplication.



(`00 Code, § 11-1005)  (Ord. passed 5- -02; Am. Ord. 2004-12, passed
7-26-04; Am. Ord. 2010-01, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 2017-19, passed 10-23-17)



§ 151.310  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Authority. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen, with a
recommendation from the Planning Commission, may hear and decide, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, requests for conditional use
permits. For the purpose of administration of this chapter, conditional uses
shall be construed as synonymous with special exceptions, as such later term
is used in Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-206 and 13-7-207.



   (B)   Procedure. The following procedure is established to integrate
properly the conditional uses after consideration by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen, with a recommendation from the Planning Commission, with other uses
located within the zoning classification. These uses shall be reviewed by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen and may be authorized, conditionally approved, or
rejected utilizing the  procedures set forth in this chapter.



   (C)   Application for conditional use permit; submission deadline
and fee. A written application for a conditional use permit shall be filed
along with payment of an application fee as prescribed in Resolution 98-28
(as amended) with the Planning Commission and Board of Mayor and Aldermen by
the property owner or his or her designated agent on a form provided by the
Town Planner. The application shall contain information and exhibits as may
be required. An incomplete application or an application that fails to meet
minimum submittal requirements shall be returned to the applicant by the Town
and shall include a written statement enumerating the deficiency(ies) in the
application. The completed application or any proposed supplement thereto
shall be submitted in compliance with the then existing required deadlines as
set periodically by the Development Director.



   (D)   Denial of a conditional use permit.  The Board of Mayor and
Aldermen, with a recommendation from the Planning Commission, may deny a
conditional use permit where it is shown that approval does not conform with
the grounds for issuance of a conditional use permit contained in § 151.310.
If the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, with a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, denies an application for a conditional use permit, a
reapplication pertaining to the same property and requesting the same
conditional use permit may not be filed within one year of the date the Mayor
and Aldermen took final action on the previous application, unless the
Department of Development Services initiates such reapplication or unless the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen authorizes such reapplication.



   (E)   Notice of public meeting. The notice of a public meeting of
the Planning Commission or Board of Mayor and Aldermen to discuss a
conditional use permit shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation to the Town of Collierville at least ten days before the date set
for a public meeting. Written notice of the public meeting shall be sent by
mail to property owners located within 500 feet of the subject parcel on all
sides at least ten days before the meeting.



   (F)   Requirements for conditional use permit. General requirements
and specific standards are established in § 151.021 and § 151.024 that
shall apply to all applications for conditional use permits. The Board, with
a recommendation from the Planning Commission, may impose additional
conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a conditional use
permit as may be necessary to comply with the provisions set forth in §
151.021 and § 151.024 in order to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of
such conditional use upon surrounding areas and insure compatibility with
surrounding property and in the furtherance of the general purposes of this
chapter. Such additional conditions and restrictions shall be limited as
follows:



      (1)   No condition shall be less restrictive than the
standards of the zoning district.



      (2)   No condition shall be made part of the application, or
shall be attached to approval of the conditional use, which specifies the
ownership status, race, religion, or character of the occupants of housing
units, the minimum value of improvements or any other exclusionary device; or
which states that the use of property will not be subject to regulations.



      (3)   If the Board places additional conditions upon a
conditional use permit, it shall indicate the specific provisions from §
151.021 and § 151.024 upon which the condition is based and shall state its
findings beyond such generalities as in the interest of public health, safety
and general welfare.



   (G)   Effective period of approval. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen
approval shall become effective immediately, unless otherwise specified. The
applicant may be required to submit an application for a site plan and/or
obtain a building permit as a condition of approval.



   (H)   Validity of plans.  All approved plans, conditions,
restrictions and requirements made part of the approval by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen shall run with the land and the permitted conditional use of the
land shall conform to the same at all times.



   (I)   Failure to establish conditional use. The applicant is
required to fully establish the conditional use within two years of approval
in conformance with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Code and
conditions of approval imposed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and other
boards and commissions. Failure to establish the conditional use within the
prescribed time period shall result in the voiding of approval of the
conditional use permit. The applicant may request an extension from the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen not to exceed one year.



   (J)   Appeal of decision of Board of Mayor and Aldermen on
conditional use permit. Any person  aggrieved by a decision of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen relative to a conditional use permit may appeal by
certiorari to a court to competent jurisdiction. The judgment and findings of
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on all questions of fact that may be involved
in any appeal, cause, hearing or proceeding under this chapter shall be final
and subject to review only for illegality or want of jurisdiction.



(`00 Code, § 11-1006)  (Ord. 2004-12, passed 7-26-04; Am. Ord. 2008-20,
passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-9-12; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed
9-28-15)



§ 151.311  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   Purpose and scope.  The purpose of the site plan review
procedure is to ensure compliance with the town’s development requirements
and its design guidelines and to encourage quality development reflective of
the guiding principles of the land use plan.  Building permits shall not be
issued, nor shall any site preparation commence for uses requiring site plan
review until the site plan is approved pursuant to this chapter and approved
by the Development Director.  There are established submittal requirements
and procedures for the review and approval of preliminary and final site
plans by the town as defined in § 151.003.  Preliminary and final site
plans are not to be considered as being synonymous with subdivision plats as
defined in the subdivision regulations of the town.  Site plans dependent
upon minor or major, will be reviewed by: the Development Director, Planning
Commission (PC), Design Review Commission (DRC), Historic District Commission
(HDC) (for parcels located within the Historic District) and the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen (BMA). The procedures and requirements set forth within
this chapter shall provide for the timely and effective review of development
proposals by town government and various boards and commissions involved in
the site plan review process.



   (B)   Initiation.  An application for site plan approval may be
initiated by the owner or entities having a contractual interest in the
property for which site plan approval is requested or by the authorized agent
of such owner or other person.



   (C)   Applicability.  The following shall require site plan review
and approval:



      (1)   All new buildings and building additions. 



      (2)   All manufactured buildings to be moved to a parcel
except prefabricated accessory structures placed on single-family residential
parcels or lots in residential zones.



      (3)   Site alterations, including the construction of
driveways, loading areas and parking areas, with the exception of single
family residences.



   (D)   Exemptions.  The following shall be exempted from site plan
review:



      (1)   Individual single-family detached dwellings and their
accessory structures.



      (2)   The internal construction or change in floor area of a
development that does not increase gross floor area, increase the intensity
of use, or affect parking requirements on a site that meets all development
and site design standards of the ordinance codified herein.



      (3)   Temporary uses.



      (4)   Subdivisions.



      (5)   Townhouses, where each individual housing unit is
located on a single, platted lot in an approved subdivision.



   (E)   Site plan levels.



      (1)   Site plans require different levels of approval
depending on the intensity and type of project. Table I shows the level of
approval required for the two types of site plans, classified as Tier 1
(Minor Site Plans) or Tier 2 (Major Site Plans).



 


Table I Site Plan Review Process for Minor and Major Site Plans



Administrative Staff Review
Tier 1 - Minor Site Plans
 
PC, DRC, HDC, & BMA Review
Tier 2 - Major Site Plans



1. Plans that propose 10,000 gross square feet or less of new,
non-residential building area on an undeveloped site;

 
1.  Plans that propose more than 10,000 gross square feet of new,
non-residential building area on an undeveloped site;


2.  Plans that propose to expand an existing, non-residential building(s) by
25% or less additional square feet;
 
2. Plans that propose to expand an existing, non-residential building(s) by
more than 25% additional square feet;


3.  Plans that propose 20 or less new multi-family dwelling units on an
undeveloped site; or
 
3.  Plans that propose more than 20 new multi-family dwelling units on an
undeveloped site; or


4.  Plans that propose an increase of 25% or less of the number of
multi-family dwelling units within an existing project.
 
4.  Plans that propose an increase of more than 25% of the number of
multi-family dwelling units within an existing project.



 



      (2)   Deviations from the Tier 1 (Minor Site Plan general
classification) to the Tier 2 (Major Site Plan general classification) may be
made for:



         (a)   Plans for projects located in direct proximity to
residential neighborhoods and in proximity to public parks and facilities
where there is potential that the project could have adverse impacts on
neighborhood traffic flow, public safety, aesthetics, noise, odor, waste, or
other factors that could be detrimental to a residential area or public
facility, provided that the potential impacts have not already been vetted
through a variance or similar case in which the neighborhood has had an
opportunity to review and comment on the issue in a public forum;



         (b)   Plans for projects that are located on or near
environmentally sensitive areas, or those that have the potential to have an
adverse impact on natural resources;



         (c)   Plans for projects that are located on or near
areas in which there is a known potential for the presence of historical
resources; or



         (d)   Plans for projects that are located within the
downtown area or historic district.



      (3)   Deviations from the Tier 2 (Major Site Plan) general
classification to the Tier 1 (Minor Site Plan) general classification may be
made for:



         (a)   Plans for projects located within the boundaries
of a planned development which has been approved or amended within the past
three years;



         (b)   Plans for projects that are located in commercial
or an industrial area where there is minimal potential for neighborhood
impacts; or



         (c)   Plans for projects using PILOTs (payment in lieu
of taxes), state or federal grants, or similar economic development tools.



   (F)   Development Director responsibilities.  The Development
Director or designee has the authority to approve, approve with conditions,
or disapprove minor site plans as referenced below.  Such action shall be
based upon the review comments from the Departmental Review Team (DRT).  The
Development Director shall provide written notice of the decision to the
applicant, along with the reasons for the decision within 30 working days. 
The Development Director shall have the authority to promulgate and publish
standards and policies for the review of site plans as needed.  The
Development Director shall also on a monthly basis provide updates on any
administrative approvals to the HDC, PC, DRC and the BMA.



   (G)   Departmental Review Team responsibilities.  The Departmental
Review Team (DRT) serves as the town’s staff for technical review of site
plans; both minor and major.  The DRT is composed of designated
representatives from the following departments and divisions: Development
Services (Building, Codes, Engineering, Planning), Fire Administration (Fire
Marshal), Parks and Recreation, Police and Public Services.  The DRT shall
meet as needed to review site plan applications in an internal staff meeting,
(not a public meeting) conducted by the Development Director, or designee. 
The DRT shall have the authority to promulgate administrative rules of policy
and to establish deadlines for the administrative site plans.



   (H)   Appeal of site plan decisions.



      (1)   For Tier 1 site plans, an applicant may appeal the
Development Director’s decision, or the conditions imposed by the
Development Director, to the Planning Commission by filing a written notice
of appeal to the Development Director within 30 days of the Development
Director’s decision.  The Development Director shall schedule the appeal
on the next available Planning Commission agenda.



      (2)   For Tier 2 site plans, an applicant may appeal the
recommendation or the conditions imposed by the HDC  DRC, or PC, to the BMA
(as applicable) by filing a written notice of appeal to the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen within 30 days of the decision by the applicable entity.  The
Development Director shall schedule the appeal on the next available meeting
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (I)   Process for minor site plans.



      (1)   Tier 1 or minor site plans as referenced in Table 1
shall be processed administratively through town staff and consists of a one
step process (a final site plan).



      (2)   The site plan shall contain the information in
accordance with the site plan review requirements in division (Q).  The site
plan review will be reviewed internally by the DRT and ultimately approved by
the Development Director.



      (3)   With the final submission of a revised site plan, the
applicant shall apply for a development agreement with the Engineering
Division.  Upon approval of the site plan, the Development Director shall
place the development agreement on the next available BMA agenda for approval.



      (4)   Notice of minor site plans shall be posted on the
town’s website and in the newspaper.



   (J)   Process for major site plans.



      (1)   Tier 2 or major site plans as referenced in Table I
shall be processed formally through the HDC (as applicable) the DRC, PC, and
the BMA, and consist of a two-step process (a preliminary site plan and a
final site plan).



      (2)   The preliminary site plan shall contain the information
in accordance with the site plan review requirements in division (Q).  The
preliminary site plan will be reviewed by the HDC (as applicable), PC, DRC,
and BMA.



      (3)   After the preliminary site plan is approved by the BMA,
the applicant shall revise the site plan in accordance with conditions of
approval imposed through the review process.  Upon completion of those
revisions, the applicant shall submit a final site plan to the Planning
Division which will be reviewed internally by the DRT and ultimately approved
by the Development Director provided that it does not substantially deviate
from the preliminary site plan.  Should the final plan deviate substantially
from the preliminary site plan, the site plan will be forwarded to the PC for
review.  For the purpose of this section, non-substantial deviations shall
include minor shifts in building footprint locations, parking lot aisles,
spaces, and landscaping islands, minor changes to pond designs, and minor
changes to building facades or signage; all of which are expected as the
project moves into construction ready civil or architectural drawings. 
During the review of the final site plan, the applicant shall apply for a
development agreement with the Engineering Division.  Upon approval of the
final site plan, the Development Director shall place the development
agreement on the next available BMA agenda for approval.



   (K)   Site plan review procedure summary.



      (1)   Step 1 - pre-application conference.



         (a)   Unless waived, the applicant shall supply
preliminary information in a form established by the DRT.  Such information
shall be submitted at least three business days prior to the pre-application
conference.



         (b)   The purpose of the pre-application meeting shall
be to review the draft site plan with the DRT to identify any initial
conflicts between the draft site plan and town codes.



      (2)   Step 2 - site plan application.



         (a)   The applicant shall submit an application
containing the information in accordance with the site plan review
requirements in division (Q).  The application shall be made within 120 days
of the pre-application meeting conference (step 1), if applicable.



      (3)   Step 3 - DRT review and recommendation on the site plan.



         (a)   The Planning Division shall schedule a meeting of
the DRT to review the site plan application pursuant to the standards in this
subsection and the schedules maintained by the Planning Division.



         (b)   The HDC shall act on any necessary certificate of
appropriateness prior to the final decision on a site plan if located in the
Historic District.



         (c)   The Planning Division shall transmit, in writing,
all comments and recommendations from the DRT to the applicant.



         (d)   From the date of receipt of the DRT comments, the
applicant shall have until the deadline established by the Planning Division
to address the comments and submit a revised site plan.



      (4)   Step 4 - decision on the site plan.



         (a)   For site plan applications that are decided by the
Development Director, upon submittal of a revised site plan, the Planning
Division in conjunction with the DRT shall prepare a final review, and make a
decision to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the site plan
application in accordance with the ordinance codified herein and state law.



         (b)   For site plan applications decided by the BMA, the
HDC (as applicable) PC and DRC shall hold public meetings by the date
established by the Planning Division and shall make a recommendation to
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the site plan application in
accordance with the ordinance codified herein and state law.



   (L)   Development agreement required. Where public improvements or
private site improvements are required as part of site plan approval or where
fees are to be assessed by the town in relation to a development project, the
developer(s) shall enter into a development agreement with the town for all
required public improvements and/or fees assessed for development of a
project.



      (1)   Such an agreement shall be as provided for in the
Collierville Subdivision Regulations (and other technical specifications or
as modified to conform to a particular development proposal) and shall be
approved as to form and content by the Town Attorney.



      (2)   The Development Director shall confirm the developer(s)
have the development agreement prior to the development agreement being
placed on the BMA agenda, unless the developer(s) disagree with any
conditions or terms in the standard development agreement.



      (3)   Development agreements associated with site plans may be
executed by the Mayor and need not be placed on the BMA agenda as full BMA
authorization is not required except in the following circumstances:



         (a)   The applicant is in disagreement with any
conditions or terms in the standard development agreement;



         (b)   Waivers or exceptions from standards where the BMA
has the final decision are requested by the developer(s);



         (c)   Fees in lieu of construction are requested;



         (d)   A traffic study beyond daily trip generation was
required (e.g. traffic impacts warrant a Level II or III Traffic Impact
Study);



         (e)   Parkland is to be dedicated to the Town (after a
recommendation from the Parks Advisory Board);



         (f)   Development is proposed within the limits of the
floodplain (i.e. floodway or floodway fringe);



         (g)   A residential development of 21 dwellings/lots or
greater that is not within a planned development;



         (h)   A nonresidential development of three lots or
greater that is not within a planned development;



         (i)   A nonresidential site plan of over 10,000 square
feet of new building area that has not received previous preliminary site
plan, planned development, or conditional use permit (CUP) approval from the
BMA;



         (j)   The BMA has applied a condition to a previous
approval (preliminary site plan, planned development, or conditional use
permit) stating that a development agreement approved by the BMA is needed; or



         (k)   If, in the opinion of the Development Director,
the development could potentially cause an adverse change in the internal
function of the site or create an adverse off-site impact.



      (4)   The development agreement may also include provisions
relevant to any required private improvements given consideration as part of
the approval of the site plan, including such surety as may be required to
guarantee such improvements are installed accordingly.



      (5)   All development agreements shall cover 100% of the
required public improvements by the developer(s) and shall include any and
all fees associated with the development project as well as a surety such as
an irrevocable letter of credit or a cashier's check for such improvements.



      (6)   After the Development Director confirms that the final
site plan meets the Town's regulations, guidelines, and any conditions of
preliminary site plan approval, the Mayor may execute the development
agreement between the Town and the applicant. The date of the Mayor's
execution of the development agreement begins the two-year time period that
both the development agreement and the final site plan remain valid. The
applicant shall commence construction on the subject property within two
years of the Mayor's execution of the development agreement. Failure of the
applicant to commence construction within the prescribed two-year period
shall nullify and void both the site plan and the development agreement. In
the event the approval of the development agreement expires, the applicant
may reapply in writing to the mayor or BMA, as appropriate, for an extension
of both the development agreement and site plan for approval of the site plan
and development agreement.



   (M)  Effective period of preliminary site plan approval.  The
applicant shall submit the final site plan for approval by the Development
Director within two years of the date of approval of the preliminary site
plan.  Failure of the applicant to submit the final site plan within the
prescribed two- year period shall nullify and void the approval by the BMA
related to the preliminary site plan.  The applicant may request in writing
a one-time extension of the effective period of the preliminary site plan
approval from the BMA for a period not to exceed two years from the date of
the BMA’s approval of the preliminary site plan.



   (N)   Effective period of final site plan approval.  While the
Development Director has the authority to approve the final site plan after
staff review, the development agreement as referenced in division (L) shall
be approved by the BMA.  After the site plan has received approval of the
Development Director, the BMA may authorize the Mayor to execute the
development agreement between the town and the applicant.  The applicant
shall commence construction on the subject project within two years of the
date of execution of the development agreement by the Mayor.  Failure of the
applicant to commence construction within the prescribed two-year period
shall nullify and void the final site plan approval by the Development
Director.  The site plan and development agreement approvals are valid for
the same time period as they run concurrently in accordance with division
(L). 



   (O)   Final site plan documentation.  A final, approved site plan
set shall be sealed by the engineer and other designers as may be
applicable.  Each sheet shall be denoted by the town’s official approval
stamp and dated to coincide with the development agreement approval date. 
Multiple stamped plan sets shall be required, with the specific number to be
determined by the Development Director or designee.  At least one stamped
plan set shall be kept on the job site at all times during construction and
at least one stamped plan set shall be retained at Town Hall in perpetuity
and also provided in electronic format. Sealed, as-built drawings shall also
be required (in paper and electronic format) upon completion of construction
depicting changes between the site plan and the actual construction.  The
conditions of approval from the various boards and commissions and town
officials involved in the review and approval of the site plan and related
design elements shall also be retained in the form of the public meeting
minutes or as a report in the official file.



   (P)   Approval criteria.  Recommendations and decisions on a site
plan shall be based on consideration of the following criteria:



      (1)   That the proposed development is consistent with all the
requirements of the zoning ordinance, design guidelines and other related
codes and ordinances enforced by the town; and



      (2)   That the proposed development is in compliance with the
applicable base district and overlay districts; and



      (3)   That the proposed development meets all the requirements
or conditions of any applicable development approvals (e.g., outline plan, or
modification of development standards as permitted and approved within a
planned development).



   (Q)   Site plan submittal requirements.  A written application for
a site plan shall be filed with the Planning Division along with payment of
an application fee as established by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.  The
application shall contain information and exhibits as required by resolution
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



(Ord. 2009-12, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-9-12; Am. Ord.
2017-18, passed 10-23-17)



§ 151.312  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   General. The regulations, restrictions, boundaries and
provisions set forth in this chapter may, upon proper application by the
property owner or its designated representative or by an appropriate
governmental agency, board or commission, or the Board of Mayor and Aldermen,
be amended, supplemented, revised or repealed from time to time as conditions
warrant, as herein set forth.



   (B)   Initiation of amendment. Amendments may be initiated by the
Board, the Planning Commission or by an application of one or more owners of
property affected by the proposed amendment. 



   (C)   Application for amendment; fee.



      (1)   The application for amendment may be made separately by
the property owner or his or her designated agent filed in writing on forms
provided by the Town along with payment of an application fee as prescribed
in Resolution 98-28 (as amended) and shall contain information and exhibits
as outlined on the application form and as may be necessary in accordance
with this chapter.



      (2)   Failure to provide the minimum information enumerated
above shall constitute grounds for disapproval of the proposed amendment to
the Zoning Ordinance.



      (3)   The completed application shall be submitted in
compliance with the then existing deadlines as set periodically by the Town.
The applicant shall not be permitted to submit revisions to the proposed text
or map amendment or provide supplemental information in support of the
application less than 30 days prior to the scheduled meeting of the Planning
Commission.



   (D)   Review and recommendation of the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall review and make a recommendation to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen on all proposed amendments to this chapter. No change in
or departure from the text or maps as certified by the Planning Commission
shall be made, unless such change or departure is first submitted to the
Planning Commission for a recommendation of approval and, if recommended for
disapproval by the Planning Commission, receive the favorable vote of a
majority of the entire membership of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.



   (E)   Grounds for an amendment. The Planning Commission in its
review and recommendation to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and the Board in
its deliberations shall make specific findings with regard to the following
grounds for an amendment and shall note the same in the official record as
follows:



      (1)   The amendment is in agreement with the Comprehensive
Plan and Land Use Plan for the Town (subject to subsection (4) below);



      (2)   It has been determined that the legal purposes for which
zoning exists are not contravened;



      (3)   The proposed amendment shall be consistent with the
intent and purposes of this chapter;



      (4)   If not in conformance with the adopted Comprehensive
Plan and Land Use Plan, the proposed amendment shall be necessary because of
substantially changed or changing conditions in the area and districts
affected or in the Town generally;



      (5)   It has been determined that there will not be a material
adverse effect upon adjoining property owners unless such adverse effect can
be justified by the overwhelming public good and welfare;



      (6)   It has been determined that no one property owner or
small group of property owners will benefit materially from the change to the
detriment of the general public;



      (7)   It has been determined that public infrastructure (for
example, transportation and utilities) are adequate to serve the full range
of permitted and conditional uses of the proposed zoning classification.



   (F)   Public hearing and notice of hearing.



      (1)   The Planning Commission during its deliberation shall
facilitate public comment concerning any proposed amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance. The Development Director or his or her designee shall publish a
notice of the meeting at least ten days in advance of a scheduled meeting of
the Commission. Written notification shall also be mailed to property owners
within 500 feet of the subject parcel at least ten days in advance of the
scheduled meeting of the Commission. The notice shall contain, at a minimum,
the date, time and location of the meeting and the current and proposed
change in zoning and a plot plan of the parcel(s) under consideration.



      (2)   A public hearing shall be held on all proposed
amendments to this chapter prior to the final reading by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen. Notice of such hearing shall be displayed as follows:



         (a)   The Development Director or his or her designee
shall give notice in a newspaper of general circulation to the Town of
Collierville at least 15 days, but no earlier than 30 days, prior to the
public hearing. This notice shall specify the date and time and location of
the hearing and also the current and proposed zoning classification and a
plot plan of the subject parcel(s);



         (b)   At least 15 days prior to the public hearing
before the Board, the affected property owners within 500 feet of the
parcel(s) under consideration by the Board, including those separated by a
public way or corporate limit boundary, shall be notified by mail of the
proposed amendment, including the date, time and location of the hearing and
also the current and proposed zoning classification and a plot plan of the
subject parcel(s).



   (G)   Amendments affecting Official Zoning Map. Upon enactment of an
amendment to the Official Zoning Map, which is a part of this chapter, the
Town Planner shall cause such amendment to be placed upon the Official Zoning
Map noting thereon the ordinance number and effective date of such amendment.



   (H)   Effect of denial of application. Whenever an application for a
change in the Official Zoning Map is denied, the application for such change
shall not be eligible for reconsideration for one year following such denial,
except in the following cases:



      (1)   Upon initiation by a majority of the entire membership
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen;



      (2)   When a new application, although involving all or a
portion of the same property, is for a different zoning classification than
that for which the original application was made;



      (3)   When the previous application was denied for the reason
that the proposed zoning would not conform with the adopted Land Use Plan,
and the Land Use Plan has subsequently been amended in a manner which will
allow the proposed change in zoning classification.



   (I)   Time limit. All amendments initiated by application filed with
the Town shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission within 60 days of the
submission of a complete application in conformance with the submittal
requirements of this chapter. The recommendation of the Planning Commission
shall be forwarded to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen along with the
application for consideration within 45 days of action by the Planning
Commission.



(`00 Code, § 11-1008)  (Ord. 2004-12, passed 7-26-04)



§ 151.998  REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Filing complaint on violations of Zoning Code. Whenever a
violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person
may file a written complaint with the Building Official during regular
business hours. The complaint shall state fully the causes and basis of the
complaint, including location, date and time of violation and other specific
information to document the nature of the violation. The Building Official
shall record properly such complaint, promptly investigate the complaint,
make a determination of violation(s) that may exist and take appropriate
steps to correct the violation(s) that may exist on the property, including
legal action through a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (B)   Penalties. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct,
reconstruct, alter, maintain or use any building or structure or to use any
land in violation of any regulation in this chapter. Any person, firm,
association or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses
to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine, together with
the costs of such action, up to the maximum limits established by law; and
every day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or
tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any
architect, engineer, contractor, agent or other person who commits,
participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
Compliance therewith may also be enforced by injunctive process at the suit
of the Town or the owner(s) of real estate within the district affected by
the regulation of this chapter.



   (C)   Remedies. In case any building or other structure is proposed
to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended or converted, or
any building or other structure or land is or is proposed to be used in
violation of this chapter, the Building Official or other appropriate
authority of the Town government or any adjacent or neighboring property
owner who would be especially damaged by such violation may, in addition to
other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, extension, conversion or use, to correct or abate
such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building or other
structure or land. Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect
to a building or other structure or land, the Building Official may, in
addition to other remedies, notify all public utilities and municipal service
departments of such violation and request that initial or reestablishment of
service be withheld therefrom until such time as the building or other
structure or premises are no longer in violation of these regulations, and
each such utility or department shall comply with such request.



   (D)   Validity. No invalidity of any part of this chapter shall
affect the validity of any remaining part, it being declared that all such
remaining parts would have been passed irrespective of the validity of any
part found to be invalid.



(`00 Code, § 11-1009)



CHAPTER 152:  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   152.101   Objectives



   152.102   Definitions



   152.103   Abbreviations



   152.104   Conflict



   152.105   Waivers




Land Development and Construction Requirements




   152.200   Land development and construction activities



   152.201   Applicability



   152.202   Design standards



   152.203   Stormwater management plan



   152.204   Required permits



   152.205   Stormwater pollution prevention plan



   152.206   Water quality buffers



   152.207   Runoff reduction



   152.208   Runoff reduction credits



   152.209   Stabilization requirements



   152.210   Monitoring and inspections of construction sites by Town



   152.211   Inspections and maintenance by owner/operator



   152.212   Construction site posting



   152.213   As-built drawings



   152.214   Permanent stormwater maintenance plan and agreement




Existing Facilities




   152.300   Existing facilities and new developments



   152.301   Applicability



   152.302   Operations and maintenance



   152.303   Town inspections



   152.304   Correction by Town




Illicit Discharges




   152.400   Illicit discharges



   152.401   Applicability



   152.402   Accidental discharges (spills)



   152.403   Inspections



   152.404   Dumping prohibited




Administration and Enforcement




   152.500   Enforcement



   152.501   Verbal warnings



   152.502   Notice of violation



   152.503   Stop work orders



   152.504   Permit suspension or revocation



   152.505   Other enforcement considerations



   152.506   Appeals



 



   152.999   Penalties



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.101  OBJECTIVES.



   This chapter has several complementary objectives, which although
listed separately in divisions herein, are considered as a whole and are
intended to protect lives and property, and to improve the Town environment
by enhancing water quality in all the water bodies located within the Town
limits.



   (A)   An objective of this chapter is to safeguard property and
public welfare by regulating stormwater drainage and requiring temporary and
permanent provisions for its control.



   (B)   An objective of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and
enhance the environment of the Town and the public health, safety and the
general welfare of the citizens of the Town, by controlling discharges of
pollutants to the Town's stormwater system and to maintain and improve the
quality of the receiving waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow,
including, without limitation, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and
groundwater of the Town.



   (C)   An objective of this chapter is to enable the Town to comply
with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES) and
applicable regulations, 40 C.F.R. 122.26 for stormwater discharges and the
provisions of the Tennessee General Construction Permit.



   (D)   An objective of this chapter is to authorize the Town to
exercise the powers granted in Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-221-1105, which provides
that, among other powers cities have with respect to stormwater facilities,
is the power by ordinance or resolution to exercise general regulation over
the planning, location, construction, and operation and maintenance of
stormwater facilities in the Town, whether or not owned and operated by the
Town.



   (E)   An objective of this chapter is to authorize the Town to adopt
any rules and regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the objectives of
this chapter, including the adoption of a system of fees for services and
permits.



   (F)   An objective of this chapter is to authorize the Town to
establish standards to regulate the quantity and quality of stormwater
discharged and to regulate stormwater contaminants as may be necessary to
protect water quality.



   (G)   An objective of this chapter is to authorize the Town to
review and approve plans and plats for stormwater management in proposed land
development activities.



   (H)   An objective of this chapter is to authorize the Town to issue
permits for stormwater discharges, or for the construction, alteration,
extension, or repair of stormwater facilities.



   (I)   An objective of this chapter is to authorize the Town to
suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that the permittee has
violated any applicable ordinance, resolution, or condition of the permit.



   (J)   An objective of this chapter is to authorize the Town to
regulate and prohibit discharges into stormwater facilities of sanitary,
industrial, or commercial sewage or waters that have otherwise been
contaminated.



   (K)   An objective of this chapter is to authorize the Town to
expend funds to remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of contaminated
land or other sources of stormwater contamination, whether public or private.



   (L)   An objective of this chapter is to assign the authority and
responsibility for administration of this chapter to the Town's
Engineering/Development Department.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.102  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  Words
in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular.  Words used in the present tense shall include the
future tense.  The word "shall" connotes mandatory and is not discretionary,
while the word "may" is permissive.



   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.  A discharge into the Town MS4, prohibited by
this chapter, that occurs by chance and without planning or consideration
prior to its occurrence.



   ADMINISTRATIVE or CIVIL PENALTIES.  Under the authority provided in
Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-221-1106, any person violating the provisions of this
chapter may be assessed a civil or administrative penalty by the Town of not
less than $50 and not more than $5,000 per day for each day of violation. 
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.



   AS-BUILT PLANS.  Drawings depicting conditions as they were actually
constructed.



   BMA.  The Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Collierville,
Tennessee.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
state.  BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, or drainage from raw
material storage.



   BORROW PIT.  An excavation from which erodible material (typically
soil) is removed to be fill for another site.  There is no processing or
separation of erodible material conducted at the site.  A borrow pit is
considered a construction activity for the purpose of this chapter.



   BUFFER ZONE.  A strip of dense undisturbed perennial native
vegetation, either original or reestablished, that borders streams and
rivers, ponds and lakes, wetlands, and seeps.  Buffer zones are established
for the purpose of slowing water runoff, enhancing water infiltration, and
minimizing the risk of any potential nutrients or pollutants from leaving the
upland area and reaching surface waters.  Buffer zones are primarily
established for the primary purpose of protecting water quality and
maintaining a healthy aquatic ecosystem in receiving waters.



   CHANNEL.  A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically.



   CLEAN WATER ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
as amended, codified at 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.



   COMMERCIAL.  Property devoted, in whole or part, to the exchange and
buying and selling of commodities or services.



   CLEARING.  The removal of vegetation and disturbance of soil prior to
grading or excavation in anticipation of construction activities.  Clearing,
grading and excavation do not refer to clearing of vegetation along existing
or new roadways, highways, dams or power lines for sight distance or other
maintenance and/or safety concerns.  The clearing of land for agricultural
purposes is exempt from Town stormwater permitting.



   COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION.  The initial disturbance of soils
associated with clearing, grading, or excavating activities or other
construction activities.



   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE.  Any announcement or documentation
(including a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement,
drawing, permit application, zoning request, computer design, and the like)
or physical demarcation (including boundary signs, lot stakes, surveyor
markings, and the like) indicating construction activities may occur on a
specific plot. A COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE identifies a situation in
which multiple areas of disturbance are occurring on contiguous areas.  This
applies because the activities may take place at different times, on
different schedules, by different operators.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Any clearing, grading, filling, excavating, or
equipment usage that will result in the disturbance of land surface, and is
subject to stormwater permit requirements under the State of Tennessee
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction
Activities. The term shall not include:



      (1)   Such minor construction activities as home gardens and
individual home landscaping, home repairs, home maintenance work and other
related activities that result in minor soil erosion;



      (2)   Individual service and sewer connections for single- or
two-family residences;



      (3)   Agricultural practices involving the establishment,
cultivation or harvesting of products of the field or orchard, preparing and
planting of pastureland, forestry land management practices, including
harvesting, farm ponds, dairy operations, livestock and poultry management
practices, and the construction of farm buildings;



      (4)   Any project carried out under the technical supervision
of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department
of Agriculture;



      (5)   Installation, maintenance and repair of any underground
public utility lines, when the activity occurs in an existing hard surface
road, street or sidewalk; provided the activity is confined to the area of
the road, street or sidewalk that is hard surfaced, a street, curb, gutter or
sidewalk permit has been obtained, and the area is less than one acre of
disturbance.



   CONTAMINANT.  Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological
substance or matter in water.



   CONTROL MEASURE.  Any Best Management Practice (BMP) or other method
used to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.



   CLEAN WATER ACT.  The Clean Water Act of 1977 or the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act.



   DESIGN STORM EVENT.  A hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency
interval and duration, used in the analysis and design of a stormwater
facility.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or
permanent storage of materials (defined as materials of a like nature stored,
in whole or in part, for more than six months).



   DISCHARGE.  To dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak
or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured,
injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct
or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate
storm sewer system.



   DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER ASSOCIATED WITH CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. 
Stormwater point source discharges from areas where soil disturbing
activities (e.g., clearing, grading, excavation, and the like), or
construction materials or equipment storage or maintenance (e.g., earth fill
piles, fueling, waste material, and the like) are located.



   EASEMENT.  An acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a
person, party, firm, corporation, municipality or other legal entity has in
the land of another.



   EROSION.  The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice or other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in
conjunction with or promoted by human activities or effects.



   EXCEPTIONAL TENNESSEE WATER.  Surface waters of the state that satisfy
characteristics of exceptional Tennessee waters as listed in Chapter
1200-4-3-.03 of the official compilation - Rules and Regulations of the State
of Tennessee.  Characteristics include waters designated by the Water
Quality Control Board as Outstanding Natural Resource Waters (ONRW); waters
that provide habitat for ecologically significant populations of certain
aquatic or semi-aquatic plants or animals; waters that provide specialized
recreational opportunities; waters that possess outstanding scenic or
geologic values; or waters where existing conditions are better than water
quality standards.



   FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil disturbing activities at the site have
been completed and one of the three following criteria is met:



      (1)   A uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare
areas) perennial vegetative cover with a uniform density of at least 70% of
the (preferably) native vegetative cover for the area has been established on
all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, and all
slopes and channels have been permanently stabilized against erosion; or



      (2)   Equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the
use of riprap; permanent geotextiles, hardened surface materials including
concrete, asphalt, gabion baskets, or Reno mattresses) have been employed: or



      (3)   For construction projects on land used for agricultural
or silvicultural purposes, final stabilization may be accomplished by
returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural or
silvicultural use.



   HOTSPOT.  An area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.  The following land uses and activities are
deemed stormwater hot spots, but that term is not limited to only these land
uses:



      (1)   Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities;



      (2)   Vehicle service and maintenance facilities;



      (3)   Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities;



      (4)   Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, and the like);



      (5)   Industrial sites (included on standard industrial
classification code list);



      (6)   Marinas (service and maintenance);



      (7)   Public works storage areas;



      (8)   Facilities that generate or store hazardous waste
materials;



      (9)   Commercial container nursery;



      (10)   Restaurants and food service facilities;



      (11)   Other land uses and activities as designated by the
Town's Engineering/Development Department.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.  Illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the
municipal separate storm sewer system whether or not the connections result
in discharges into that system.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the municipal separate storm
sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater and not specifically
exempted herein.



   IMPAIRED WATERS.  Any segment of surface waters that has been
identified by the Division of Water Pollution Control of the State of
Tennessee, Department of Environment and Conservation as failing to support
one or more classified uses.



   IMPERVIOUS.  Not allowing the passage of water through the surface of
the ground or ground covering, or a substantial reduction in the capacity for
water to pass through the surface of the ground or ground covering.



   INDUSTRIAL FACILITY.  A business engaged in industrial production or
service that is characterized by manufacturing or productive enterprise or a
related service business.  An industrial facility is subject to the
Tennessee Multi-Sector Permit (TMSP) for Stormwater Discharges Associated
with Industrial Activity.



   INSPECTOR.  A person that has successfully completed and has a valid
certification from the Fundamentals of Erosion Prevention and Sediment
Control Level I or equivalent course.



   INSTITUTIONAL.  An established organization, especially of a public or
charitable nature.



   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any vehicle that is self-propelled and designed
to travel along the ground, and shall include, but not be limited to:
automobiles, buses, motor bikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks,
tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers; any of which does not
have lawfully affixed thereto a valid license plate or plates, and/or is in
the condition of being wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or
discarded.



   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.  Any activity that results in a change in
the existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the
existing soil topography.  Land-disturbing activities include, but are not
limited to, development, re-development, demolition, construction,
reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation.



   LINEAR PROJECT.  A land disturbing activity as conducted by an
underground/overhead utility or highway department, including but not limited
to any cable line or wire for the transmission of electrical energy, any
conveyance pipeline for transportation of gaseous or liquid substance, any
cable line or wire for communications, or any other energy resource
transmission right-of-way or utility infrastructure.



      (1)   Activities include the construction and installation of
these utilities within a corridor.  Linear project activities also include
the construction of access roads, staging areas, and borrow/spoil sites
associated with the linear project.



      (2)   Land disturbance specific to the development of
residential and/or commercial subdivision or high-rise structures is not
considered a linear project.



   MAINTENANCE.  Any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater
facility in good working order so as to function as designed.  Maintenance
shall include complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if
reconstruction is needed in order to restore the facility to its original
operational design parameters.  Maintenance shall also include the
correction of any problem on the site property that may directly impair the
functions of the stormwater facility.



   MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.  A document recorded in the Shelby County
Register's office that acts as a property deed restriction, and which
provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4).  The conveyances owned or
operated by the Town for the collection and transportation of stormwater,
including the roads and streets and their drainage systems, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and storm drains, and where the
context indicates, it means the municipality that owns the separate storm
sewer system.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT.  A
permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342.



   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI).  A written notice by the discharger to the
Commissioner of the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, or
his or her designee, that a person wishes his or her discharge to be
authorized under a general permit authorized by state law or regulation.



   NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT).  Notice that coverage under the
construction general permit is terminated due to completion of the project
and cessation of land disturbing activities.



   OFF-SITE FACILITY.  A structural BMP located outside the subject
property boundary described in the permit application for land development
activity.



   ON-SITE FACILITY.  A structural BMP located within the subject
property boundary described in the permit application for land development
activity.



   OPERATOR.  Any person associated with a construction project that
meets either of the following two criteria:



      (1)   The person who has operational or design control over
construction plans and specifications, including the ability to make
modifications to those plans and specifications.  This person is typically
the owner or developer of the project or a portion of the project, and is
considered the primary permittee; or



      (2)   The person who has day-to-day operational control of
those activities at a project which are necessary to ensure compliance with a
SWPPP for the site or other permit conditions.  This person is typically a
contractor or a commercial builder who is hired by the primary permittee, and
is considered a secondary permittee.



      (3)   It is anticipated that at different phases of a
construction project, different types of parties may satisfy the definition
of OPERATOR.



   PEAK FLOW.  The maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a
particular point resulting from a storm event.



   PERSON.  Any, and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, association, partnership, co-partnership, company,
governmental or private entity organized or existing under the laws of the
State of Tennessee or any other state or country.



   POINT SOURCE.  Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding
operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating
craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.  This term does not
include introduction of pollutants from non-point source agricultural and
silvicultural activities, including stormwater runoff from orchards,
cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and forest lands or return flows
from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.



   PRIORITY CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Any construction activity discharging
directly into, or immediately upstream of, waters the state recognizes as
impaired (for siltation or habitat alteration) or exceptional Tennessee
waters, and other construction activity as identified by the Town's
Engineering/Development Department.  For priority construction activity the
Town shall conduct pre-construction meetings with construction-site operators
and monthly site inspections.



   QUALITY ASSURANCE SITE ASSESSMENT.  Documented site inspection to
verify the functionality and performance of the SWPPP and for determining if
construction, operation and maintenance comply with permit requirements, as
presented in the narrative, engineering specifications, maps, plans and
drawings, and details for erosion prevention, sediment control and stormwater
management.



   REDEVELOPMENT.  Any development on a site where previous development
has occurred that is subject to the Tennessee General Permit for Construction
Activities.



   REGISTERED ENGINEER AND REGISTERED LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT.  An engineer
or landscape architect certified and registered by the State Board of
Architectural and Engineer Examiners pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. §§
62-2-101 et seq. to practice in the state.



   REGIONAL FACILITY.  A storm water management facility designed to
serve two or more properties and 100 or more acres of drainage area.



   RUNOFF.  That portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is
discharged from the area into the municipal separate storm sewer system.



   SEDIMENT.  Solid material, both inorganic and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from the original site by
wind, water, gravity, or ice as a product of erosion and has come to rest on
the earth's surface either above or below sea level.



   SEDIMENT BASIN.  A temporary basin consisting of an embankment
constructed across a wet weather conveyance, or an excavation that creates a
basin or by a combination of both, constructed to capture sediment on the
construction site to prevent downstream water quality impairment.



   SEDIMENTATION.  The action or process of forming or depositing
sediment, and where the context indicates the soil particles suspended in
stormwater that can settle in stream beds.



   SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTOR OF POLLUTANTS.  Any discharge containing
pollutants that are reasonably expected to cause or contribute to an
impairment of receiving stream water quality or designated uses.



   SIGNIFICANT SPILLS.  Releases of oil or hazardous substances in excess
of reportable quantities the Clean Water Act or the Comprehensive
Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA).



   SOILS REPORT.  A study of soils on a subject property with the primary
purpose of characterizing and describing the soils.  The soils report shall
be prepared by a qualified soils engineering professional, who shall be
directly involved in the soil characterization either by performing the
investigation or by directly supervising employees conducting the
investigation.



   STABILIZATION.  The provision of adequate measures, vegetative and/or
structural, that will prevent soil erosion from occurring.



   STEEP SLOPE.  A natural or created slope of 35% grade or greater. 
Designers of sites with steep slopes must pay attention to stormwater
management in the SWPPP to engineer runoff nonerosively around or over a
steep slope.



   STORMWATER.  Water induced or created from precipitation, whether
rain, snow or ice, and either stored, collected, detained, absorbed or
discharged.  The definition also includes street wash waters related to
street cleaning or maintenance, and groundwater infiltration into pipes and
drainage structures.



   STORMWATER DISCHARGE-RELATED ACTIVITIES.  Activities which cause,
contribute to, or result in point source stormwater pollutant discharges,
including but not limited to excavation, site development, grading and other
surface disturbance activities; and measures to control stormwater including
the citing, construction and operation of best management practices (BMPs) to
control, reduce or prevent stormwater pollution.



   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.  The collection, conveyance, storage,
treatment and disposal of storm water in a manner to meet the objectives of
this chapter and its terms, including but not limited to measures that
control the increased volume and rate of storm water runoff and water quality
impacts caused or induced by manmade changes to land at pre-development
levels.



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES.  The stormwater management control
devices, structures, conduits, ponds, ditches, combined sewers, sewers, and
all or system of such physical components designed to treat, detain, store,
convey, absorb, conserve, protect or otherwise control storm water.



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.  The set of drawings and other documents
that comprise all the information and specifications for the programs,
drainage systems, structures, BMP's, concepts and techniques intended to
maintain or restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to
pre-development levels.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP).  A written plan that
includes site map(s), an identification of construction/contractor activities
that could cause pollutants in the stormwater, and a description of measures
or practices to control these pollutants.  The SWPPP should be prepared in
accordance with the Tennessee Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook.



   STREAM.  A surface water that is not a wet weather conveyance as
defined herein.



   STRUCTURAL BMPs.  Facilities that are constructed to provide control
of stormwater runoff.



   SURFACE WATER.  Waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created
naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other water
courses, lakes and reservoirs.



   TEMPORARY STABILIZATION.  The temporary condition that exists when
vegetation and/or a non-erodible surface have been established on the area of
disturbance and construction activity has temporarily ceased.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in 40 C.F.R. Part 401, promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of
33 U.S.C. 1317.



   TURBIDITY.  The cloudiness or haziness of a fluid caused by individual
particles (suspended solids) that are generally invisible to the naked eye.



   WASTE SITE.  An area where waste material from a construction site is
deposited.  When the material is erodible, such as soil, the site must be
treated as a construction site.



   WATERCOURSE.  A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which collects or carries surface water. 
See STREAM.



   WATER QUALITY.  Characteristics that are related to the physical,
chemical, biological, and/or radiological nature of storm water.



   WATER QUALITY BUFFER.  A setback from the top of water body's bank of
undisturbed vegetation, including trees, shrubs and herbaceous vegetation;
enhanced or restored vegetation; or the re-establishment of native vegetation
bordering streams, ponds, wetlands, springs, reservoirs or lakes, which
exists or is established to protect those water bodies.



   WATERSHED.  All the land area that contributes runoff to a particular
point along a waterway.



   WATERS OF THE STATE.  Any and all water, public or private, on or
beneath the surface of the ground, which are contained within, flow through,
or border upon Tennessee or any portion thereof except those bodies of water
confined to and retained within the limits of private property in single
ownership which do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or
underground waters.



   WETLAND(S).  Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted to life in saturated soil conditions.  Wetlands
include, but are not limited to, swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.



   WET WEATHER CONVEYANCES.  Man-made or natural watercourses, including
natural watercourses that have been modified by channelization, that flow
only in direct response to precipitation runoff in their immediate locality
and whose channels are at all times above the groundwater table and are not
suitable for drinking water supplies, and in which hydrological and
biological analyses indicate that, under normal weather conditions, due to
naturally occurring ephemeral or low flow, there is not sufficient water to
support fish or multiple populations of obligate lotic aquatic organisms
whose life cycle includes an aquatic phase of at least two months.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.103  ABBREVIATIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following abbreviations shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ARAP.  Aquatic Resource Alteration Permit.



   BMP.  Best Management Practice.



   CERCLA.  The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act.



   C.F.R.  The Code of Federal Regulations.



   CGP.  General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated
with Construction Activities.



   CWA.  Clean Water Act.



   EPA.  Environmental Protection Agency.



   EPSC.  Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control.



   FEMA.  The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   MS4.  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.



   NOC.  Notice of Coverage.



   NOI.  Notice of Intent.



   NOT.  Notice of Termination.



   NPDES.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   POTW.  Publicly Owned Treatment Works.



   SWPPP. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.



   TDEC.  Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation.



   TDOT.  Tennessee Department of Transportation.



   TCA.  Tennessee Code Annotated.



   TMSP.  Tennessee Multi-Sector Permit (TMSP) for Storm Water Discharges
Associated with Industrial Activity.



   TWQCA.  Tennessee Water Quality Control Act.



   TNCGP.  Tennessee Construction General Permit.



   USACOE.  United States Army Corps of Engineers.



   U.S.C.  United States Code.



   USGS.  United States Geological Survey.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.104  CONFLICT.



   To the extent its provisions conflict or overlap with other Town
ordinances or regulations, it is the intent of this chapter that the
provision that is more restrictive or imposes higher standards or
requirements shall govern.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.105  WAIVERS.



   Waivers for stormwater management will not be granted for any
construction or site work project. All construction and site work projects
shall provide for on-site or off-site stormwater management as required by
this chapter.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



LAND DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS



§ 152.200  LAND DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.



   Land development and construction activities are a primary source of
stormwater pollution, and can cause significant environmental damage to the
streams and waterways of the Town if not properly managed.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.201  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all land
development and construction activities, including, but not limited to, site
plan applications and subdivision applications.  These standards apply to
any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the
following criteria:



   (A)   Any new development or redevelopment site that involves land
development activities of one acre or more.



   (B)   Projects or developments of less than one acre of total land
disturbance may also be required to comply with the provisions of this
chapter if:



      (1)   The stormwater discharge from a site is causing,
contributing to, or is likely to contribute to a violation of a state water
quality standard;



      (2)   The stormwater discharge is, or is likely to be a
significant contributor of pollutants to waters of the state;



      (3)   Changes in state or federal rules require sites of less
than one acre that are not part of the of a large common plan of development
or sale to obtain a stormwater permit;



      (4)   Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of
size, that is defined by as a hotspot land use; or



      (5)   Minimum applicability criteria set forth in division (A)
above, if the activities are part of a larger common plan of development,
even multiple that is part of a separate and distinct land development
activity that may take place at different times on different schedules.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.202  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   The Town adopts as its MS4 stormwater design and best
management practices (BMPs) manuals for stormwater management, construction
and permanent, the following publications, which are incorporated by
reference in this chapter as if fully set out herein:



      (1)   TDEC Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Handbook,
most current edition.



      (2)   Town of Collierville Stormwater Drainage Manual, most
current edition.



      (3)   A collection of Town approved BMPs developed or
collected by the Town that comply with the goals of the Town's MS4 permit
and/or the CGP.



      (4)   This chapter.



   (B)   The Town's BMP manual(s) include a list of acceptable BMPs
including the specific design performance criteria and operation and
maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice.  These include Town
approved BMPs for permanent stormwater management, including green
infrastructure BMPs.



   (C)   The Town manual(s) may be updated and expanded from time to
time, at the discretion of the Town's Engineering/Development Department,
based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local
maintenance experience, or changes in federal or state law or regulation.
Stormwater facilities that are designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with these BMP criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water
quality performance standards.



   (D)   Stormwater quantity control is an integral component of
overall stormwater management. Quantity control is effectively flood control,
reducing potential damages and health risks, but because uncontrolled runoff
can cause erosion, it can also be a form of water quality control.  All
projects meeting the applicability requirements of this chapter shall provide
a permanent stormwater storage facility, unless certain criteria are met as
determined by the Town Engineer, or his or her designee, which shall be based
on qualified studies submitted by the engineer of record.  Exceptions to
stormwater quantity requirements shall be made based on criteria, including
but not limited to the following:



      (1)   Redevelopment projects where post-redevelopment
conditions reduces the flow rate from existing conditions.



      (2)   The site is located in the lower portion of the drainage
basin (generally lower one-fourth) and requiring a storage facility would
have a negative effect on the stormwater drainage system.



      (3)   There is a regional detention facility which provides
for stormwater management of the site.



      (4)   There is excess capacity of the existing stormwater
drainage system to convey the 100-year storm event for the drainage basin in
a fully developed condition.



      (5)   Additional criteria as set by the Town's
Engineering/Development Department.



   (E)   The following design criteria are established for stormwater
quantity control.  Stormwater quantity designs shall meet the multi-stage
storm frequency storage requirements as identified below.  In the case of a
discrepancy between this chapter and the Town of Collierville Drainage
Manual, most current edition, the most stringent requirement(s) will apply.



      (1)   All stormwater storage facilities shall be designed such
that the maximum allowable release rate of stormwater runoff generated
on-site shall not exceed the pre-development peak rate of runoff as
calculated by the engineer of record for the two-year, ten-year and 25-year
storm event using methods outlined in the Town of Collierville Drainage
Manual or other standard engineering methods as approved by the Town's
Engineering/Development Department.



      (2)   Earthen stormwater storage facilities shall be designed
with an emergency spillway sized to carry the 100-year storm event while
maintaining a one foot freeboard between the top of the embankment and water
surface elevation.



   (F)   All calculations shall be performed by an engineer registered
in the state.



   (G)   Urban areas have two separate and distinct drainage systems
that function to remove excess precipitation with minimum inconvenience and
property damage.  This dual system is comprised of a minor (active) system
and a major (passive) system.  The minor system includes the curb and gutter
area of the street, roadside ditches, inlets, storm sewers, culverts,
channels, or other conveyance facilities designed to convey the design storm
runoff.  The major system comes into operation once the minor system's
capacity is exceeded.  The major system consists of excess capacity in storm
sewers, culverts, streets, property line drainage swales, and other natural
and lined channels.  The capacity of the major system shall have capacity to
convey the major storm runoff without life hazard or property damage.



      (1)   Design storm frequency for land use/development type for
the minor (active) system shall be as follows:



         (a)   Residential - 25 years;



         (b)   Commercial/business/industrial - 25 years;



         (c)   Critical areas (hospitals, interstates) - 50 years.



      (2)   Design storm frequency per street classification for the
minor (active) system shall be as follows:



         (a)   Locals - 25 years;



         (b)   Collectors - 25 years;



         (c)   Arterials - 50 years.



      (3)   Design storm frequency for the major (passive) system
shall be 100 years.



   (H)   The methodology for hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the
design storms is specified in the BMP Manual.  These calculations must show
that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling
runoff from the site in compliance with this chapter and the guidelines of
the Town of Collierville Drainage Manual.  Required calculations include:



      (1)   A description of the design storm frequency, duration,
and intensity where applicable;



      (2)   Time of concentration;



      (3)   Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients;



      (4)   Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each
watershed area;



      (5)   Infiltration rates, where applicable;



      (6)   Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other stormwater
conveyance capacities;



      (7)   Flow velocities;



      (8)   Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for
the required design storms; and



      (9)   Documentation of sources for all computation methods and
field test results.



   (I)   If hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater
control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the Town's
Engineering/Development Department may impose any and all additional
requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of
runoff.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.203  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   Every land development or construction activity that results
in the discharge of stormwater to the Town stormwater management facilities,
including but not limited to, detention ponds, rain gardens, underground
storage, and any other facility intended to manage stormwater quality or
quantity shall furnish a stormwater management plan to the Town.  The
stormwater management plan (narrative and/or plan sheets) shall include
sufficient information to allow the Town to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed
development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and
the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing
stormwater generated at the project site.



   (B)   To accomplish this goal the stormwater management plan shall
include the following:



      (1)   Topographic base map.  Topographic base map of the site
which extends a minimum of 100 feet beyond the limits of the proposed
development and indicates:



         (a)   Existing surface water drainage including streams,
ponds, culverts, ditches, sink holes, wetlands, and the type, size,
elevation, and the like, of nearest upstream and downstream drainage
structures;



         (b)   Current land use including all existing
structures, roads, and easements, and locations of utilities;



         (c)   All other existing significant natural and
artificial features;



         (d)   Proposed land use with tabulation of the
percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, drainage patterns,
locations of utilities, roads and easements, the limits of clearing and
grading;



      (2)   Proposed structural and non-structural BMPs;



      (3)   A written description of the site plan and justification
of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required;



      (4)   Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms
specified in the Town's BMP manual or this chapter.  These calculations must
show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of
controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this chapter and the
guidelines of the Town's BMP manual.  These calculations shall include:



         (a)   A description of the design storm frequency,
duration, and intensity where applicable;



         (b)   Time of concentration;



         (c)   Soil curve numbers or runoff;   



         (d)   Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for
each watershed area;



         (e)   Infiltration rates, where applicable;



         (f)   Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other
stormwater conveyance capacities;



         (g)   Flow velocities;



         (h)   Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff
for the design storms referenced in the Town's BMP manual; and



         (i)   Documentation of sources for all computation
methods and field test results.



   (5)   Soils information.  If a stormwater management control
measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration
basins), then a soils report shall be submitted.  The soils report shall be
based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports. 
The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be
determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.204  REQUIRED PERMITS.



   (A)   Any person who intends to discharge stormwater from
construction or reconstruction sites to the Town stormwater system must
provide proof of coverage (NOC) under the General NPDES Permit for discharges
of stormwater associated with construction activities (CGP) prior to
commencing any land disturbing activity.



   (B)   Prevention Plan (SWPPP), Notice of Intent for Stormwater
Discharges from Construction Activity (NOI), and a Notice of Coverage (NOC),
and any additional applicable local, state or federal permits (i.e.: ARAP,
and the like) to the Town's Engineering/Development Department for review and
approval prior to commencement of construction.



   (C)   Upon project completion, a copy of the Notice of Termination
(NOT) must be submitted to the Town's Engineering/Development Department.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.205  STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.



   (A)   Any person who intends to commence construction or land
development activities in the Town must prepare and implement a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) that complies with this chapter and the CGP
for all construction activities.



   (B)   The purpose of this plan is to identify
construction/contractor activities that could cause pollutants in the
stormwater, and to describe measures or practices to control these pollutants
during project construction.



   (C)   The SWPPP shall accurately describe the potential for soil
erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from land disturbing activity
and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to be taken to control
these problems.



   (D)   The length and complexity of the plan is to be commensurate
with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and potential
for off-site damage.  All plans shall be phased in accordance with the
CGP.  As necessary, the plan shall be phased so that changes to the site
during construction that alter drainage patterns will be addressed by an
appropriate phase of the plan.



   (E)   The plan shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer
or landscape architect licensed in the state.  The plan shall conform to the
requirements of this chapter and the CGP.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.206  WATER QUALITY BUFFERS.



   (A)   The goal of the water quality buffer is to preserve
undisturbed vegetation that is native to the streamside habitat in the area
of the project. Vegetated, preferably native, water quality buffers protect
water bodies by providing structural integrity and canopy cover, as well as
stormwater infiltration, filtration and evapotranspiration.



   (B)   The buffer width depends on the size of a drainage area. 
Streams or other waters with drainage areas less than one square mile will
require buffer widths of 30 feet minimum.  Streams or other waters with
drainage areas greater than one square mile will require buffer widths of 60
feet minimum.  The 30-feet criterion for the width of the buffer zone can be
established on an average width basis at a project, as long as the minimum
width of the buffer zone is more than 15 feet at any measured location.  The
60-feet criterion for the width of the buffer zone can be established on an
average width basis at a project, as long as the minimum width of the buffer
zone is more than 30 feet at any measured location. The Town Engineer shall
determine the circumstances under which the average will be available.  A
determination that standards cannot be met may not be based solely on the
difficulty or cost associated with implementation.  Every attempt should be
made for development and redevelopment activities not to take place within
the buffer zone.



   (C)   If water quality buffer width as defined above cannot be fully
accomplished on-site, the Town Engineer shall determine the circumstances
under which alternative buffer widths will be available.  A determination
that water quality buffer widths cannot be met on site may not be based
solely on the difficulty or cost of associated with implementation, but must
include multiple criteria, such as type of project, existing land use and
physical conditions that preclude use of these practices.



   (D)   Buffer zones are not primary sediment control measures and
should not be relied upon as such.



   (E)   Rehabilitation and enhancement of a natural buffer zone is
allowed, if necessary, for improvement of its effectiveness of protection of
the waters of the state.



   (F)   Water quality buffers shall be clearly marked on site
development plans, grading permit applications, and/or concept plans.



   (G)   Buffer zone requirements.



      (1)   Construction applies to all streams adjacent to
construction sites, with an exception for streams designated as impaired or
exceptional Tennessee waters, as designated by the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation.  A 30-foot natural riparian buffer zone
adjacent to all streams at the construction site shall be preserved, to the
maximum extent practicable, during construction activities at the site.  The
water quality buffer zone is required to protect waters of the state located
within or immediately adjacent to the boundaries of the project, as
identified using methodology from standard operating procedures for
hydrologic determinations (see rules to implement a certification program for
qualified hydrologic professionals, TN Rules Chapter 0400-40-17).  The
buffer zone requirement only applies to new construction sites.  The
riparian buffer zone should be preserved between the top of stream bank and
the disturbed construction area.  The 30-feet criterion for the width of the
buffer zone can be established on an average width basis at a project, as
long as the minimum width of the buffer zone is more than 15 feet at any
measured location.



      (2)   Buffer zone requirements for discharges into impaired or
exceptional Tennessee waters. A 60-foot natural riparian buffer zone adjacent
to the receiving stream designated as impaired or high quality waters shall
be preserved, to the maximum extent practicable, during construction
activities at the site.  The water quality buffer zone is required to
protect waters of the state (e.g., perennial and intermittent streams,
rivers, lakes, wetlands) located within or immediately adjacent to the
boundaries of the project, as identified on a 7.5-minute USGS quadrangle map,
or as determined by the director.  Buffer zones are not sediment control
measures and should not be relied upon as primary sediment control
measures.  Rehabilitation and enhancement of a natural buffer zone is
allowed, if necessary, for improvement of its effectiveness of protection of
the waters of the state.  The buffer zone requirement only applies to new
construction sites.  The riparian buffer zone should be established between
the top of stream bank and the disturbed construction area.  The 60-feet
criterion for the width of the buffer zone can be established on an average
width basis at a project, as long as the minimum width of the buffer zone is
more than 30 feet at any measured location.



      (3)   Permanent new development and significant redevelopment
sites are required to preserve water quality buffers along streams within the
MS4.  Alternatives to installing new or expanding existing buffer zones may
be considered on a case-by-case basis for redevelopment sites.  Buffers
shall be clearly marked on site development plans, grading permit
applications, and/or concept plans.  Buffer width depends on the size of a
drainage area.  Streams or other waters with drainage areas less than one
square mile will require buffer widths of 30 feet minimum.  The 30-feet
criterion for the width of the buffer zone can be established on an average
width basis at a project, as long as the minimum width of the buffer zone is
more than 15 feet at any measured location.  Streams or other waters with
drainage areas greater than one square mile will require buffer widths of 60
feet minimum.  The 60-feet criterion for the width of the buffer zone can be
established on an average width basis at a project, as long as the minimum
width of the buffer zone is more than 30 feet at any measured location.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.207  RUNOFF REDUCTION.



   The State of Tennessee issues to the Town of Collierville an NPDES
General Permit for Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems, which requires permanent stormwater management. Site designs for all
new and redevelopment projects approved after the State established
implementation date shall require management measures that are designed,
built and maintained to infiltrate, evapotranspire, harvest and/or use, at a
minimum, the first inch of every rainfall event preceded by 72 hours of no
measurable precipitation. This first inch of rainfall must be 100% managed
with no discharge to surface waters, except as provided herein.



   (A)   Application of runoff reduction requirements may not be
appropriate in all circumstances. Alternate treatment approaches may be
approved where there is a potential for introducing pollutants into the
groundwater, where pre-existing soil contamination is present in areas
subject to contact with infiltrated runoff, or where there is the presence of
sinkholes or other karst features.



   (B)   Pre-development infiltrative capacity of soils at the site
must be taken into account in selection of runoff reduction management
measures.



   (C)   For developments that cannot meet 100% of the runoff reduction
requirement, the remainder of the stipulated amount of rainfall must be
treated prior to discharge with a technology documented to remove 80% total
suspended solids (TSS) unless an alternative provided under this ordinance is
approved. The treatment technology must be designed, installed and maintained
to continue to meet this performance standard.



   (D)   For developments that cannot meet 100% of the runoff reduction
requirements, alternative runoff reduction measures may be implemented at
another location, preferably within the same USGS 12-digit hydrologic unit
code (HUC) as the original development. Off-site mitigation must be a minimum
of 1.5 times the amount of water not managed on site. The off-site mitigation
location (or alternative location outside the 12-digit HUC) and runoff
reduction measures must be approved by the Town’s Engineering/Development
Department. The Town’s Engineering/Development Department shall aid in
identifying priority areas within the watershed in which mitigation projects
can be completed. The Town’s Engineering/Development Department shall
create an inventory of appropriate mitigation projects, and develop
appropriate institutional standards and management systems to value, evaluate
and track transactions. Mitigation can be used for retrofit or redevelopment
projects, but should be avoided in areas of new development.



   (E)   For developments that cannot meet 100% of the runoff reduction
and pollutant removal standards and cannot provide for off-site mitigation,
the owner may make payment into a public stormwater project fund to be
established by the Town. The payment into the fund by the owner shall be 1.5
times the estimated cost of on-site runoff reduction controls.



      (1)   Funds from the payment in lieu of runoff reduction and
pollutant removal shall be used by the Town to construct and maintain
detention and conveyance systems within the town.



      (2)   Acceptance of payment in lieu of runoff reduction and
pollutant removal is not automatic and must be considered on a case-by-case
basis.



      (3)   If payment in lieu of runoff reduction and pollutant
removal is approved, the developer is still responsible for conveying and
managing stormwater runoff from the development to the existing storm
drainage system in accordance with the requirements of this section.



   (F)   Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive
resources (e.g., recharge areas, wetlands) may be subject to additional
performance criteria as determined by the town’s Engineering/Development
Department, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management
practices.



   (G)   Stormwater discharges from hot spots may require the
application of specific structural BMP’s and pollution prevention
practices. Stormwater from a hot spot land use may not be infiltrated.



   (H)   Prior to or during the site design process, applicants shall
consult with the town’s Engineering/Development Department to determine if
they are subject to additional stormwater requirements.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed 3-23-15)



§ 152.208  RUNOFF REDUCTION CREDITS.



   Incentives for construction sites may be approved after the
implementation date that allow a 10% reduction in the volume of rainfall to
be managed for redevelopment projects, projects with density that exceeds
seven units per acre, or projects with a Floor to Area Ratio (FAR) of two. 
The credits are additive such that a maximum reduction of 30% of the standard
established herein is possible for a development that meets all three of the
above criteria.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed 3-23-15)



§ 152.209  STABILIZATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has
been either partially or wholly cleared by development activities shall be
stabilized.  Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as possible
in portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or
permanently ceased.  Temporary or permanent soil stabilization at the
construction site (or a phase of the project) must be completed no later than
14 days after the construction activity in that portion of the site has
temporarily or permanently ceased.



   (B)   Steep slopes shall be temporarily stabilized not later than
seven days after construction activity on the slope has temporarily or
permanently ceased.



   (C)   Permanent stabilization with perennial vegetation (using
native herbaceous and woody plants where practicable) or other permanently
stable, non-eroding surface shall replace any temporary measures as soon as
practicable.  Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are
capable of controlling erosion.



   (D)   Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established
over 90% of the seeded area.



   (E)   Every stabilized area must exhibit survival of a minimum of
70% of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following
stabilization.  Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the
minimum 70% survival for one year is achieved.



   (F)   In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must
be included describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques
to be used at the site after construction is completed.  This plan must
specify not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who
will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what
practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is
permanently preserved.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.210  MONITORING AND INSPECTIONS OF CONSTRUCTION SITES BY TOWN.



   The Town Engineer, or his or her designee, shall monitor and conduct
periodic inspections of active and inactive construction sites to determine
compliance with the CGP and SWPPP.  Deficiencies noted during these
monitoring and inspection activities will be corrected as directed by the
Town Engineer, or his or her designee, as stated in the enforcement section
of this chapter.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.211  INSPECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE BY OWNER/OPERATOR.



   The owner/operator shall conduct inspections of permitted construction
sites to ensure compliance with the CGP and SWPPP.  These inspections shall
be made in accordance with the requirements of the CGP.  Maintenance needs
identified in inspections or by other means shall be accomplished before the
next storm event, but in no case more than seven days after the need is
identified.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.212  CONSTRUCTION SITE POSTING.



   (A)   The developer shall post a notice near the main entrance of
the construction site accessible to the public with the following information:



      (1)   A copy of the NOC with the NPDES permit tracking number
for the construction project;



      (2)   Name, company name, email address (if available),
telephone number and address of the project site owner/operator or a local
contact person;



      (3)   A brief description of the project; and



      (4)   The location of the SWPPP (see CGP).



   (B)   The notice must be maintained in a legible condition.  If
posting this information near a main entrance is infeasible due to safety
concerns, or not accessible to the public, the notice shall be posted in a
local public building.  If the construction project is a linear construction
project (e.g., pipeline, highway, and the like), the notice must be placed in
a publicly accessible location near where



construction is actively underway and moved as necessary.  This permit does
not provide the public with any right to trespass on a construction site for
any reason, including inspection of a site.  This permit does not require
that permittees allow members of the public access to a construction site.



   (C)   The developer shall also retain following items/information in
an appropriate location on-site:



      (1)   Rain gauge;



      (2)   A copy of twice weekly inspection reports;



      (3)   A documentation of quality assurance site assessments,
if applicable (see CGP); and



      (4)   A copy of the site inspector's Fundamentals of Erosion
Prevention and Sediment Control Level 1 certification.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.213  AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.



   All persons are required to submit as-built plans for any structures
located on-site after final construction is completed.  The plan must show
the final design configurations for all stormwater management facilities and
must be sealed by a registered professional surveyor or registered
professional engineer licensed to practice in Tennessee.  A final inspection
by the Town is required before any performance security will be released.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.214  PERMANENT STORMWATER MAINTENANCE PLAN AND AGREEMENT.



   (A)   Every land development or construction activity that results
in the construction of permanent stormwater management facilities, including
but not limited to, detention ponds, rain gardens, underground storage, and
any other facility intended to manage stormwater quality or quantity shall
provide to the Town a permanent stormwater maintenance plan and agreement
that provides for the perpetual care and maintenance of the stormwater
management facilities for the development.



   (B)   The maintenance agreement shall operate as a deed restriction
binding on the current property owners and all subsequent property owners and
their lessees and assigns, including but not limited to, homeowner
associations or other groups or entities.



   (C)   The maintenance agreement for permanent stormwater management
shall be fully executed by the person responsible for permanent maintenance
prior to commencement of construction.



   (D)   The maintenance agreement shall assign responsibility for the
maintenance and repair of the stormwater facility to the owners of the
property upon which the facility is located and be recorded as such on the
plat for the property by appropriate notation.  The maintenance agreement
will identify the parts or components of the stormwater management facility
that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary
for the required maintenance.



   (E)   The maintenance agreement shall provide for a periodic
inspection by the property owners in accordance with the requirements of
below divisions for the purpose of documenting maintenance and repair needs
and to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter.  The
property owners will arrange for these inspections to be conducted by a
person familiar with site specific stormwater management measures, who will
submit a signed written report of the inspection to the Town's
Engineering/Development Department.  It shall also grant permission to the
Town to enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the stormwater
facility to ensure that it is being properly maintained.



   (F)   The maintenance agreement shall provide that the minimum
maintenance and repair needs include, but are not limited to, the removal of
silt, litter and other debris, the cutting of grass, cutting and vegetation
removal, and the replacement of landscape vegetation, in detention and
retention basins, and inlets and drainage pipes and any other stormwater
facilities.  It shall also provide that the property owners shall be
responsible for additional maintenance and repair needs consistent with the
needs and standards outlined in the Town's BMP manual.



   (G)   The maintenance agreement shall provide that maintenance needs
must be addressed in a timely manner, on a schedule to be determined by the
Town's Engineering/Development Department.



   (H)   The maintenance agreement shall provide that if the property
is not maintained or repaired within the prescribed schedule, the Town shall
perform the maintenance and repair at its expense, and bill the same to the
property owner.  The maintenance agreement shall also provide that the
Town's cost of performing the maintenance shall be a lien against the
property.



   (I)   A stormwater maintenance and repair plan shall be prepared and
included as an exhibit to the stormwater maintenance agreement.  The design
and planning of all permanent stormwater management facilities shall include
detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued
performance.  The plan will identify the parts or components of any
stormwater management facility that needs to be maintained and the equipment
and skills or training necessary to complete the maintenance.  Provisions
for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the
maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance
procedures shall be included in the plan.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



EXISTING FACILITIES



§ 152.300  EXISTING FACILITIES AND NEW DEVELOPMENTS.



   The MS4 permit issued to the Town by the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation requires the Town to monitor stormwater
management facilities that were constructed prior to and after the adoption
of this chapter to assure that these facilities are maintained properly and
perform the intended function.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.301  APPLICABILITY.



   Every permanent stormwater management facility existing at the time of
and after the adoption of this chapter, including but not limited to,
detention ponds, rain gardens, underground storage, and any other facility
intended to manage stormwater quality or quantity shall provide for the
perpetual care and maintenance of the stormwater management facilities.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.302  OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a
stormwater management facility approved after the adoption of this chapter
shall maintain records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of
all maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for
at least three years. These records shall be made available to the Town
during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.



   (B)   The owners and/or the operators of stormwater management
facilities shall perform routine inspections to ensure that the stormwater
management facilities are properly functioning.  These inspections shall be
conducted on an annual basis, at a minimum.  These inspections shall be
conducted by a person familiar with site specific stormwater management
measures.



   (C)   In the event that there is not a maintenance agreement for any
existing facility, the Town's Engineering/Development Department shall in
writing notify the owners of existing locations and developments of specific
drainage, erosion or sediment problems affecting or caused by the locations
and developments, and the specific actions required to correct those
problems.  The notice shall also specify a reasonable time for compliance. 
Discharges from existing stormwater management facilities that have not been
maintained and/or inspected in accordance with this chapter shall be regarded
as illicit.



   (D)   The owners and/or the operators of stormwater management
facilities approved after the adoption of this chapter shall perform
comprehensive inspection of all stormwater management facilities and review
management practices at least once every five years.  These inspections and
reviews must be conducted by either a professional engineer or landscape
architect, licensed in the state.  The owners or operators shall maintain
documentation of these inspections and shall submit this documentation to the
Town's Engineering/Development Department upon request.  Complete inspection
reports for these five year inspections shall include the following:



      (1)   Facility type;



      (2)   Inspection date;



      (3)   Latitude and longitude and nearest street address;



      (4)   Facility owner information (e.g. name, address, phone
number, fax, and email);



      (5)   A description and photographic documentation of
condition of the stormwater management facilities, including vegetation and
soils, inlet and outlet channels and structures, embankments, slopes, safety
benches, spillways, weirs, and other control structures.  Any sediment and
debris accumulation shall be noted.



      (6)   A list of specific maintenance items or violations that
need to be corrected by the stormwater management facilities owner, including
deadlines and re-inspection dates.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.303  TOWN INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Town may enter and inspect private property for the
purpose of determining if there are illicit non-stormwater discharges, and to
verify that all stormwater management facilities are functioning as designed.



   (B)   Inspections may be conducted on any reasonable basis,
including but not limited to routine inspections, random inspections,
inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations, and
inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical
sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants.



   (C)   Inspections may include, but are not limited to reviewing
maintenance and repair records, sampling discharges, surface water,
groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities, and
evaluating the condition of stormwater control facilities.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.304  CORRECTION BY TOWN.



   In the event that the stormwater management facility is not maintained
as required by this chapter, the Town Engineer, or his or her designee, shall
notify in writing the person responsible for maintenance of the stormwater
management facility.  The responsible person shall have 30 calendar days to
complete the maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. 
If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the maintenance standards
required for stormwater facilities under this chapter, the Town, after
reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the maintenance needs by
performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working
condition.  The cost of any action by the Town under this section shall be
charged to the responsible party.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



ILLICIT DISCHARGES



§ 152.400  ILLICIT DISCHARGES.



   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) any discharge that is not composed entirely
of stormwater, except as stated in this chapter, and any discharge that flows
into the MS4 that is not accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be an illicit discharge.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.401  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system is
prohibited.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



   (B)   Prohibited non-stormwater discharges shall include, but shall
not be limited to, sanitary wastewater, car wash wastewater, radiator
flushing disposal, spills from roadway accidents, carpet cleaning wastewater,
effluent from septic tanks, improper oil disposal, laundry wastewater/gray
water, or improper disposal of auto and household toxics.



   (C)   The Town shall take appropriate steps to detect and minimize
illicit connections to the Town MS4, including the adoption of programs to
identify illicit discharges and their source or sources, and to provide for
public education, public information and other appropriate activities to
facilitate the proper management and disposal of used oil, toxic materials
and household hazardous waste.



   (D)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any non-stormwater
discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited except
as described as follows:



      (1)   Water line flushing or other potable water sources;



      (2)   Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with potable water;



      (3)   Diverted stream flows;



      (4)   Rising ground waters;



      (5)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration;



      (6)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;



      (7)   Discharges from potable water sources;



      (8)   Uncontaminated air conditioning condensate;



      (9)   Irrigation water;



      (10)   Springs;



      (11)   Water from crawl spaces;



      (12)   Foundation or footing drains;



      (13)   Lawn watering;



      (14)   Individual residential car washing;



      (15)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;



      (16)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;



      (17)   Street wash water;



      (18)   Discharges or flows from fire fighting activities;



      (19)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge with written
permission from the Town;



      (20)   Other discharges authorized by the Construction General
Permit (CGP):



      (21)   Dewatering of work areas of collected stormwater and
ground water (filtering or chemical treatment may be necessary prior to
discharge);



      (22)   Waters used to wash vehicles (of dust and soil, not
process materials such as oils, asphalt or concrete) where detergents are not
used and detention and/or filtering is provided before the water leaves the
site;



      (23)   Routine external building washing that does not use
detergents or other chemicals;



      (24)   Uncontaminated groundwater or spring water; and



      (25)   Any other uncontaminated water source.



   (E)   Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is,
or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement,
at the person's expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge
of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.



   (F)   Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the
provisions of this section.



   (G)   Discharges from existing BMPs that have not been maintained
and/or inspected in accordance with this chapter shall be regarded as illicit.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.402  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES (SPILLS).



   (A)   As soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation,
or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has
information of any known or suspected release of materials which are
resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants discharging
into the municipal separate storm sewer system, the person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of the
release.



   (B)   In the event of a release of prohibited materials that are
classified as hazardous, the person shall immediately notify emergency
response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.  In the
event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the person shall notify the
Town Engineer, or his or her designee in person or by telephone, fax, or
email, no later than the next business day.



   (C)   Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the Town's Engineering/Development
Department designee within three business days of the telephone notice.



   (D)   If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of the
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge
and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.  The records shall be
retained for at least three years.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.403  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Town Engineer, or his or her designee, bearing proper
credentials and identification, may enter and inspect all properties for
regular periodic inspections, investigations, monitoring, observation,
measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, to effectuate the provisions
of this section, and/or the NPDES Storm Water Permit.  The Town Engineer, or
his or her designee, shall duly notify the owner of the property or the
representative on site, and the inspection shall be conducted at reasonable
times.



   (B)   Upon refusal by any property owner to permit an inspector to
enter or to continue an inspection, the inspector shall terminate the
inspection or confine the inspection to areas wherein no objection is
raised.  The inspector shall immediately report the refusal and its grounds
to the Town Engineer.  The Town Engineer may seek appropriate compulsory
process.



   (C)   In the event the Town Engineer, or his or her designee,
reasonably believes that discharges into the Town MS4 may cause an imminent
and substantial threat to human health or the environment, the inspection may
take place at any time and without notice to the owner of the property or a
representative on site.



   (D)   At any time during the conduct of an inspection or at such
other times as the Town Engineer, or his or her designee, may request
information from an owner or representative, the owner or representative may
identify areas of the facility or establishment, material or processes that
contain or may contain a trade secret.



      (1)   If the Town Engineer, or his or her designee, has no
clear and convincing reason to question the identification, the inspection
report shall note that trade secret information has been omitted.



      (2)   To the extent practicable, the Town Engineer, or his or
her designee, shall protect all information that is designated as a trade
secret by the owner or their representative.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.404  DUMPING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall dump or otherwise deposit outside an authorized
landfill, convenience center or other authorized garbage or trash collection
point, any trash or garbage of any kind or description on any private or
public property, occupied or unoccupied, inside the Town.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.500  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Town's Engineering/Development Department is vested with the
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and shall have the
authority to pursue the course of action deemed to be the most likely course
to achieve correction of the violations in a minimum of time and damage to
the environment.  The Town Engineer, or his or her designee, may issue
verbal warning, written notices of violation, and stop work orders in
addition to the right to impose the civil penalties provided in this
section.  Generally the Town Engineer will pursue a course of progressive
enforcement, but no provision of this chapter shall prevent the Town's
Engineering/Development Department from implementing any stage of enforcement
if it deems it to be necessary.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.501  VERBAL WARNINGS.



   Verbal warnings are used when it appears the condition can be corrected
by the violator within a reasonable time and with minimal environmental
impact.  Verbal warnings shall specify the nature of the violation, required
corrective action, and deadline for making corrections.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.502  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Should the Town's Engineering/Development Department determine that any
permittee or any other person discharging stormwater has violated or is
violating this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, the Town
Engineer, or his or her designee, may serve upon the person a written notice
of the violation.  Written notices must stipulate the nature of the
violation and the required corrective action, with deadlines for taking such
action.  Submission of a plan for correction does not relieve the discharger
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
notice of violation.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.503  STOP WORK ORDERS.



   Stop work orders which require immediate cessation of construction
activities, except for those activities directed at cleaning up, abating
discharge, and installing appropriate control measures may be issued by the
Town Engineer, or his or her designee, should he or she determine that the
permittee or any other person discharging stormwater has failed to comply
with the terms stated in a notice of violation, or when the Town Engineer, or
his or her designee determines that continued construction activities pose a
significant threat to water quality and/or the environment.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.504  PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   The Town Engineer, or his or her designee, may suspend, revoke or
modify the permit authorizing the land development project or any other
project of the applicant or other responsible person within the Town.  A
suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated only after the
applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set
forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations
described therein to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, or his or her
designee.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.505  OTHER ENFORCEMENT CONSIDERATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the civil penalty listed above, the Town may
recover all damages proximately caused by the violator to the Town, which may
include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and
enforcing compliance with, this chapter, or any other actual damages caused
by the violation, including the costs of the Town's maintenance of stormwater
facilities when the user of the facilities fails to maintain them as required
by this chapter.



   (B)   Where the Town has used progressive enforcement to achieve
compliance with this chapter, and in the judgment of the Town progressive
enforcement has not been successful, the Town may refer the violation to TDEC.



   (C)   The Town may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing
violation of this chapter, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or
equity, shall be no defense to any such actions.



   (D)   The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative,
not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or
criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought
or granted.



   (E)   The use of other escalated measures provided under Town
ordinances, including the use of Town forces to perform work necessary to
improve erosion control measures and collect reimbursement and administrative
fees from the responsible person in an appropriate manner, such as collecting
against the project's bond or directly billing the responsible party to pay
for work and materials, is hereby authorized at the discretion of the Town
Engineer, or his or her designee.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.506  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person who has been assessed a civil or administrative
penalty or damage assessment by the Town Engineer, or his or her designee,
has the right to appeal the assessment to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
(BMA) (or any other appeals board that may be established by the BMA.)



   (B)   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-221-1106(d), any person
aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or damage assessment as
provided by this chapter may appeal the penalty or damage assessment to the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen (BMA) (or other appeals board established by the
BMA.)



   (C)   The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Town Clerk
within 15 calendar days after the civil penalty and/or damage assessment is
legally served.



   (D)   Upon receipt of an appeal, the BMA, or other appeals board
established by the BMA, shall hold a public hearing within 30 calendar
days.  Ten calendar days prior notice of the time, date, and location of the
hearing shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation.  Ten
calendar days notice by registered mail shall also be provided to the
aggrieved party, the notice to be sent to the address provided by the
aggrieved party at the time of appeal.  The decision of the BMA (or other
appeals board established by the BMA shall be final).



   (E)   Any alleged violator may appeal a decision of the BMA (or
other appeals board established by the BMA) pursuant to the provisions of
Tenn. Code Ann., Title 27, chapter 8.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



§ 152.999  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under
this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, who violates the
provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who fails or
refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take
corrective action by the Town Engineer, or his or her designee, shall be
guilty of a civil offense.



   (B)   Under the authority provided in Tenn. Code Ann. §
68-221-1106, the Town declares that any person violating the provisions of
this chapter may be assessed a civil penalty by the Town Engineer, or his or
her designee, of not less than $50 and not more than $5,000 per day for each
day of violation.  Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
violation.  In assessing a civil penalty, the Town Engineer, or his or her
designee, may consider:



      (1)   The harm done to the public health or the environment;



      (2)   Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial
economic deterrent to the illegal activity;



      (3)   The economic benefit gained by the violator;



      (4)   The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy
this violation;



      (5)   Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred
by the Town;



      (6)   The amount of penalty established by ordinance or
resolution for specific categories of violations; and



      (7)   Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit
of imposing any penalty or damage assessment.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-12-12)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   FRANCHISES



TABLE I:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


—
 
7-11-39
 
Granting a franchise to Memphis Power and Light Company for distribution or
sale of electric power and energy within the corporate limits of Collierville.


—
 
9-14-65
 
Granting a franchise to Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company to
construct, maintain and operate lines of telephone and telegraph in
Collierville for a period of 25 years.


 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Tennessee Code Annotated



References to 1983 Code



References to 2000 Code



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO TENNESSEE CODE ANNOTATED



 

Tenn. Code Ann. Cite
 
Code Section




4-21-602
 
151.003, 151.159


5-8-108
 
71.01


6-54-501 et seq.
 
Adopting Ordinance


6-54-502
 
91.15


6-56-105
 
37.019


7-84-101 et seq.
 
110.03, 110.04


7-84-208(5)
 
110.03, 110.04


7-84-303
 
110.03, 110.04


7-84-406
 
110.03, 110.04


8-17-102
 
35.10, 35.11


8-44-101 et seq.
 
38.25


9-6-303
 
53.10


12-3-1207
 
37.018


Title 13
 
151.001


Title 13, Chapter 4 
 
150.008


Title 13, Chapter 7
 
150.008


13-7-201 et seq.
 
151.285


13-7-201—13-7-210
 
151.090


13-7-201—13-7-306
 
151.001


13-7-204
 
151.022


13-7-205
 
151.308


13-7-206
 
151.310


13-7-207
 
151.310


16-15-209
 
34.02


Title 27, Chapter 8
 
152.506


27-8-101
 
53.10


Title 37
 
130.019


39-17-310
 
116.37, 130.042


39-17-1702
 
130.019


39-17-1801 et seq.
 
95.10


Title 39, Chapter 17, Part 2, Schedules I-V
 
116.36, 116.37


45-6-201 et seq.
 
112.02


45-6-203(5)
 
112.01


45-6-205
 
112.01, 112.02


45-6-209
 
112.03, 112.26


45-6-211
 
112.29


45-6-212
 
112.21, 112.23, 112.28


45-6-213
 
112.25


45-6-217
 
112.21


45-6-219
 
112.02


45-2215
 
112.30


55-1-101 et seq.
 
71.13


55-8-101
 
70.02


55-8-132
 
72.01


55-8-169
 
71.03


55-8-174
 
71.09


55-9-201 et seq.
 
70.01


55-14-101
 
113.05, 113.22


55-14-102
 
113.06, 113.21


55-14-105
 
113.04, 113.25


55-16-103
 
70.54


55-16-103—55-16-112
 
70.54


55-50-101 et seq.
 
71.13


Title 57, Chapter 3
 
116.01, 116.07, 116.25


57-3-101
 
116.50


57-3-211
 
116.05


57-3-501
 
116.14


57-3-503
 
116.14


57-3-806
 
116.07


57-3-811
 
116.11


Title 57, Chapter 4
 
116.01, 116.25


57-4-301
 
116.13


Title 57, Chapter 5
 
116.01, 116.25


57-5-101 et seq.
 
116.36, 116.48


57-5-101(b)
 
116.25


57-5-103(a)(4)
 
116.36


57-5-104
 
116.33


57-5-108
 
116.33


57-5-601 et seq.
 
116.42


57-5-606
 
116.41, 116.43


57-5-608
 
116.41


57-6-101 et seq.
 
37.080


58-201-101 et seq.
 
96.01


62-2-101 et seq.
 
152.102


62-9-102
 
113.06


62-9-103
 
113.07


62-9-104
 
113.08


65-31-101—65-31-112
 
118.52


Title 67
 
Charter § 10.08


67-1-707
 
Charter § 10.08, 37.162


67-1-1801 et seq.
 
37.162


67-4-701 et seq.
 
37.065, 37.066


67-6-102(75)(A)
 
116.35


Title 67, Chapter 23
 
Charter § 10.08


Title 68, Chapter 11
 
95.10


68-8-101—68-8-114
 
94.20


68-102-108
 
33.07


68-102-137
 
91.15


68-104
 
91.40


68-104-101 et seq.
 
91.41


68-104-108
 
91.40


68-201-116(b)(1)
 
96.01


68-221-101
 
52.02


68-221-104
 
52.02, 52.07


68-221-1105
 
152.101


68-221-1106
 
152.102 , 152.999


68-221-1106(d)
 
152.506


69-3-115(a)
 
53.10


69-3-115(a)(1)(F)
 
53.10


69-3-123
 
53.10


69-3-123-129
 
53.10


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1983 CODE



 

1983 Code Section
 
2003 Code Section




1-101
 
30.01


1-103
 
30.02


1-104
 
30.03


1-105
 
30.04


1-106
 
30.05


1-109
 
30.06


1-110
 
30.07


1-120
 
71.09


1-201
 
30.08, 36.01


1-204
 
36.02


1-205
 
36.03


1-206
 
36.04


1-207
 
36.05


1-208
 
36.99


1-301
 
31.01


1-401
 
31.15


1-402
 
31.16


1-501
 
31.30


1-502
 
31.31


1-503
 
31.32


1-601
 
32.01


1-602
 
32.02


1-603
 
32.03


1-604
 
32.04


1-605
 
32.05


1-606
 
32.06


1-607
 
32.07


1-608
 
32.08


1-609
 
32.09


1-610
 
32.10


1-611
 
32.11


1-713
 
34.12


1-801
 
35.01


1-901
 
31.45


1-902
 
31.46


1-903
 
31.47


1-904
 
31.48


1-905
 
31.49


1-906
 
31.50


1-907
 
31.51


1-1301
 
32.25


1-1302
 
32.26


1-1303
 
32.27


1-1304
 
32.28


1-1305
 
32.29


1-1306
 
32.30


1-1307
 
32.31


1-1308
 
32.32


1-1309
 
32.33


1-1310
 
32.34


1-1311
 
32.35


1-1312
 
32.36


1-1313
 
32.37


1-1314
 
32.38


1-1315
 
32.39


1-1316
 
32.40


2-101
 
116.01


2-102
 
116.02


2-103
 
116.03


2-105
 
116.05


2-106
 
116.06


2-107
 
116.07


2-108
 
116.08


2-109
 
116.09


2-110
 
116.10


2-111
 
116.11


2-112
 
116.12


2-113
 
116.13


3-101
 
94.01


3-102
 
94.02


3-103
 
94.03


3-104
 
94.04


3-105
 
94.05


3-106
 
94.06


3-107
 
94.07


3-108
 
94.08


3-201
 
94.20


3-202
 
94.21


3-203
 
94.22


3-204
 
94.23


3-205
 
94.24


3-206
 
94.25


3-209
 
94.27


3-210
 
94.28


3-301
 
94.40


3-302
 
94.41


3-303
 
94.42


3-304
 
94.43


3-305
 
94.44


3-306
 
94.45


3-308
 
94.46


4-310
 
111.10


4-1404
 
150.999


5-101
 
110.01


5-102
 
110.02


5-301
 
111.01


5-302
 
111.02


5-303
 
111.03


5-304
 
111.04


5-305
 
111.05


5-306
 
111.06


5-307
 
111.07


5-308
 
111.08


5-309
 
111.09


5-311
 
111.99


5-401
 
115.01


5-402
 
115.02


5-403
 
115.03


5-404
 
115.04


5-405
 
115.05


5-406
 
115.06


5-407
 
115.07


5-408
 
115.08


5-409
 
115.09


5-410
 
115.10


5-411
 
115.11


5-412
 
115.12


5-413
 
115.13


5-414
 
115.14


5-415
 
115.15


5-416
 
115.16


5-501
 
114.30


5-502
 
114.31


5-503
 
114.32


5-601
 
112.01


5-602
 
112.02


5-603
 
112.20


5-604
 
112.21


5-605
 
112.22


5-606
 
112.23


5-607
 
112.24


5-608
 
112.25


5-609
 
112.26


5-610
 
112.27


5-611
 
112.28


5-612
 
112.29


5-613
 
112.30


5-614
 
112.03


5-618
 
112.04


5-619
 
112.05


5-701
 
113.01


5-702
 
113.02


5-703
 
113.03


5-704
 
113.04


5-705
 
113.05


5-706
 
113.06


5-707
 
113.07


5-708
 
113.08


5-801
 
113.20


5-802
 
113.21


5-803
 
113.22


5-804
 
113.23


5-805
 
113.24


5-806
 
37.110, 113.25


5-807
 
113.26


5-808
 
113.27


5-809
 
113.28


5-810
 
113.29


5-901
 
114.01


5-902
 
114.02


5-903
 
114.03


5-904
 
114.04


5-905
 
114.05


5-906
 
114.06


5-907
 
114.07


5-908
 
114.08


5-909
 
114.09


5-910
 
114.10


5-911
 
114.11


5-912
 
114.12


5-913
 
114.13


5-914
 
114.14


5-915
 
114.15


5-916
 
114.16, 114.33


5-917
 
114.99


6-101
 
37.050


6-102
 
37.051


6-103
 
37.052


6-201
 
37.065


6-202
 
37.066


6-203
 
37.067


6-301
 
33.01, 37.080


6-401
 
37.015


6-402
 
37.016


6-403
 
37.017


6-404
 
37.018


6-405
 
37.019


6-501
 
37.030


6-502
 
37.031


6-503
 
37.032


6-504
 
37.033


6-506
 
37.034, 37.035


6-507
 
37.036


6-601
 
37.090


6-602
 
37.091


6-604
 
37.093


6-701
 
37.001


6-801
 
37.105


6-802
 
37.106


6-804
 
37.108


6-805
 
37.109


6-807
 
37.111


6-808
 
37.112


6-809
 
37.113


6-810
 
37.114


6-811
 
37.115


6-812
 
37.116


6-813
 
37.117


6-901
 
37.130


6-902
 
37.131


6-903
 
37.132


6-904
 
37.133


6-905
 
37.134


6-906
 
37.135


6-907
 
37.136


6-908
 
37.137


6-909
 
37.138


6-910
 
37.139


6-911
 
37.140


6-1001
 
37.155


6-1002
 
37.156


6-1003
 
37.157


6-1004
 
37.158


6-1005
 
37.159


6-1006
 
37.160


6-1007
 
37.161


6-1008
 
37.162


6-1009
 
37.163


6-1010
 
37.164


7-101
 
91.01


7-201
 
91.15


7-202
 
91.16


7-203
 
91.17


7-204
 
91.18


7-205
 
91.19


7-206
 
91.20


7-207
 
91.21


7-208
 
91.22


7-209
 
91.23


7-210
 
91.24


7-211
 
91.25


7-212
 
91.26


7-213
 
91.27


7-214
 
91.28


7-302
 
33.02


7-303
 
33.03


7-304
 
33.04


7-305
 
33.05


7-306
 
33.06


7-307
 
33.07


7-308
 
33.08


7-401
 
91.40


7-402
 
91.41


8-101
 
52.01


8-102
 
52.02


8-103
 
52.03


8-104
 
52.04


8-105
 
52.05


8-106
 
52.06


8-107
 
52.07


8-108
 
52.08


8-109
 
52.09


8-110
 
52.99


8-111
 
52.10


8-201
 
50.01


8-202
 
50.02


8-203
 
50.15


8-204
 
50.16


8-205
 
50.17


8-207
 
50.18


8-208
 
50.30


8-209
 
50.31


8-210
 
50.32


8-211
 
50.33


8-212
 
50.34


8-213
 
50.35


8-301
 
95.01


8-302
 
95.02


8-303
 
95.03


8-305
 
95.04, 95.06


8-306
 
95.05


8-308
 
95.07


8-309
 
95.08


8-310
 
95.09


8-401
 
95.10


8-402
 
95.10


8-403
 
95.10


8-404
 
72.04


9-101
 
70.01


9-102
 
70.02


9-103
 
71.01


9-104
 
71.02


9-105
 
71.03


9-106
 
71.04


9-107
 
71.05


9-108
 
71.06


9-109
 
70.04


9-110
 
70.05


9-111
 
70.06


9-112
 
70.07


9-113
 
70.20


9-114
 
70.21


9-115
 
70.22


9-116
 
70.23


9-117
 
70.08


9-118
 
71.07


9-119
 
71.08


9-121
 
71.10


9-122
 
71.11


9-123
 
71.12


9-124
 
71.13


9-125
 
70.03


9-126
 
71.14


9-127
 
71.15


9-128
 
71.16


9-129
 
71.17


9-201
 
71.30


9-202
 
71.31


9-203
 
71.32


9-204
 
71.33


9-205
 
71.34


9-301
 
71.45


9-302
 
71.46


9-303
 
71.47


9-304
 
71.48


9-305
 
71.49


9-401
 
72.01


9-402
 
72.02


9-403
 
72.03


9-405
 
72.05


9-406
 
72.06


9-407
 
72.07


9-408
 
72.08


9-409
 
72.09


9-410
 
72.10


9-501
 
72.25


9-502
 
72.26


9-503
 
72.27


9-504
 
72.28


9-505
 
72.29


9-506
 
72.30


9-507
 
72.31


9-508
 
72.32


9-509
 
72.33


9-510
 
72.34


9-511
 
72.35


9-512
 
72.36


9-513
 
72.37


9-514
 
72.38


9-601
 
70.50


9-602
 
70.51


9-603
 
70.52


9-604
 
70.53


9-605
 
70.54


9-701
 
70.35


9-702
 
70.36


9-703
 
70.37


9-704
 
70.38


9-705
 
70.99


9-901
 
93.01


9-902
 
93.02


9-903
 
93.03


9-904
 
93.20


9-905
 
93.21


9-906
 
93.22


9-907
 
93.23


9-908
 
93.24


9-909
 
93.25


9-910
 
93.26


9-911
 
93.27


9-913
 
93.29


9-914
 
93.30


9-915
 
93.31


9-916
 
93.32


9-917
 
93.99


9-918
 
93.04


10-101
 
130.001


10-201
 
130.01


10-202
 
130.016


10-203
 
130.017


10-207
 
130.060


10-209
 
130.090


10-210
 
130.091


10-211
 
130.092


10-212
 
130.075


10-213
 
130.076


10-214
 
130.077


10-215
 
130.040


10-216
 
130.041


10-217
 
130.093


10-221
 
130.061


10-222
 
130.018


10-223
 
130.019


10-224
 
130.020


10-225
 
130.062


10-226
 
130.042


10-227
 
130.043


10-228
 
130.063


10-229
 
130.044


10-230
 
130.064


10-231
 
130.021


10-232
 
130.022


10-233
 
130.045


10-234
 
130.023


10-235
 
130.046


11-101
 
150.001


11-102
 
150.002


11-103
 
150.003


11-104
 
150.004


11-105
 
150.005


11-106
 
150.006


11-107
 
150.007


11-108
 
150.008, 150.009


11-205
 
151.006


12-101
 
92.30


12-102
 
92.31


12-103
 
92.32


12-104
 
92.33


12-105
 
92.34


12-106
 
92.35


12-107
 
92.36


12-108
 
92.37


12-109
 
92.38


12-110
 
92.39


12-201
 
92.01


12-202
 
92.02


12-203
 
92.03


12-204
 
92.04


12-205
 
92.05


12-206
 
92.06


12-207
 
92.07


12-208
 
92.08


12-209
 
92.09


12-210
 
92.10


12-211
 
92.11


12-212
 
92.12


12-213
 
92.13


12-214
 
92.14


12-215
 
92.15


12-216
 
92.16


12-217
 
92.17


12-218
 
92.18


12-301
 
73.01


12-302
 
73.02


12-303
 
73.03


12-304
 
73.04


12-305
 
73.05


12-306
 
73.06


12-307
 
73.07


12-308
 
73.99


12-401
 
90.01


12-402
 
90.02


12-403
 
90.03


12-404
 
90.04


12-405
 
90.04


12-406
 
90.04


12-407
 
90.05


12-408
 
90.06


12-409
 
90.07


12-410
 
90.08


12-411
 
90.99


13-101
 
51.01


13-102
 
51.02


13-103
 
51.03


13-104
 
51.50


13-105
 
51.37


13-106
 
51.38


13-107
 
51.51


13-108
 
51.04


13-109
 
51.20


13-110
 
51.21


13-111
 
51.22


13-112
 
51.23


13-113
 
51.35


13-114
 
51.52


13-115
 
51.36


13-116
 
51.53


13-117
 
51.54


13-118
 
51.55


13-119
 
51.56


13-120
 
51.57


13-121
 
51.58


13-122
 
51.59


13-123
 
51.60


13-124
 
51.61


13-125
 
51.62


13-126
 
51.63


13-127
 
51.64


13-128
 
51.65


13-129
 
51.98


13-130
 
51.05


13-201
 
53.01


13-202
 
53.02


13-203
 
53.03


13-204
 
53.04


13-205
 
53.05


13-206
 
53.06


13-207
 
53.07


13-208
 
53.08


13-209
 
53.09


13-210
 
53.99


13-211
 
53.10


13-501
 
118.01


13-502
 
118.02


13-503
 
118.03


13-504
 
118.04


13-505
 
118.20


13-506
 
118.21


13-507
 
118.22, 118.24


13-508
 
118.23, 118.25


13-509
 
118.26


13-510
 
118.27


13-513
 
118.28


13-514
 
118.29


13-515
 
118.30


13-516
 
118.31


13-517
 
118.32


13-518
 
118.33


13-519
 
118.34


13-520
 
118.50


13-521
 
118.51


13-522
 
118.52


13-523
 
118.53


13-524
 
118.54


13-525
 
118.55


13-526
 
118.56


13-527
 
118.35, 118.57


13-528
 
118.58


13-529
 
118.59


13-530
 
118.60


13-531
 
118.61


13-532
 
118.62


13-533
 
118.63


13-534
 
118.64


13-535
 
118.65


13-536
 
118.66


13-537
 
118.67


13-538
 
118.68


13-539
 
118.69


13-540
 
118.70


13-541
 
118.71


13-542
 
118.72


13-543
 
118.73


13-544
 
118.36


13-545
 
118.37


13-546
 
118.74


13-547
 
118.99


13-548
 
118.99


13-701
 
117.001


13-702
 
117.002


13-704
 
117.003


13-705
 
117.999


13-706
 
117.999


13-707
 
117.004


13-708
 
117.020


13-709
 
117.020


13-711
 
117.020


13-713
 
117.021


13-714
 
117.022


13-715
 
117.023


13-716
 
117.024


13-717
 
117.025


13-718
 
117.026


13-719
 
117.027


13-720
 
117.028


13-721
 
117.029


13-722
 
117.030


13-723
 
117.031


13-724
 
117.031


13-725
 
117.031


13-726
 
117.045


13-727
 
117.046


13-728
 
117.047


13-729
 
117.048


13-730
 
117.049


13-731
 
117.060


13-732
 
117.061


13-733
 
117.062


13-734
 
117.063


13-735
 
117.064


13-736
 
117.065


13-737
 
117.066


13-738
 
117.067


13-739
 
117.068


13-740
 
117.069


13-741
 
117.070


13-742
 
117.071


13-743
 
117.072


13-744
 
117.073


13-745
 
117.074


13-746
 
117.075


13-747
 
117.076


13-748
 
117.077


13-749
 
117.078


13-750
 
117.079


13-751
 
117.080


13-752
 
117.081


13-753
 
117.082


13-754
 
117.083


13-755
 
117.032


13-756
 
117.033


13-757
 
117.034


13-758
 
117.035


13-759
 
117.005


13-760
 
117.006


13-761
 
117.095


13-762
 
117.096


13-763
 
117.097


13-764
 
117.098


13-765
 
117.099


13-766
 
117.100


13-767
 
117.101


13-768
 
117.102


13-769
 
117.103


13-770
 
117.104


13-771
 
117.105


13-772
 
117.106


13-773
 
117.107


13-774
 
117.007


13-775
 
117.008


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 2000 CODE



 

2000 Code Section
 
2003 Code Section




11-201
 
151.001


11-202
 
151.002, 151.003


11-203
 
151.004


11-204
 
151.005


11-302
 
151.021


11-303
 
151.022


11-304
 
151.023


11-305
 
151.024


11-401
 
151.035


11-402
 
151.036


11-402A
 
151.037


11-403
 
151.038


11-404
 
151.040


11-405
 
151.041


11-406
 
151.042


11-407
 
151.043


11-408
 
151.044


11-409
 
151.045


11-409A
 
151.046


11-409B
 
151.047


11-410
 
151.048


11-501
 
151.060


11-502
 
151.061


11-503
 
151.062


11-504
 
151.063


11-505
 
151.064


11-506
 
151.065


11-600
 
151.075


11-602
 
151.076


11-603
 
151.077


11-701
 
151.090


11-702
 
151.091


11-703
 
151.092


11-703
 
151.093 - 151.098, 151.102


11-704
 
151.099


11-705
 
151.100


11-706
 
151.101


11-801
 
151.115


11-802
 
151.116


11-803
 
151.117


11-1101
 
151.150


11-1102
 
151.151


11-1103
 
151.152


11-1104
 
151.153


11-1105
 
151.154


11-1106
 
151.155


11-1107
 
151.156


11-1108
 
151.157


11-1109
 
151.158


11-1110
 
151.160


11-1301
 
151.195


11-1302
 
151.196


11-1303
 
151.197


11-1304
 
151.198


11-1305
 
151.199


11-1306
 
151.200


11-1307
 
151.201


11-1308
 
151.202


11-1309
 
151.203


11-1310
 
151.205


11-1501
 
151.240


11-1502
 
151.241


11-1503
 
151.242


11-1504
 
151.243


11-1505
 
151.244


11-1506
 
151.245


11-1507
 
151.246


11-1508
 
151.247


11-1509
 
151.248


11-1510
 
151.249


11-1511
 
151.250


11-1601
 
151.265


11-1602
 
151.266


11-1603
 
151.267


11-1604
 
151.268


11-1605
 
151.269


11-1606
 
151.269


11-1607
 
151.271


11-1608
 
151.272


11-1609
 
151.273


11-1701
 
151.285


11-1702
 
151.286


11-1703
 
151.287


11-1704
 
151.288


11-1705
 
151.289


11-1706
 
151.290


11-707
 
151.291


11-1708
 
151.291


11-1001
 
151.305


11-1002
 
151.306


11-1003
 
151.307


11-1004
 
151.308


11-1005
 
151.309


11-1006
 
151.310


11-1008
 
151.312


11-1009
 
151.998


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




—
 
7-11-39
 
T.S.O. I


—
 
2-5-60
 
92.08


—
 
11-11-60
 
116.10


—
 
8-10-62
 
51.20, 70.38, 70.99


—
 
6-10-65
 
116.11


—
 
9-14-65
 
T.S.O. I


—
 
7-7-66
 
92.10


—
 
3-3-69
 
130.064


—
 
10-11-69
 
70.38


—
 
7-16-73
 
116.10


—
 
4-1-74
 
116.11


—
 
11-11-74
 
130.022


—
 
5-14-75
 
51.65


—
 
10- -75
 
130.018, 130.043


—
 
10-13-75
 
116.12


79-005
 
7-9-79
 
30.06, 30.08


—
 
7-14-80
 
151.004


82-017
 
1-24-83
 
53.07


82-018
 
1-24-83
 
51.22


86-06
 
4-28-86
 
51.01


86-07
 
4-28-86
 
92.17


87-35
 
11-23-87
 
52.10


93-23
 
8-23-93
 
51.22, 53.07


94-19
 
- -
 
151.063—151.065


94-30
 
1-9-95
 
94.20


95-01
 
2-27-95
 
151.042


95-06
 
5-8-95
 
110.02


95-11
 
- -
 
151.006, 151.036—151.038, 151.040, 151.041,  151.043—151.048


95-13
 
- -
 
151.268


96-04
 
- -
 
151.063


96-07
 
4-22-96
 
51.38


96-15
 
7-8-96
 
37.155—37.164


96-25
 
8-26-96
 
111.01—111.10, 111.99


97-27
 
- -
 
151.063


97-33
 
10-13-97
 
151.021, 151.062


97-34
 
- -
 
151.004


97-49
 
1-5-98
 
91.15


98-14
 
6-22-98
 
37.136, 37.137, 37.139


98-15
 
- -
 
151.063, 151.065


98-22
 
2-8-99
 
150.999


98-27
 
1-26-99
 
130.075, 130.076


98-28
 
1-11-99
 
90.04, 90.06


99-07
 
5-10-99
 
92.18


99-09
 
5-10-99
 
94.08, 94.28


99-12
 
5-24-99
 
91.18, 91.21, 91.22, 91.28


99-16
 
9-13-99
 
53.07


99-17
 
5-24-99
 
51.05


99-26
 
- -
 
151.046, 151.048, 151.156


99-32
 
9-27-99
 
51.03


99-44
 
12-13-99
 
50.02, 95.05


00-01
 
- -
 
151.063, 151.065


00-05
 
- -
 
151.063


00-09
 
7-10-00
 
50.01, 50.02, 50.15—50.18, 50.30—50.35


00-20
 
9-11-00
 
117.001—117.008, 117.020—117.035, 117.045—117.049, 117.060—117.066,
117.068—117.083, 117.095—117.098, 117.100—117.106


2000-25
 
6-11-01
 
151.150— 151.158, 151.160


00-35
 
- - 
 
151.006


2001-05
 
4-9-01
 
150.002, 150.030


2001-06
 
4-9-01
 
151.036—151.038, 151.040—151.048


2001-07
 
4-23-01
 
111.01—111.10, 111.99


2001-08
 
4-23-01
 
31.45—31.51


2001-09
 
4-23-01
 
151.046


2001-13
 
6-11-01
 
37.018


2001-15
 
7-9-01
 
116.01—116.03, 116.05—116.13


2001-17
 
7-9-01
 
93.02


2001-21
 
10-8-01
 
36.01—36.05, 36.99


2001-24
 
11-26-01
 
37.114


2001-26
 
1-28-02
 
95.08


2002-01
 
2-11-02
 
96.01—96.10, 96.25—96.33, 96.99


—
 
5- -02
 
151.003, 151.006, 151.020, 151.021, 151.024, 151.064, 151.117, 151.156,
151.241, 151.308, 151.309


2002-11
 
7-2-02
 
151.003, 151.021, 151.024


2002-12
 
8-12-02
 
91.25


2002-13
 
8-12-02
 
151.061—151.065, 151.076, 151.077


2002-15
 
9-9-02
 
151.198


2002-17
 
10-28-02
 
51.03


2003-01
 
2-10-03
 
30.01


2003-03
 
2-10-03
 
151.195—151.203, 151.205


2003-05
 
4-14-03
 
36.99, 52.99, 53.99, 70.99, 73.99, 90.99, 93.99, 94.99, 96.99, 111.99,
114.99, 116.99, 117.99, 118.99, 150.999


2003-06
 
4-14-03
 
71.01


2003-07
 
4-14-03
 
130.017


2003-08
 
4-14-03
 
130.019


2003-09
 
4-14-03
 
92.10


2003-10
 
5-12-03
 
51.35, 51.39


2003-11
 
4-14-03
 
150.305


2003-13
 
6-9-03
 
110.03


2003-14
 
6-9-03
 
110.04


2003-15
 
5-12-03
 
151.003, 151.021, 151.024


2003-17
 
9-8-03
 
94.41, 94.60—94.65


2003-22
 
8-25-03
 
151.003, 151.115


2003-27
 
8-25-03
 
151.003


2003-34
 
11-24-03
 
151.003, 151.006, 151.061—151.065, 151.076, 151.077


2003-35
 
11-24-03
 
151.007


2003-38
 
12-8-03
 
151.003


2004-01
 
3-8-04
 
35.02


2004-11
 
7-12-04
 
91.25


2004-12
 
7-26-04
 
151.024, 151.309, 151.310, 151.312


2004-13
 
7-26-04
 
151.116, 51.117


2004-14
 
8-23-04
 
37.018


2004-15
 
9-13-04
 
Adopting Ordinance


2004-24
 
12-13-04
 
37.030—37.036, 37.090—37.093, 37.162


Res. 2004-31
 
6-28-04
 
151.196


2005-01
 
2-14-05
 
151.003, 151.200, 151.243


2005-02
 
2-28-05
 
51.22, 51.23, 53.07


2005-04
 
3-28-05
 
110.02


2005-05
 
3-28-05
 
31.48


2005-10
 
8-22-05
 
151.005, 151.006


2005-12
 
12-12-06
 
151.003, 151.021, 151.117, 151.159


2005-15
 
10-24-05
 
51.22


2005-20
 
1-23-06
 
34.01 - 34.05, 34.07 - 34.11


2006-04
 
4-24-06
 
151.308


2006-08
 
7-10-06
 
151.160


2006-10
 
9-11-06
 
151.006


2006-12
 
7-10-06
 
151.003, 151.021, 151.064


2006-14
 
9-11-06
 
34.07


2006-19
 
9-25-06
 
34.05


2006-23
 
11-27-06
 
51.22


2006-26
 
1-22-07
 
37.018


2007-03
 
2-26-07
 
35.10, 35.11


2007-04
 
4-23-07
 
53.07


2007-11
 
9-24-07
 
151.090, 151.093


2007-12
 
11-12-07
 
151.090, 151.093


2007-13
 
11-26-07
 
91.01, 91.15—91.28, 91.40, 91.41


2007-14
 
11-26-07
 
116.25—116.46, 116.48, 116.49, 116.98, 116.99


2007-15
 
11-26-07
 
95.10


2008-02
 
2-11-08
 
151.003


2008-03
 
2-11-08
 
37.018


2008-04
 
2-11-08
 
51.22


2008-06
 
2-25-08
 
151.151


2008-11
 
4-15-08
 
110.05


2008-13
 
5-12-08
 
70.52


2008-16
 
6-23-08
 
51.22, 53.07


2008-17
 
7-28-08
 
151.150—151.160


2008-19
 
11-10-08
 
37.053


2008-20
 
11-10-08
 
151.003, 151.004, 151.006, 151.021, 151.024, 151.036—151.038,
151.040—151.048, 151.115, 151.307, 151.308, 151.310


2008-21
 
11-10-08
 
151.006


2009-01
 
2-9-09
 
151.003, 151.004, 151.021, 151.024


2009-05
 
6-22-09
 
151.021, 151.024


2009-07
 
7-13-09
 
151.130—151.137


2009-08
 
6-22-09
 
151.308


2009-09
 
5-26-09
 
51.22


2009-12
 
10-26-09
 
151.003, 151.243, 151.245—151.247, 151.311


2009-16
 
11-23-09
 
151.003, 151.190


2009-18
 
1-25-10
 
51.22


2009-19
 
1-25-10
 
38.01, 38.10—38.12, 38.20—38.25, 38.30, 38.40—38.43, 38.50, 38.60


2010-01
 
8-23-10
 
110.02, 151.003, 151.133, 151.155, 151.170—151.176, 151.178—151.183,
151.200, 151.240, 151.243, 151.246, 151.249, 151.309


2010-02
 
3-9-10
 
53.07


2010-05
 
5-10-10
 
53.07


2010-07
 
6-28-10
 
70.35


2010-08
 
10-11-10
 
51.22, 53.07


2010-10
 
11-23-10
 
51.22


2010-11
 
1-11-11
 
151.024


2010-12
 
1-24-11
 
51.22


2010-13
 
12-13-10
 
116.25—116.46, 116.48, 116.49, 116.98, 116.99


2011-01
 
3-14-11
 
151.003, 151.027, 151.036—151.038, 151.040—151.048, 151.061—151.065,
151.076, 151.077


2011-02
 
3-14-11
 
151.003, 151.006, 151.021, 151.024, 151.025, 151.036—151.038,
151.040—151.048, 151.061—151.065, 151.076, 151.077


2011-04
 
3-14-11
 
110.05, 151.006, 151.021, 151.025, 151.061—151.065, 151.076, 151.077


2011-05
 
5-23-11
 
151.003, 151.006, 151.021, 151.024, 151.025, 151.027, 151.049, 151.050,
151.061, 151.064, 151.115, 151.210


2011-06
 
4-25-11
 
110.05, 111.02, 151.003, 151.006, 151.021, 151.024, 151.026


2011-08
 
9-26-11
 
151.024


2011-09
 
9-12-11
 
51.22


2011-10
 
10-10-11
 
151.171, 151.179, 151.180


2011-11
 
12-12-11
 
151.204


2011-23
 
1-23-12
 
150.020, 150.030, 150.031, 150.040, 150.041, 150.050, 150.051, 150.060,
150.070, 150.071, 150.080, 150.090


2011-25
 
1-9-12
 
51.22, 53.07


2012-01
 
2-13-12
 
91.01, 91.15 - 91.28, 91.40, 91.41


2012-02
 
4-9-12
 
151.024, 151.026, 151.179 - 151.181, 151.310, 151.311


2012-06
 
5-29-12
 
71.49, 151.115


2012-11
 
6-11-12
 
150.070


2012-14
 
7-23-12
 
51.22


2012-15
 
9-24-12
 
151.170—151.176, 151.178—151.183


2012-17
 
10-8-12
 
51.22, 53.07


2012-18
 
11-12-12
 
152.101—152.105, 152.200—152.214, 152.300—152.304, 152.400—152.404,
152.500—152.506, 152.999


2012-19
 
1-14-13
 
151.090, 151.091, 151.093, 151.099


2013-01
 
1-13-14
 
151.170 —151.183


2013-07
 
7-8-13
 
151.021 , 151.025


2013-08
 
8-12-13
 
130.022


2013-09
 
8-12-13
 
150.070


2013-12
 
8-22-13
 
39.01


2013-13
 
9-9-13
 
51.38


2013-15
 
11-11-13
 
34.02


2013-16
 
1-13-14
 
51.22


2014-01
 
5-12-14
 
94.26, 94.29, 94.30


2014-02
 
4-28-14
 
91.15, 91.17, 91.28


2014-07
 
11-24-14
 
150.030


2014-08
 
12-8-14
 
34.05


2015-02
 
2-23-15
 
70.55


2015-03
 
3-23-15
 
152.207, 152.208


2015-06
 
3-9-15
 
116.25, 116.32, 116.38, 116.40


2015-07
 
9-28-15
 
151.003, 151.025, 151.310


2015-08
 
6-8-15
 
51.22


2015-10
 
10-26-15
 
151.006


2015-13
 
9-28-15
 
94.25, 94.27, 94.31


2015-14
 
8-10-15
 
110.23, 110.30—110.50, 110.98, 110.99


2015-15
 
8-10-15
 
37.136, 37.137, 91.21


2015-16
 
8-24-15
 
91.17, 91.21


2015-19
 
11-9-15
 
151.027, 151.062


2015-20
 
11-9-15
 
150.070


2015-24
 
1-25-16
 
34.05


2016-06
 
6-27-16
 
151.006, 151.020, 151.021, 151.024, 151.025, 151.027, 151.039—151.050,
151.156


2016-07
 
7-25-16
 
151.115


2017-02
 
2-13-17
 
96.26, 96.27


2017-03
 
2-13-17
 
116.01, 116.03, 116.11, 116.25, 116.32, 116.33, 116.35—116.38, 116.40,
116.44


2017-06
 
3-27-17
 
50.01, 50.03


2017-07
 
5-8-17
 
53.01—53.11, 53.99


2017-10
 
7-10-17
 
151.003, 151.021


2017-11
 
5-8-17
 
116.50


2017-17
 
10-9-17
 
37.018


2017-18
 
10-23-17
 
151.311


2017-19
 
10-23-17
 
151.309


2018-01
 
3-12-18
 
116.14


2018-02
 
8-14-18
 
151.003, 151.021, 151.027, 151.159


2018-05
 
8-28-18
 
151.115


2018-06
 
8-28-18
 
151.171, 151.178, 151.179, 151.180


2018-09
 
6-11-18
 
70.35


2018-14
 
10-22-18
 
37.018


2018-16
 
11-12-18
 
72.28


2018-17
 
12-10-18
 
116.07, 116.14


2018-18
 
1-14-19
 
51.01


 
 
 
 
 




 


