THE
CAMDEN
MUNICIPAL
CODE
Prepared by the
MUNICIPAL TECHNICAL ADVISORY SERVICE
INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE
THE UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE
in cooperation with the
TENNESSEE MUNICIPAL LEAGUE
April 2000
Change 7, April 11, 2016
CITY OF CAMDEN, TENNESSEE
MAYOR
Roger Pafford
VICE MAYOR
Ford Travis Pierce
ALDERMEN
Debbie Baldwin
Randall W. Clark
Pat McLin
Richard Smith
CITY RECORDER/CITY CLERK
Phyllis Woodard
ii
PREFACE
The Camden Municipal Code contains the codification and revision of the
ordinances of the City of Camden, Tennessee. By referring to the historical
citation appearing at the end of each section, the user can determine the origin
of each particular section. The absence of a historical citation means that the
section was added by the codifier. The word "modified" in the historical citation
indicates significant modification of the original ordinance.
The code is arranged into titles, chapters, and sections. Related matter
is kept together, so far as possible, within the same title. Each section number
is complete within itself, containing the title number, the chapter number, and
the section of the chapter of which it is a part. Specifically, the first digit,
followed by a hyphen, identifies the title number. The second digit identifies the
chapter number, and the last two digits identify the section number. For
example, title 2, chapter 1, section 6, is designated as section 2-106.
By utilizing the table of contents and the analysis preceding each title and
chapter of the code, together with the cross references and explanations included
as footnotes, the user should locate all the provisions in the code relating to any
question that might arise. However, the user should note that most of the
administrative ordinances (e.g. Annual Budget, Zoning Map Amendments, Tax
Assessments, etc...) do not appear in the code. Likewise, ordinances that have
been passed since the last update of the code do not appear here. Therefore, the
user should refer to the city's ordinance book or the city recorder for a
comprehensive and up to date review of the city's ordinances.
Following this preface is an outline of the ordinance adoption procedures,
if any, prescribed by the city's charter.
The code has been arranged and prepared in loose-leaf form to facilitate
keeping it up to date. MTAS will provide updating service under the following
conditions:
(1) That all ordinances relating to subjects treated in the code or which
should be added to the code are adopted as amending, adding, or deleting
specific chapters or sections of the code (see section 8 of the adopting ordinance).
(2) That one copy of every ordinance adopted by the city is kept in a
separate ordinance book and forwarded to MTAS annually.
(3) That the city agrees to pay the annual update fee as provided in the
MTAS codification service charges policy in effect at the time of the update.
When the foregoing conditions are met MTAS will reproduce replacement
pages for the code to reflect the amendments and additions made by such
ordinances. This service will be performed at least annually and more often if
justified by the volume of amendments. Replacement pages will be supplied
iii
with detailed instructions for utilizing them so as again to make the code
complete and up to date.
The able assistance of Linda Dean, the MTAS Sr. Word Processing
Specialist who did all the typing on this project, and Sandy Selvage,
Administrative Services Assistant, is gratefully acknowledged.
Steve Lobertini
Codification Consultant
iv
ORDINANCE ADOPTION PROCEDURES PRESCRIBED BY THE
CITY CHARTER1
1The ordinance adoption procedures for the City of Camden are not set out
in the city's charter but can be found in § 1-103(5) of the Camden Municipal
Code.
v




1-1
1Charter references
See the charter index, the charter itself, and footnote references to the
charter in the front of this code.
Municipal code references
Building, plumbing, electrical and gas inspectors: title 12.
Fire department: title 7.
Utilities: titles 18 and 19.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Zoning: title 14.
2Charter references
Officers: § 4.
Powers of council: § 6.
TITLE 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION1
CHAPTER
1. CITY COUNCIL.
2. MAYOR.
3. RECORDER.
CHAPTER 1
CITY COUNCIL2
SECTION
1-101. Stated and special meetings.
1-102. Call to order.
1-103. Order of business.
1-104. General rules of order.
1-101. Stated and special meetings. (1) Stated meetings of the
council shall be held at the recorder's office on the second Monday of each month
at 6:00 P.M.
(2) Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor when
he may deem it expedient. (1972 Code, § 1-101, modified)
1-102. Call to order. The presiding officer of the council shall call the
members to order at the appointed hour. In absence of the presiding officer, the
recorder if present, or any member of the council if the recorder is absent shall
1-2
call the members to order. Under such circumstances the council shall appoint
a chairman to preside at such meeting. (1972 Code, § 1-102)
1-103. Order of business. The following regular order of business shall
be observed unless dispensed with by unanimous consent of council:
(1) Roll call by the recorder.
(2) Reading of the minutes of the previous meeting and approval or
corrections.
(3) Communications from the mayor.
(4) Presentation for consideration. (a) Petitions, memorials,
remonstrations and communications.
(b) Accounts and other claims against the city.
(c) Reports of committees and other officers.
(d) Ordinances, resolutions and motions.
(e) Old business and new business in priority of order set forth
in this subsection.
(5) Passage of all ordinances shall require the following procedure:
(a) Read at two sessions of the council which are conducted on
two separate days.
(b) Any ordinances referred to a committee shall stand for final
action at the session it is reported back unless it is deferred by council.
(c) Action will not be deferred on an ordinance reported back
from a committee because it has been amended or a substitute ordinance
has been reported unless such amendment or substitution is not germane
to the original ordinance referred.
(d) All ordinances repealing or amending prior ordinances or
parts thereof shall contain the title of such amended or repealed
ordinance. (1972 Code, § 1-103)
1-104. General rules of order. The rules of order and parliamentary
procedure contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, 1990 (9th)
Edition, shall govern the transaction of business by and before the board of
mayor and aldermen at its meetings in all cases to which they are applicable
and in which they are not inconsistent with provisions of the charter or this
code. (1972 Code, § 1-104, modified)
1-3
1Charter references
Duties of mayor: § 13.
Officers: § 4.
Powers of council: § 6.
Terms of officers: § 9.
CHAPTER 2
MAYOR1
SECTION
1-201. Appointment of legal counsel.
1-202. Appointment of committees.
1-203. Removal of committee members.
1-204. Appointment of special committees.
1-201. Appointment of legal counsel. The mayor when he deems it
necessary for the welfare of the city, may employ the services of legal counsel
and enter agreement, with the approval of the council, for the payment of a
reasonable fee for the services of such legal assistance. (1972 Code, § 1-201)
1-202. Appointment of committees. The mayor shall appoint
members of the finance, street, lights and water committees with not less than
three (3) aldermen serving as members on each such committee. (1972 Code,
§ 1-202)
1-203. Removal of committee members. With the advise and consent
of the council, the mayor may remove or change members of the standing
committees and immediately replace them with other persons. (1972 Code,
§ 1-203)
1-204. Appointment of special committees. As the need arises, the
mayor may appoint such special committees as may be authorized by council.
(1972 Code, § 1-204)
1-4
1Charter reference
Duties of recorder: § 14.
CHAPTER 3
RECORDER1
SECTION
1-301. Oath and bond.
1-302. General accountant.
1-303. Water subscribers.
1-304. Salary of recorder.
1-305. Delinquent taxpayers.
1-301. Oath and bond. The recorder before assuming the duties of his
office shall solemnly swear that he will faithfully perform all of his duties as are
required of him by law. He shall execute a faithful performance bond signed by
two or more solvent personal sureties, or one corporate surety properly approved
by the state insurance and banking commissioner in the amount of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00). Any premiums becoming due and payable on such
corporate bond shall become an obligation of the municipality. (1972 Code,
§ 1-301)
1-302. General accountant. As general accountant, he shall have the
following duties:
(1) Receive and preserve all accounts, books, vouchers and papers
relating to accounts, contracts, debts, revenue, and related fiscal affairs of the
city.
(2) Draw and register all warrants on the treasury for all
appropriations and funds ordered paid by the council.
(3) Have custody of the city seal and issue certified copies of all public
records which are in his keeping and charge.
(4) Collect such fees as the council may designate for the issuance of
privilege license and the recording of deeds to cemetery lots.
(5) By and with advice and consent of council, issue distress warrants
to any lawful officer of the city or county. Taxes due and unpaid on the 1st day
of May of each year and every year shall constitute grounds for the issuance of
such distress warrant, with allowance to such officer, to be paid by the
delinquent tax payer, of a fee for service as is provided in collection of delinquent
state and county taxes. (1972 Code, § 1-302)
1-303. Water subscribers. The recorder shall maintain all books and
records for the sale of water. Such records shall properly show the names of all
1-5
subscribers, amounts of water used, rates, and balances due. He shall mail or
deliver to each subscriber a statement of the balance due from him on the first
of each month and make collections from such subscribers. (1972 Code, § 1-303)
1-304. Salary of recorder. The recorder shall receive such
compensation for his services as the council may designate. (1972 Code, § 1-304)
1-305. Delinquent taxpayers. The recorder shall report to the council
on October 1, of each year, a list of uncollected taxes, showing the name,
description of property or polls, the amount due from each delinquent taxpayer,
the aggregate of such taxes and why the same have not been paid. (1972 Code,
§ 1-305)
2-1
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, ETC.
CHAPTER
1. RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD.
2. CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
3. WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE COMMISSION.
CHAPTER 1
RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION
2-101. Creation, authority, purpose and title.
2-102. Membership and terms.
2-103. Officers.
2-104. Function.
2-105. Administration.
2-106. Compensation and funding.
2-101. Creation, authority, purpose and title. The authority to fund,
create, operate and maintain parks and recreation facilities and to conduct
recreation programs shall be retained by the governing body; however, pursuant
to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 11-24-103(b)(1), there shall be and is hereby
created an advisory body for the purpose of providing the governing body of the
City of Camden, Tennessee (the "city council"), advice and guidance, and to
provide a conduit for input from the general population as to the effective
creation, operation and maintenance of parks and recreation facilities and/or
recreation programs for said city. This body shall be named and known as the
"Recreation Advisory Board" of the City of Camden. (Ord. #GWO-36, April
1997)
2-102. Membership and terms. The membership of the board shall
consist of five (5) members, appointed by the mayor for staggered terms of five
(5) years. At the time of the original five (5) appointments, to initiate the
staggered terms, one member will be appointed for one (1) year, one for two (2)
years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, and one for five (5) years.
Thereafter, all appointments or reappointments will be for terms of five (5)
years.
(1) The membership of the board shall be representative of all sections
of the community, but one (1) member shall be selected from the Benton County
School System.
2-2
(2) The serving mayor, park commissioner, and superintendent of
parks shall serve as members ex-officio during their respective terms of office.
(Ord. #GWO-36, April 1997)
2-103. Officers. At the first meeting of the board subsequent to its
creation, the members shall elect from the membership a chairperson,
vice-chairperson and secretary to serve their respective terms of appointment.
(Ord. #GWO-36, April 1997)
2-104. Function. The affairs of the board shall be conducted in a
manner determined by the city council. The board shall not be responsible for
the supervision of staff, hiring for dismissal of staff, the expenditure of public
funds or the promulgation or enforcement of rules and regulations governing
parks and recreation facilities or programs; however, the board may advise the
city council on any of these matters and act on behalf of said council, on a case
by case basis, if so authorized by the governing body. (Ord. #GWO-36, April
1997)
2-105. Administration. The board shall set its own by-laws and
meeting schedule in accordance with the open meeting laws of the state. Official
minutes shall be recorded for each meeting, a copy of which shall be furnished
to the city council at their next subsequent meeting. The department of finance
and administration shall provide the board such administrative support as it
may need, within the limits of its capabilities. (Ord. #GWO-36, April 1997)
2-106. Compensation and funding. All members of the board shall
serve without pay; however, with prior approval of the mayor and funding by the
city council, members may be reimbursed for actual expenses involved in the
discharge of their official duties on behalf of the city pursuant with the city's
comprehensive travel regulations. Incidental funding for operations of the board
may be provided by the city council in the city's normal budgeting processes.
(Ord. #GWO-36, April 1997)
2-3
1Municipal code reference
Municipal personnel: title 4.
CHAPTER 2
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION1
SECTION
2-201. Establishment of a system of civil service.
2-202. Creation and function of commission.
2-203. Duties of the civil service commission.
2-204. Procedures on appeal.
2-205. Employment and tenure.
2-206. Dismissal.
2-201. Establishment of a system of civil service. There is hereby
established for employees of the City of Camden, Tennessee, a system of
personnel administration based on merit, principals and tenure of employment.
That system shall govern the transfer, lay-off, removal and discipline of
employees based upon merit, fitness and tenure of employment. (1972 Code,
§ 1-901)
2-202. Creation and function of commission. There is hereby
created the "Civil Service Commission of the City of Camden, Tennessee" to be
made up of five (5) citizens and residents of the City of Camden, Tennessee, over
the age of eighteen (18) years, who are in no other way associated with the City
of Camden, either by employment, appointment or election. Said commissioners
shall be appointed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Camden
upon the following basis:
(1) There shall be five (5) commissioners appointed by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Camden, Tennessee.
(2) Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years from
and after the original tenure of appointment. For purposes of making the
original appointment, two (2) commissioners shall be appointed for a term of two
(2) years and the remaining three (3) commissioners shall be appointed for a
term of four (4) years. Thereafter, said commissioners shall serve for terms of
four (4) years. Terms of the civil service commissioners shall correspond with
the term of office of the board of mayor and aldermen and they shall be
appointed at the first meeting subsequent to the city elections. (1972 Code,
§ 1-902)
2-203. Duties of the civil service commission. The civil service
commission shall hear all appeals of employees of the City of Camden who allege
2-4
that the City of Camden, acting through its agents, have dismissed or demoted
any employee for political or religious opinions or affiliations, or because of race,
national origin, or any other non-merit factor. The commission shall also hear
appeals wherein an employee complains of being suspended or laid-off or
transferred to another department where said lay-off, suspension or transfer
was made for political or religious opinions or affiliations or because of race,
national origin or any other non-merit factor. If the commission finds that the
employee was dismissed or demoted, transferred, suspended or laid-off without
just cause, or if it should appear that said employee was dismissed, demoted or
laid-off for any of the reasons enumerated above, said employee shall be
reinstated without loss of pay. (1972 Code, § 1-903)
2-204. Procedures on appeals. Should any employee be suspended,
laid-off or transferred, both the appealing employee and the agent, or authority
of the City of Camden whose action is reviewed, shall have the right to be heard
and to be present and present evidence on their behalf within fifteen (15) days
after such action is taken. The hearing shall be informal in nature and the
technical rules of evidence shall not apply. If the commission finds that the
appealed action against the employee was taken without cause, the commission
shall reduce its decision to writing and file a copy of the same in duplicate with
the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Camden. If the finding of the
commission is in favor of the employee, such employee shall be immediately
reinstated to his or her previous position with the City of Camden. (1972 Code,
§ 1-904)
2-205. Employment and tenure. The provisions of the foregoing
section shall only apply to those employees of the City of Camden, Tennessee,
who have been so employed for more than six (6) months. Each and every
person appointed or employed to a position with the City of Camden, Tennessee
shall be subject to a probationary period of employment. The probationary
period shall continue for such time, not less than six (6) months, as shall be
established by the board of mayor and aldermen. (1972 Code, § 1-905)
2-206. Dismissal. The board of mayor and aldermen, or its duly
appointed authority or agents, may dismiss an employee for cause when it
appears that the good of the department or the City of Camden will be served
thereby. The employee shall be given a written notice of dismissal with the
reasons therefor stated in said notice. (1972 Code, § 1-906)
2-5
1Municipal code reference
Water and sewers: title 18.
CHAPTER 3
WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE COMMISSION1
SECTION
2-301. Creation, membership, organization, jurisdiction, etc.
2-302. Violation of commission's rules and regulations.
2-301. Creation, membership, organization, jurisdiction, etc. A
waterworks and sewerage commission has heretofore been created and is hereby
continued in full force and effect. Such commission shall have three (3)
members who shall be appointed and organized in accordance with Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 7-35-406. The board shall have jurisdiction over the city
waterworks and sewerage system, but in all respects be subject to and controlled
by provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-35-406. (1972 Code, § 13-101)
2-302. Violation of commission's rules and regulations. It shall be
unlawful to violate any lawful rule or regulation adopted by the waterworks and
sewerage system commission. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
such rule or regulation, in addition to being fined under the general penalty
clause of this code, shall be subject to having his utility service discontinued in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the board. (1972 Code, § 13-102)
3-1
1Charter references
Duties of recorder: § 14.
Powers of council: § 6.
TITLE 3
MUNICIPAL COURT1
CHAPTER
1. CITY JUDGE.
2. COURT ADMINISTRATION.
3. WARRANTS, SUMMONSES AND SUBPOENAS.
4. BONDS AND APPEALS.
CHAPTER 1
CITY JUDGE
SECTION
3-101. City judge.
3-101. City judge. The officer designated as city judge pursuant to the
city charter shall preside over the city court, and shall be known as the city
judge. (1972 Code, § 1-501)
3-2
CHAPTER 2
COURT ADMINISTRATION
SECTION
3-201. Maintenance of docket.
3-202. Imposition of fines and costs.
3-203. Disposition and report of fines and costs.
3-204. Failure or refusal to pay fine.
3-205. Disturbance of proceedings.
3-206. Trial and disposition of cases.
3-201. Maintenance of docket. The city judge shall keep a complete
docket reflecting the following information:
(1) Name of the defendant,
(2) Name of witnesses,
(3) The offense,
(4) Pleas,
(5) Date of hearing,
(6) Finding, and the amount of the fine if such is imposed. (1972
Code, § 1-502)
3-202. Imposition of fines and costs. In all cases in which a fine is
imposed, the judge shall record the same on the docket and tax such cost against
the defendant as is allowed in courts of the justice of the peace for similar
violations. (1972 Code, § 1-508)
3-203. Disposition and report of fines and costs. All funds coming
into the hands of the city judge in the form of fines, costs, and forfeitures shall
be recorded by him and paid over to the municipality daily. At the end of each
month he shall submit to the board of mayor and aldermen a report accounting
for the collection or non-collection of all fines and costs imposed by his court
during the current month and to date for the current fiscal year. (1972 Code,
§ 1-511)
3-204. Failure or refusal to pay fine. Any person who has been fined
by the city judge and who fails or refuses to pay his fine shall be required to
perform such work for the city as may be assigned by the city judge and may be
credited with two dollars ($2.00) for each day worked and one dollar ($1.00) per
day for those days not worked. (1972 Code, § 1-507)
3-205. Disturbance of proceedings. It shall be unlawful for any
person to create any disturbance of any trial before the city court by making
3-3
loud or unusual noises, by using indecorous, profane, or blasphemous language,
or any distracting conduct whatsoever. (1972 Code, § 1-512)
3-206. Trial and disposition of cases. The city judge is empowered to
impose fines for any violation of city ordinances. He shall conduct preliminary
hearings of alleged violations of state criminal laws pending before the court.
In all cases in which the evidence supports probable cause of such violation, he
shall bind the violator to the county grand jury under reasonable bond in all
cases in which the law provides for bond. (1972 Code, § 1-506)
3-4
1State law reference
For authority to issue warrants, see Tennessee Code Annotated, title
40, chapter 6.
CHAPTER 3
WARRANTS, SUMMONSES AND SUBPOENAS
SECTION
3-301. Issuance of warrants.
3-302. Issuance of summonses.
3-303. Issuance of subpoenas.
3-301. Issuance of warrants.1 The city judge shall have authority to
issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with violating municipal
ordinances and state laws. (1972 Code, § 1-503)
3-302. Issuance of summonses. When a complaint of an alleged
ordinance violation is made to the city judge, the judge may in his discretion, in
lieu of issuing an arrest warrant, issue a summons ordering the alleged offender
to personally appear before the city court at a time specified therein to answer
to the charges against him. The summons shall contain a brief description of
the offense charged but need not set out verbatim the provisions of the
ordinance alleged to have been violated. Upon failure of any person to appear
before the city court as commanded in a summons lawfully served upon him, the
cause may be proceeded with ex parte, and the judgment of the court shall be
valid and binding subject to the defendant's right of appeal. (1972 Code,
§ 1-504)
3-303. Issuance of subpoenas. The city judge may subpoena as
witnesses all persons whose testimony he believes will be relevant and material
to matters coming before his court, and it shall be unlawful for any person
lawfully served with such a subpoena to fail or neglect to comply therewith.
(1972 Code, § 1-505)
3-5
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 27-5-101.
CHAPTER 4
BONDS AND APPEALS
SECTION
3-401. Appeals.
3-402. Bond amounts, conditions, and forms.
3-401. Appeals. Any defendant who is dissatisfied with any judgment
of the city court against him may, within ten days (10) next after such judgment
is rendered, appeal to the next term of the circuit court upon posting a proper
appeal bond.1 (1972 Code, § 1-509)
3-402. Bond amounts, conditions, and forms. An appearance bond
in any case before the city court shall be in such amount as the city judge shall
prescribe and shall be conditioned that the defendant shall appear for trial
before the city court at the stated time and place.
A person in custody may post a cash bond in an amount equivalent to the
maximum fine that may be assessed, with either the judge or the presiding
police officer. If such police officer receives a cash bond, he shall in all cases
prepare a receipt in duplicate, furnishing the original to the person posting
bond, and deliver the cash received and duplicate receipt to the recorder within
twenty-four (24) hours. Persons posting cash bonds who fail to appear at his
hearing shall forfeit such bond to the court.
An appeal bond shall be in the sum of two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00) and shall be conditioned that if the circuit court shall find against the
appellant the fine and all costs of the trial and appeal shall be promptly paid by
the defendant and/or his sureties. An appeal bond in any case may be made in
the form of a cash deposit or by any corporate surety company authorized to do
business in Tennessee, or by two (2) private persons who individually own real
property located within the county. (1972 Code, § 1-510)
4-1
TITLE 4
MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL1
CHAPTER
1. SOCIAL SECURITY.
2. VACATIONS, SICK LEAVE, AND COMPENSATION FOR INJURED
EMPLOYEES.
3. DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING.
4. OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM.
5. TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT REGULATIONS.
6. EMPLOYEE'S RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
CHAPTER 1
SOCIAL SECURITY
SECTION
4-101. Policy and purpose as to coverage.
4-102. Necessary agreements to be executed.
4-103. Withholdings from salaries or wages.
4-104. Appropriations for employer's contributions.
4-105. Records and reports to be made.
4-106. Exclusions.
4-101. Policy and purpose as to coverage. It is hereby declared to
be the policy and purpose of the City of Camden, Tennessee, to extend as of
January 1, 1951, to employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or this
chapter, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or
proprietary function, the benefits of the System of Federal Old-Age and
Survivors Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and
amendments thereto, including Public Law 734, 81st Congress. In pursuance
of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be
required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations. (1972 Code,
§ 1-701)
4-102. Necessary agreements to be executed. The mayor is hereby
authorized and directed to execute all the necessary agreements and
amendments thereto with the state executive director of old age insurance, as
1Municipal code reference
Civil service commission: title 2, chapter 3.
4-2
agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in the
preceding section. (1972 Code, § 1-702)
4-103. Withholdings from salaries or wages. Withholdings from the
salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in the first
section of this chapter are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at
such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations,
and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or
regulations. (1972 Code, § 1-703)
4-104. Appropriations for employer's contributions. There shall be
appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's
contributions, and the same shall be paid over to the state or federal agency
designated by said laws or regulations. (1972 Code, § 1-704)
4-105. Records and reports to be made. The municipality shall keep
such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state and
federal laws or regulations. (1972 Code, § 1-705)
4-106. Exclusions. (1) There is hereby excluded from this chapter any
authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or employee or
official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating
any retirement system for any employee or official of the city, (or any employee
or official excluded by federal or state laws or regulations.) There is hereby
further excluded from this chapter any authority to make any agreement with
respect to employees rendering emergency services, employees rendering
services in part-time and fee basis positions, and elective officials engaged in
rendering legislative, executive and judicial services as classifications of
employees and officials of all departments of city government.
Effective January 1, 1961, the mayor is hereby authorized and directed
to make and enter into a supplement to the agreement of October 12, 1953 so as
to extend the benefits of the System of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance
to include those employees and officials of said classifications.
(2)1 The mayor is hereby directed to amend the social security
agreement between the State Old Age and Survivors Insurance Agency and the
City of Camden, Tennessee so as to exclude services of election officials and
election workers if the remuneration paid in a calendar year is less than $100,
to be effective not earlier than the last day of the calendar quarter in which a
1Ordinance #EWJ-16-A amended this chapter but did not specify which
section. This subsection was added to exclusions as the amendment deals with
further exclusions.
4-3
modification to the agreement is mailed to the Social Security Administration,
pursuant to provisions of federal law and regulations. (1972 Code, § 1-706, as
amended by Ord. #EWJ-16-A, March 1988)
Change 6, January 14, 2013 4-4
CHAPTER 2
VACATIONS, SICK LEAVE, AND COMPENSATION
FOR INJURED EMPLOYEES
SECTION
4-201. Applicability of chapter.
4-202. Vacation leave.
4-203. Sick leave.
4-204. Elective officers, sick leave.
4-205. Leave records.
4-206. Part-time employees not entitled to leave.
4-207. Compensation for employees injured in the line of duty.
4-201. Applicability of chapter. This chapter shall apply to all fulltime
municipal officers and employees. (1972 Code, § 1-801)
4-202. Vacation leave. During each calendar year, all officers and
employees who have served the City of Camden for more than one (1) year and
less than five (5) years shall receive forty (40) hours vacation with full
compensation. Any employee who has served the city for five (5) years or more
shall receive eighty (80) hours vacation with full compensation. Any employee
who has served the city for ten (10) years or more shall receive one-hundred
twenty (120) hours vacation with full compensation. Any employee who has
served the city for twenty (20) years or more shall receive one-hundred sixty
(160) hours vacation with full compensation. Vacations are not cumulative and
shall be taken during the year in which they occur, or same shall be waived.
Legal holidays and regularly scheduled days off do not constitute a part of their
vacations. (1972 Code, § 1-802, as amended by Ord. #HK-4, Sept. 1991)
4-203. Sick leave. It appears that the city employees who have served
the City of Camden for one (1) year or more shall be entitled to twelve (12) days
sick leave with full compensation. The employees are not eligible to accrue sick
pay benefits until the successful completion of the first year of employment.
Employees will be eligible to accrue one (1) sick day per month. Sick leave not
taken shall be cumulative with no maximum number of days employees can
accumulate. Upon an employee being eligible for retirement, said employee shall
be entitled to accelerate the retirement date by the number of accumulated sick
leave days the employee has accumulated. All sick leave will be supervised by
the board, mayor, and alderpersons and is hereby authorized to promulgate and
adopt rules, regulations, and sick leave policies as the board deems necessary
and proper from time to time. (Ord. #HK-5, Sept. 1991, modified, as amended
by Ord. #EWJ-01-2012-2, April 2012)
4-5
4-204. Elective officers, sick leave. Should any elective officer be
absent from duty because of sickness for more than sixty (60) days, his salary
shall cease and shall not be renewed or reinstated until he returns to active
duty, except absence from duty for injuries or sickness caused by injuries arising
in the line of duty. (1972 Code, § 1-804)
4-205. Leave records. The recorder shall cause to be kept, for each
officer and employee, a record currently up to date at all times showing credits
earned and leave taken under this chapter. (1972 Code, § 1-805)
4-206. Part-time employees not entitled to leave. Part-time
employees and temporary officers are expressly excluded from benefit of
vacation and sick leave. (1972 Code, § 1-806)
4-207. Compensation for employees injured in the line of duty.
Any regularly employed person of the City of Camden who has been so employed
for more than six (6) months and who shall be injured while performing his
duties as an employee of the city and who is required to be off from work due to
said injuries shall be entitled to draw his full salary for a period of sixty (60)
days from date of injury, and thereafter said employee shall draw Workman's
Compensation benefits only. During said sixty (60) days period the employee
shall assign his Workman's Compensation benefits to the City of Camden in
order to receive the full salary benefits provided herein. (1972 Code, § 1-807)
Change 7, April 11, 2016 4-6
CHAPTER 3
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING
SECTION
4-301. City adopts a drug and alcohol testing policy.
4-302. Drug and alcohol policy.
4-301. City adopts a drug and alcohol testing policy.1 The City of
Camden through its board of mayor and aldermen, does hereby adopt a policy
to provide for the random drug and alcohol testing of all city employees who hold
a commercial driver's license from the division of transportation. Said drug
testing shall be conducted by the city clerk or one of her designatees upon
request of the various department heads. (Ord. #GWO-30, Aug. 1996)
4-302. Drug and alcohol policy. The city is committed to maintaining
the safety and health of its employees and to protect the public from risks which
result from employee drug or alcohol induced behavior. The city will act to
eliminate any substance abuse (alcohol, illegal drugs, prescription drugs or any
other substance which could impair an employee's ability to safely and
effectively perform the functions of the particular job) which increases the
potential for accidents, absenteeism, substandard performance, poor employee
morale or damage to the city's reputation. Employees are prohibited from the
use, possession and sale of drugs, alcohol or any other controlled substance on
city property or in city vehicles. Employees must be free from drug or alcohol
dependence, illegal drug use, or drug/alcohol abuse while on duty. (as added by
Ord. #RP-09142015-2, Oct. 2015)
1A complete copy of the drug and alcohol testing policy is of record in the
office of the recorder.
4-7
CHAPTER 4
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM
SECTION
4-401. Title.
4-402. Purpose.
4-403. Coverage.
4-404. Standards authorized.
4-405. Variances from standards authorized.
4-406. Administration.
4-407. Funding the program.
4-401. Title. This section shall provide authority for establishing and
administering the Occupational Safety and Health Program for the employees
of the City of Camden, Tennessee. (Ord. #GWO-21, April 1995, as replaced by
Ord. #JT2002-3, Aug. 2002)
4-402. Purpose. The City of Camden, in electing to establish and
maintain an effective occupational safety and health program for its employees,
shall:
(1) Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of employment.
(2) Make, keep, preserve and make available to the Commissioner of
Labor of the State of Tennessee, his designated representatives, or persons
within the Tennessee Department of Labor to whom such responsibilities have
been delegated, adequate records of all occupational accidents and illnesses and
personal injuries for proper evaluation and necessary corrective action as
required.
(3) Provide for education and training of personnel for the fair and
efficient administration of occupational safety and health standards, and
provide for education and notification of all employees of the existence of this
program. (Ord. #GWO-21, April 1995, as replaced by Ord. #JT2002-3, Aug.
2002)
4-403. Coverage. The provisions of the occupational safety and health
program for the employees of the City of Camden shall apply to all employees
of each administrative department, commission, board, division, or other agency
of the City of Camden whether part-time or full-time, seasonal or permanent.
(Ord. #GWO-21, April 1995, as replaced by Ord. #JT2002-3, Aug. 2002)
4-404. Standards authorized. The occupational safety and health
standards adopted by the City of Camden are the same as, but not limited to,
the State of Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Standards promulgated,
or which may be promulgated, in accordance with Section 6 of the Tennessee
4-8
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 (Tennessee Code Annotated, title
50, chapter 3). (Ord. #GWO-21, April 1995, as replaced by Ord. #JT2002-3, Aug.
2002)
4-405. Variances from standards authorized. The City of Camden
may, upon written application to the Commissioner of Labor of the State of
Tennessee, request an order granting a temporary variance from any approved
standards. Applications for variances shall be in accordance with Rules of
Tennessee Department of Labor, Occupational Safety, chapter 0800-1-2, as
authorized by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 50. Prior to requesting such
temporary variance, the City of Camden shall notify or serve notice to
employees, their designated representatives, or interested parties and present
them with an opportunity for a hearing. The posting of notice on the main
bulletin board as designated by the City of Camden shall be deemed sufficient
notice to employees. (Ord. #GWO-21, April 1995, as replaced by Ord.
#JT2002-3, Aug. 2002)
4-406. Administration. For the purpose of this chapter, (Name of
Office) Gary Farmer is designated as the director of occupational safety and
health to perform duties and to exercise powers assigned so as to plan, develop,
and administer City of Camden. The director shall develop a plan of operation1
for the program and said plan shall become a part of this chapter when it
satisfies all applicable sections of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health
Act of 1972 and Part IV of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Plan.
(Ord. #GWO-21, April 1995, as replaced by Ord. JT2002-03, Aug. 2002)
4-407 Funding the program. Sufficient funds for administering and
staffing the program pursuant to this chapter shall be made available as
authorized by the City of Camden. (Ord. #GWO-21, April 1995, as replaced by
Ord. #JT2002-3, Aug. 2002)
1The plan of operation has been added as Appendix A to the Camden
Municipal Code and placed behind the parallel reference table. See page
APPA-1.
4-9
CHAPTER 5
TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION
4-501. Purpose.
4-502. Enforcement.
4-503. Travel policy.
4-504. Travel reimbursement rate schedule.
4-505. Administrative procedures.
4-501. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter and referenced regulations
is to bring the city into compliance with Public Acts 1993, Chapter 433. This act
requires Tennessee municipalities to adopt travel and expense regulations
covering expenses incurred by "any mayor and any member of the local
governing body and any board or committee member elected or appointed by the
mayor or local governing body, and any official or employee of the municipality
whose salary is set by charter or general law."
To provide consistent travel regulations and reimbursement, this chapter
is expanded to cover regular employees. It's the intent of this policy to assure
fair and equitable treatment to all individuals traveling on city business at city
expense. (Ord. #GWO-2, Sept. 1993)
4-502. Enforcement. The chief administrative officer (CAO) of the city
or his or her designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of these travel
regulations. (Ord. #GWO-2, Sept. 1993)
4-503. Travel policy. (1) In the interpretation and application of this
chapter, the term "traveler" or "authorized travel" means any elected or
appointed municipal officer or employee, including members of municipal boards
and committees appointed by the mayor or the municipal governing body, and
the employees of such boards and committees who are traveling on official
municipal business and whose travel was authorized in accordance with this
chapter. "Authorized traveler" shall not include the spouse, children, other
relatives, friends, or companions accompanying the authorized traveler on city
business, unless the person(s) otherwise qualifies as an authorized traveler
under this chapter.
(2) Authorized travelers are entitled to reimbursement of certain
expenditures incurred while traveling on official business for the city.
Reimbursable expenses shall include expenses for transportation; lodging;
meals; registration fees for conferences, conventions, and seminars; and other
actual and necessary expenses related to official business as determined by the
CAO. Under certain conditions, entertainment expenses may be eligible for
reimbursement.
4-10
(3) Authorized travelers can request either a travel advance for the
projected cost of authorized travel, or advance billing directly to the city for
registration fees, air fares, meals, lodging, conferences, and similar expenses.
Travel advance requests aren't considered documentation of travel
expenses. If travel advances exceed documented expenses, the traveler must
immediately reimburse the city. It will be the responsibility of the CAO to
initiate action to recover any undocumented travel advances.
(4) Travel advances are available only for special travel and only after
completion and approval of the travel authorization form.
(5) The travel expense reimbursement form will be used to document
all expense claims.
(6) To qualify for reimbursement, travel expenses must be:
(a) Directly related to the conduct of the city business for which
travel was authorized, and
(b) Actual, reasonable, and necessary under the circumstances.
The CAO may make exceptions for unusual circumstances.
Expenses considered excessive won't be allowed.
(7) Claims of $5 or more for travel expense reimbursement must be
supported by the original paid receipt for lodging, vehicle rental, phone call,
public carrier travel, conference fee, and other reimbursable costs.
(8) Any person attempting to defraud the city or misuse city travel
funds is subject to legal action for recovery of fraudulent travel claims and/or
advances.
(9) Mileage and motel expenses incurred within the city aren't
ordinarily considered eligible expenses for reimbursement. (Ord. #GWO-2, Sept.
1993)
4-504. Travel reimbursement rate schedule. Authorized travelers
shall be reimbursed according to the federal travel regulation rates. The city's
travel reimbursement rates will automatically change when the federal rates
are adjusted.
The municipality may pay directly to the provider for expenses such as
meals, lodging, and registration fees for conferences, conventions, seminars, and
other education programs. (Ord. #GWO-2, Sept. 1993)
4-505. Administrative procedures. The city adopts and incorporates
by reference--as if fully set out herein--the administrative procedures submitted
by MTAS to, and approved by letter by, the Comptroller of the Treasury, State
of Tennessee, in June 1993. A copy of the administrative procedures is on file
in the office of the city recorder.
This chapter shall take effect upon its final reading by the municipal
governing body. It shall cover all travel and expenses occurring on or after July
1, 1993. (Ord. #GWO-2, Sept. 1993)
4-11
CHAPTER 6
EMPLOYEE'S RETIREMENT PROGRAM
SECTION
4-601. Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System.
4-601. Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System. The employees
of all departments of the City of Camden shall be eligible to participate in the
Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System pursuant to resolutions adopted by
the city council.1
1Resolutions are available for inspection in the office of the recorder.
5-1
1Charter references
Delinquent taxes: § 17.
Liability of recorder and marshal for taxes: § 18.
2Municipal reference
Board of city tax equalization: title 4.
Tax assessor: title 2.
3State law references
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 67-1-701, 67-1-702 and 67-1-801, read
together, permit a municipality to collect its own property taxes if its
charter authorizes it to do so, or to turn over the collection of its
property taxes to the county trustee. Apparently, under those same
provisions, if a municipality collects its own property taxes, tax due
and delinquency dates are as prescribed by the charter; if the county
trustee collects them, the tax due date is the first Monday in October,
and the delinquency date is the following March 1.
TITLE 5
MUNICIPAL FINANCE AND TAXATION1
CHAPTER
1. PROPERTY TAXES.
2. PRIVILEGE TAXES.
3. WHOLESALE BEER TAX.
4. LOCAL SALES TAX.
5. PURCHASING AND PROCUREMENT.
CHAPTER 1
PROPERTY TAXES2
SECTION
5-101. When due and payable.
5-102. When delinquent--penalty and interest.
5-101. When due and payable.3 The assessed taxes on all real estate,
personalty, or mixed property and all damages and costs accruing thereon levied
by the City of Camden hereunder shall constitute a first lien upon such property
from the tenth of January of each and every year, for the taxes for that year and
shall so remain until the taxes, penalties, interest and cost are paid, whether a
bill be filed to collect the same or not. (1972 Code, § 6-101)
5-2
1Charter and state law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-5-2010(b) provides that if the county
trustee collects the municipality's property taxes, a penalty of 1/2 of
1% and interest of 1% shall be added on the first day of March,
following the tax due date and on the first day of each succeeding
month.
2Charter and state law references
A municipality has the option of collecting delinquent property taxes
any one of three ways:
(1) Under the provisions of its charter for the collection of
delinquent property taxes.
(2) Under Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-55-201--6-55-206.
(3) By the county trustee under Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 67-5-2005.
5-102. When delinquent--penalty and interest.1 All municipal taxes
shall be due and payable on the first Monday in October of each year. Such tax
shall bear interest and in addition a penalty of one half of one percent (1/2%)
from the first day of March following the first Monday in October in the same
manner now provided for collection of delinquent state and county taxes.
The recorder with the advice and consent of the city attorney, shall have
authority to institute and prosecute proceedings for the collection of delinquent
municipal taxes. Such authority shall be equivalent to the law for collection of
delinquent state and county taxes. General laws relating to the collection of
delinquent state and county taxes, and general laws relating to the collection of
delinquent municipal taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter,
the same as if copied herein at length.2 (1972 Code, § 6-102)
5-3
CHAPTER 2
PRIVILEGE TAXES
SECTION
5-201. Tax levied.
5-202. License required.
5-201. Tax levied. The taxes provided in Public Acts 1971, ch. 387, and
any amendments thereto, known as the "Business Tax Act" are hereby enacted,
ordained and levied on the business, business activities, vocation or occupations
doing business or exercising a taxable privilege, as provided by said act in the
City of Camden at the rate and in the manner prescribed by said act with the
exception of the minimum payment tax for exterminators or contractors other
than public road contractors. The minimum tax for exterminators and
contractors other than public road contractors will be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per
annum. The proceeds of the privilege tax herein levied shall accrue to the
general fund of the city. (1972 Code, § 6-201)
5-202. License required. No person shall exercise any such privilege
within the city without a currently effective privilege license, which shall be
issued by the recorder to each applicant therefor upon the applicant's
compliance with all regulatory provisions in this code and payment of the
appropriate privilege tax. (1972 Code, § 6-202)
5-4
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, chapter 6 provides for a tax of
17% on the sale of beer at wholesale. Every wholesaler is required to
remit to each municipality the amount of the net tax on beer wholesale
sales to retailers and other persons within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
CHAPTER 3
WHOLESALE BEER TAX
SECTION
5-301. To be collected.
5-301. To be collected. The recorder is hereby directed to take
appropriate action to assure payment to the city of the wholesale beer tax levied
by the "Wholesale Beer Tax Act," as set out in Tennessee Code Annotated, title
57, chapter 6.1 (1972 Code, § 6-301)
5-5
1Municipal code reference
General accountant: § 1-302.
CHAPTER 4
LOCAL SALES TAX
SECTION
5-401. Authorization of tax.
5-402. Collection of tax.
5-403. Suits for illegally collected tax.
5-401. Authorization of tax. There is hereby levied by and for the
municipality of Camden, Tennessee a tax in the same manner and on the same
privileges subject to the Retailers Sales Tax Act, Tennessee Code Annotated,
title 67, ch. 30, as the same may be amended, which are exercised in Camden,
Tennessee. The tax is levied on all such privileges at a rate of "one-sixth" (1/6)
the rate levied in the Retailers Sales Act, Tennessee Code Annotated, title 67,
ch. 38, provided the tax shall not exceed two and one half (2 1/2) dollars on the
sale or use of any single article of personal property and there is excepted from
the tax levied by this chapter the sale, purchase, use consumption or
distribution of electric power or energy, natural or artificial gas, coal or fuel oil.
Penalty and interest for delinquency shall be the same as provided in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 67-30-26. (1972 Code, § 6-501)
5-402. Collection of tax.1 It having been determined by the Department
of Revenue of the State of Tennessee that it is feasible for this tax to be collected
by that department, said determination being evidenced by Local Option Sales
and Use Tax Rules and Regulations theretofore promulgated to the department
of revenue, the department shall collect such tax concurrently with the collection
of the state tax in the same manner as the state tax is collected in accordance
with rules and regulations promulgated by said department. The recorder is
authorized to contract with the department of revenue for the collection of the
tax by the department, and to provide in such contract that the department may
deduct from the tax collected a reasonable amount or percentage covering
expenses of the administration and collecting of said tax. (1972 Code, § 6-502)
5-403. Suit for illegally collected tax. In the event said tax is
collected by the department of revenue, suits for the recovery of any taxes
illegally assessed or collected shall be brought against the Mayor of the City of
Camden. (1972 Code, § 6-503)
5-6
CHAPTER 5
PURCHASING AND PROCUREMENT
SECTION
5-501. Purpose.
5-502. Definitions.
5-503. General provisions.
5-504. Sole source procurement.
5-505. Emergency procurement.
5-506. Real property procurement.
5-507. Electricity, natural gas and telephone services.
5-508. Fuel (gasoline and diesel) procurement.
5-509. Professional services contracts.
5-510. Insurance contracts.
5-511. Intergovernmental purchasing.
5-512. Contractual services from non-profit groups.
5-513. Purchases of less than $1,000.00.
5-514. Purchases of less than $2,500.00 but over $1,000.00.
5-515. Purchases of less than $10,000.00 but over $2,500.00.
5-516. Purchases of more than $10,000.00.
5-517. Limitations and penalties.
5-501. Purpose. This regulation will implement the standard operating
procedure for the orderly, timely and responsible purchase and procurement of
supplies, materials, and equipment for the activities of the city to insure the
proper use of the public funds of the city as authorized by Tennessee Code
Annotated, which is entitled the "Municipal Purchasing Law of 1983." (Ord.
#MPW-10, June 1992)
5-502. Definitions. For the purposes of this regulation, the following
definitions shall apply:
(1) "Purchasing agent." The person designated by the mayor as
responsible for the implementation of this regulation, and who shall exercise
supervision over all purchasing and procurement of all supplies, materials,
equipment and/or services, as well as property control and inventory for
supplies, materials, equipment or services for the City of Camden, or, failing
such designation, the mayor him/herself.
(2) "Purchase." The act of procuring supplies, materials, equipment
and/or services in exchange for money where title will vest in the city.
(3) "Lease." The act of procuring the use of supplies, materials,
equipment and/or services in exchange for a periodic payment of money where
title will not vest in the city.
5-7
(4) "Lease/purchase." The act of procuring the use and ownership of
supplies, materials, equipment and/or services by the means of periodic
payments of money, where title will vest in the town at a pre-agreed point in
time, when certain monetary conditions have been met.
(5) "Request for quotation." The form prescribed by the purchasing
agent to invite competitive bids from prospective suppliers for supplies,
materials, equipment or services (same as invitation to bid), or the act of
soliciting a quotation.
(6) "Purchase order." The form prescribed in certain instances by the
purchasing agent for the procurement, lease or lease/purchase of supplies,
materials, equipment or services.
(7) "Contract." A formal, written agreement between the City of
Camden and the provider of supplies, materials, equipment or services to the
city.
(8) "Competitive bidding." The process of obtaining price quotations
from various sources for required supplies, materials, equipment or services by
use of standardized specifications and invitations to submit quotations for same.
(9) "Invitation to bid." The procedure of submitting request for
quotations to various sources for the proposed procurement of supplies,
materials, equipment or services. (Same as invitation to submit quotation.)
(10) "Public advertisement." The act of placing an advertisement in the
city's official newspaper, or other media as may be required, announcing the
intent of the city to purchase supplies, materials, equipment or services, and
inviting public participation by submission of competitive bids. (Ord. #MPW-10,
June 1992)
5-503. General provisions. (1) The mayor shall be responsible for
controlling the expenditures of the various agencies of the city government to
accomplish maximum efficiency and economy.
(2) The recorder/director of finance shall be designated as the
Purchasing Agent of the City of Camden, under the supervision of the mayor,
who shall, in the absence of the purchasing agent, act in that capacity.
(3) The purchasing agent shall be responsible for the implementation
and maintenance of the city's purchasing and procurement program, and shall
prescribe such forms as may be required for administration of the program.
(4) The office of the director of finance shall be designated as the
purchasing office of the city.
(5) Except as set forth hereinbelow, all proposed purchases or
procurements shall be with the prior review of the purchasing agent to insure
that all such actions are within the budgetary limitations of the activity
concerned and that funds are available to make payment for same.
(6) Each department supervisor is designated as the person
responsible for the purchasing and procurement activities of his or her
respective department and for coordination with the city's purchasing agent.
5-8
(7) No funds shall be obligated by any official or employee of the city
except those herein designated. (Ord. #MPW-10, June 1992)
5-504. Sole source procurement. Any goods or services which may not
be procured by competitive means because of the existence of a single source or
because of a proprietary product shall be exempt from the competitive bidding
process; however, the procurement of such goods or services will be with the
prior written approval of the mayor. Further, a record of all such purchases
shall be made by the purchasing agent which shall contain a list of those items
so procured, the prices paid, the source from which procured, and the
justification for the sole source procurement. The data in this report shall be
furnished the board at its next subsequent meeting.
Where a department of the city government has established a particular
model/type of equipment for a specified application, subsequent additions to that
system or parts required for maintenance and repair thereto, shall be classified
as sole source procurement to insure that the integrity of the system is
maintained. (Ord. #MPW-10, June 1992)
5-505. Emergency procurement. Competitive bidding procedures may
be waived for purchases or leases of any supplies, materials or equipment for
immediate delivery in actual emergencies arising from unforeseen causes,
including delays by contractors, delays in transportation, and unanticipated
volume of work; however, the emergency procurements of such items will be
with the prior written approval of the mayor. A record of all such purchases
shall be made by the purchasing agent which shall contain a list of the items so
procured, the prices paid, the source(s) from which procured, and the
justification for the emergency procurement. The data contained in this report
shall be furnished the board at its next subsequent regular meeting. (Ord.
#MPW-10, June 1992)
5-506. Real property procurement. Purchases, leases or leasepurchase
of real property are exempt from the competitive bidding process. The
price or consideration for such procurements shall be negotiated subject to the
final approval of the board. (Ord. #MPW-10, June 1992)
5-507. Electricity, natural gas and telephone services. All
electrical, natural gas and telephone and related services provided the city by
regulated industries are exempt from the competitive bidding procedure. (Ord.
#MPW-10, June 1992)
5-508. Fuel (gasoline and diesel) procurement. Procurement of
regular, leaded gasoline shall be by the competitive bidding process. The
procurement of high-test, unleaded gasoline and diesel fuels shall be exempt
from the bidding process until such time as the city obtains its own bulk fuel
5-9
storage tanks for these fuels, or the local suppliers agree to furnish 1,000 gallon
storage facilities when they are the successful bidder. (Ord. #MPW-10, June
1992)
5-509. Professional services contracts. Contracts for legal services,
fiscal agents, auditors, financial advisors or advisory services, educational
consultants, engineer consultants, and similar services by professional persons
or groups of high ethical standards, shall not be based upon competitive bids,
but shall be awarded by the board on the basis of recognized competence and
integrity through review of past performance and interviews with prospective
contractees, subject to a review of all such contracts by the city's attorney. (Ord.
#MPW-10, June 1992)
5-510. Insurance contracts. (1) Insurance for various entities of the
city's government which is procured through a plan authorized and approved by
any organization of governmental entities representing cities, towns and
counties, such as, but not limited to, the Tennessee Municipal League Insurance
Pool, may be contracted for without public advertising, competitive bidding, or
invitation to submit quotations. All contracts awarded for such insurance shall
be subject to approval of the board.
(2) Insurance for various entities of the city's government which are
procured through private or for-profit entities, such as commercial insurance
companies, for casualty, liability, inland marine, property, life and health and
accident insurances, will be obtained by public advertisement and/or invitations
to submit proposals. All contracts awarded for such insurance shall be subject
to approval of the board.
Insurance policies thus contracted will usually be for a term of three (3)
years, with annual premium adjustments as approved by the board. (Ord.
#MPW-10, June 1992)
5-511. Intergovernmental purchasing. (1) Purchases by the city of
supplies, materials, equipment and/or services for other local governmental
entities may be made upon request from said entities; however, the procurement
shall be made on the same terms and under the same rules and regulations as
regular purchases by the city. The cost of all such purchases shall be borne by
the requesting entity.
(2) Purchases by the city of supplies, materials, equipment and/or
services from or through any centralized purchasing or procurement agency of
any local governmental entity, or of the state or federal government shall be
without public advertising or competitive bidding. (Ord. #MPW-10, June 1992)
5-512. Contractual services from non-profit groups. Contracts for
supplies, materials and/or services from non-profit corporations, such as, but not
limited to, the local government data processing corporations, whose purpose,
5-10
or one of whose purposes, is to provide goods or services specifically to
municipalities shall be exempt from public advertising or competitive bidding.
(Ord. #MPW-10, June 1992)
5-513. Purchases of less than $1,000.00. Supplies and materials, the
total cost of which does not exceed $1,000.00, and which are required for
day-to-day operations, maintenance and repairs in and by the various
departments and agencies of the city may be purchased or procured directly
from those firms or businesses where the city maintains accounts by the
department or activity supervisor concerned so long as such purchases or
procurements are within the budget limitations of the department or activity
concerned. (Ord. #MPW-10, June 1992, as amended by Ord. #98-12, Nov. 1998)
5-514. Purchases of less than $2,500.00 but over $1,000.00.
Purchase, procurement, lease and/or lease-purchase agreements for supplies,
materials, equipment and/or services which will cost in the aggregate more than
$1,000.00 but less than $2,500.00 shall be exempt from public advertising and/or
formal competitive bidding.
(1) Purchase or procurement of such items shall be made through the
use of telephonic or personal request for quotation of price for same, utilizing the
form prescribed by the purchasing agent. Such purchases or procurements may
be made by the supervisor of the department of activity concerned, subject to a
review of the quotations and determination of budget limitations, if any, and the
written approval of the mayor.
(2) Upon approval of the quotation, the purchasing agent shall issue
a purchase order for same. (Ord. #MPW-10, June 1992, as amended by Ord.
#98-12, Nov. 1998)
5-515. Purchases of less than $10,000.00, but over $2,500.00.
Purchases, procurement, lease and/or lease-purchase agreements for supplies,
materials, equipment and/or services consisting of less than $10,000.00 but more
than $2,500.00 shall be by competitive bids from at least three (3) different
sources where possible; however, public advertisement shall not be required.
This exemption shall not apply to purchases of like items which individually cost
less than $10,000.00, but which are customarily purchased in lots of two (2) or
more, if the total purchase price of such items would exceed $10,000.00 during
any fiscal year.
(1) The supervisor of the department of activity requiring the purchase
or procurement of such items shall submit details of the supplies, materials,
equipment and/or services to be procured, to include technical specifications
where required, to the mayor for his/her approval. Upon the approval of the
mayor and subject to budget allocations and availability of funds, the purchasing
agent shall issue the appropriate invitations to submit bids or quotations, which
shall contain all relevant data as to the city's bidding process and reservations
5-11
of the right to accept or reject bids, including specific data as to the bid opening
time and procedure.
(2) All qualified bids or quotations received shall, at the specified time
and place, be publicly opened and the results read aloud. Upon acceptance and
approval of a bid by the mayor, the purchasing agent shall issue the appropriate
purchase orders. (Ord. #MPW-10, June 1992, as amended by Ord. #98-12, Nov.
1998, modified)
5-516. Purchases of more than $10,000.00. The purchase or
procurement of supplies, materials, equipment, and/or services which
individually cost more than $10,000.00, or, if when normally procured in lots of
two (2) or more during any fiscal year total more than $10,000.00, shall be
subject to competitive bidding and public advertisement.
(1) The supervisor of the department or activity requiring the purchase
or procurement of such items shall submit details of the supplies, materials,
equipment and/or services to be obtained, to include technical specifications
where necessary, to the mayor for his/her approval. Upon approval by the
mayor, and subject to budget allocations and availability of funds, the mayor
shall refer the request for such purchase or procurement to the board for their
review and approval.
(2) Upon approval of the proposed purchase or procurement by the
board, the purchasing agent shall issue the appropriate invitations to submit
bids or quotations and place the required public advertisement in the city's
official newspaper, and such other media as may be appropriate, which shall
contain all relevant data as to the city's bidding process and reservations as to
acceptance or rejection of bids, including specific information as to the bid
opening time and procedure.
(3) All qualified bids, quotations and/or proposals (here-in-after
referred to collectively as "bids") received in response to an advertisement and/or
invitation to submit bids, shall at the time and place as indicated in the public
notice and/or solicitation of bids, which shall normally be during regular office
hours and in the board room of the Camden City Hall, be publicly opened by the
mayor or his/her designated representative and the results read aloud.
Thereupon, the official conducting the bid opening shall make a statement
declaring the apparent low bidder, and informing all persons present that all
duly qualified bids will be accepted for tabulation, review of all bid documents
for compliance with advertised specifications, and referral to the city board at
their next subsequent regular meeting for their review, approval or disapproval,
and the authorization of any procurement contracts. A minimum of three (3)
officials of the city shall be present at all public bid openings. The appropriate
official of the city shall record the minutes of all such public bid openings, which
shall be filed with the appropriate procurement documentation. (Ord.
#MPW-10, June 1992, as amended by Ord. #98-12, Nov. 1998, modified)
5-12
5-517. Limitations and penalties. (1) All purchases made from funds
of the city shall be made within the limits of the approved budgets and within
the appropriation of the department, agency or activity for which the purchase
is made.
(2) No obligation of funds of the city shall be made except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or of the city's charter.
(3) All formal contract documents entered into by the city shall be
reviewed by the city attorney prior to final execution.
(4) Any contract or agreement made in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, the city charter, or other ordinances of the city shall be void and
no expenditure shall be made thereunder. Every officer and employee who shall
knowingly make or participate in any such contract or agreement, or authorize
or make any expenditure thereunder may be liable to the city for the full
amount. (Ord. #MPW-10, June 1992)
6-1
1Municipal code reference
Traffic citations, etc.: title 15, chapter 7.
2Charter reference
Duties of the marshal: § 15.
TITLE 6
LAW ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER
1. POLICE AND ARREST.
CHAPTER 1
POLICE AND ARREST1
SECTION
6-101. Department, organization.
6-102. Chief of police, duties.
6-103. Additional police.
6-104. Authority of police to arrest.
6-105. Salaries of department members.
6-106. Members to execute oath and bond.
6-107. Authority to enter private property.
6-101. Department, organization. The police department shall consist
of a chief of police and such other members as may be appointed by the mayor.
(1972 Code, § 1-401)
6-102. Chief of police, duties.2 The chief of police shall have the
following duties:
(1) Maintain peace and order,
(2) Abate all nuisances,
(3) Apprehend and arrest violators of the law,
(4) Serve warrants, subpoenas and other process and make proper
returns thereon,
(5) Serve as ex-officio superintendent of the streets,
(6) Act as prosecutor in all cases before the city court,
(7) Supervise other members of the department. (1972 Code, § 1-402)
6-2
6-103. Additional police. All additional police shall be appointed in
accordance with the charter. They shall serve under the supervision of the chief
of police and assist him in the preservation of peace and order. (1972 Code,
§ 1-403, modified)
6-104. Authority of police to arrest. Unless otherwise authorized or
directed in this code or other applicable law, an arrest of the person shall be
made by a policeman in the following cases:
(1) Whenever he is in possession of a warrant for the arrest of the
person in question.
(2) Whenever an offense is committed or a breach of the peace is
threatened in the officer's presence by the person.
(3) Whenever a felony has in fact been committed and the officer has
reasonable cause to believe the person has committed it. (1972 Code, § 1-404)
6-105. Salaries of department members. The members of the police
department shall receive such compensation as the council shall direct. (1972
Code, § 1-405)
6-106. Members to execute an oath and bond. Any person upon
being appointed a member of the police department shall subscribe to an oath
to faithfully and impartially discharge his duties as a member of the police
department. Such member shall execute a bond in the amount and form
prescribed by council. (1972 Code, § 1-406)
6-107. Authority to enter private property. City law enforcement
officers shall be authorized to enter upon private parking lots and other private
property for the purpose of enforcing the traffic regulations of the City of
Camden and the State of Tennessee in accordance with the authority granted
under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-101. (Ord. #EWJ-20-A, Aug. 1988)
Change 2, June 14, 2004 7-1
1Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
TITLE 7
FIRE PROTECTION AND FIREWORKS1
CHAPTER
1. FIRE DISTRICT.
2. FIRE CODE.
3. VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
4. FIREWORKS.
5. MISCELLANEOUS.
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DISTRICT
SECTION
7-101. Fire limits.
7-102. Rural fire service.
7-101. Fire limits. The entire area of the municipality constitutes the
corporate fire limits of the city. (1972 Code, § 7-101)
7-102. Rural fire service. The governing body of the municipality shall
establish by resolution a rural fire service district and the city is hereby
authorized to use the equipment of the fire department for fighting fires outside
the corporate limits of the city. The governing body of the municipality is
hereby authorized to adopt a rural fire service policy setting the subscription
fees and charges for such services. The mayor and city recorder are hereby
authorized to enter into individual contracts with the residents and citizens who
own or rent property in the fire district. (1972 Code, § 7-102)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 7-2
1Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama
35213-1206.
CHAPTER 2
FIRE CODE1
SECTION
7-201. Fire code adopted.
7-202. Available in recorder's office.
7-203. Enforcement.
7-204. Definition of "municipality."
7-205. Storage of explosives, flammable liquids, etc.
7-206. Gasoline trucks.
7-207. Variances.
7-208. Violations and penalty.
7-201. Fire code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by Tennessee
Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from
fire or explosion, the International Fire Code,2 2006 edition, as recommended by
the International Code Council is hereby adopted by reference and included as
a part of this code. Said fire prevention code is adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein and shall be controlling within the corporate
limits. (1972 Code, § 7-201, modified, as amended by Ord. #JT-01-2005-01, Feb.
2005, and Ord. #AW2010-01, June 2010, and repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
7-202. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the fire code has
been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (1972 Code, § 7-202, as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
7-203. Enforcement. The fire code herein adopted by reference shall
be enforced by the chief of the fire department. He shall have the same powers
as the state fire marshal. (1972 Code, § 7-203, as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
7-204. Definition of "municipality." Whenever the word
"municipality" is used in the fire code herein adopted, it shall be held to mean
Change 5, July 11, 2011 7-3
the City of Camden, Tennessee. (1972 Code, § 7-204, as repealed and replaced
by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
7-205. Storage of explosives, flammable liquids, etc. (1) The limits
referred to in the International Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and
blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby declared to be the fire limits as set out
in § 7-101 of this title.
(2) The limits referred to in the International Fire Code, in which
storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited, are
hereby declared to be the fire limits as set out in § 7-101 of this title.
(3) The limits referred to in the International Fire Code, in which new
bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby
declared to be the fire limits as set out in § 7-101 of this title.
(4) The limits referred to in the International Fire Code, in which bulk
storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby declared to be the fire
limits as set out in § 7-101 of this title. (1972 Code, § 7-205, as repealed and
replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
7-206. Gasoline trucks. No person shall operate or park any gasoline
tank truck within the central business district or within any residential area at
any time except for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
delivery of gasoline. (1972 Code, § 7-207, as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
7-207. Variances. The chief of the volunteer fire department may
recommend to the council variances from the provisions of the fire code upon
application in writing by any property owner or lessee, or the duly authorized
agent of either, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out
the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed,
public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
variances when granted or allowed shall be contained in a resolution of the
council. (1972 Code, § 7-208, as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05,
July 2011)
7-208. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the fire code herein adopted, or
fail to comply therewith, or violate or fail to comply with any order made
thereunder; or build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or
plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken; or fail to comply with
such an order as affirmed or modified by the council of the municipality or by a
court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein. The application
of a penalty under the general penalty clause for the municipal code shall not
be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (as added by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 3, May 8, 2006 7-4
1Municipal code reference
Special privileges with respect to traffic: title 15, chapter 2.
CHAPTER 3
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT1
SECTION
7-301. Establishment, equipment, and membership.
7-302. Objectives.
7-303. Organization, rules, and regulations.
7-304. Records and reports.
7-305. Tenure of members.
7-306. Chief responsible for training.
7-307. Chief to be assistant to state officer.
7-308. Mandatory retirement.
7-301. Establishment, equipment, and membership. There is
hereby established a volunteer fire department to be supported and equipped
from appropriations by the council of this municipality. All apparatus,
equipment, and supplies shall be purchased by or through the city and shall be
and remain the property of the city. The volunteer fire department shall be
composed of a chief appointed by the council and such number of physically-fit
subordinate officers and firemen as the chief shall appoint. (1972 Code, § 7-301)
7-302. Objectives. The fire department shall have as its objectives:
(1) To prevent uncontrolled fires.
(2) To prevent the loss of life and property because of fires.
(3) To confine fires to their places of origin.
(4) To extinguish uncontrolled fires.
(5) To prevent loss of life from asphyxiation or drowning.
(6) To perform such rescue work as its equipment and/or the training
of its personnel makes practicable. (1972 Code, § 7-302)
7-303. Organization, rules, and regulations. The chief of the
volunteer fire department shall set up the organization of the department, make
definite assignments to individuals, and shall formulate and enforce such rules
and regulations as shall be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of
the fire department. (1972 Code, § 7-303)
7-304. Records and reports. The chief of the volunteer fire
department shall keep adequate records of all fires, inspections, apparatus,
equipment, personnel, and work of the department. He shall submit a written
Change 3, May 8, 2006 7-5
report on such matters to the mayor once each month, and at the end of the year
a detailed annual report shall be made. (1972 Code, § 7-304)
7-305. Tenure of members. The chief shall hold office so long as his
conduct and efficiency are satisfactory to the council; however, so that adequate
discipline may be maintained, the chief shall have the authority to suspend or
discharge any other member of the fire department when he deems such action
to be necessary for the good of the department. The chief may be suspended up
to thirty (30) days by the mayor but may be dismissed only by the council. (1972
Code, § 7-305)
7-306. Chief responsible for training. The chief of the volunteer fire
department, shall be fully responsible for the training of the firemen, and the
minimum training shall consist of having the personnel take the fire apparatus
out for practice operations not less than once a month. (1972 Code, § 7-306)
7-307. Chief to be assistant to state officer. Pursuant to
requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-102-108, the chief of the
volunteer fire department is designated as an assistant to the state
commissioner of insurance and banking and is subject to all the duties and
obligations imposed by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 68, chapter 102, and
shall be subject to the directions of the fire prevention commissioner in the
execution of the provisions thereof. (1972 Code, § 7-308)
7-308. Mandatory retirement. Fire department personnel who have
reached the age of seventy years shall be required to retire as active members
of the fire department. (as added by Ord. #JT-2005-6, Aug. 2005)
7-6
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION
7-401. Fireworks.
7-401. Fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to sell or offer for sale any type of fireworks, or toy cannons within
the city except sparklers, toy pistols and caps, or like fireworks that can be fired
within a room. It shall be unlawful to fire or light any fireworks upon the
streets of the city or within the open lots near any business house or residence
within the city, except with the advance permission of the mayor. (1972 Code,
§ 7-401)
Change 2, June 14, 2004 7-7
CHAPTER 5
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
7-501. Color coding of fire hydrants.
7-501. Color coding of fire hydrants. (1) The city does hereby adopt
the following color coding procedures for fire hydrants:
(a) Fire hydrants with flow available at a residual pressure of
twenty pounds per square inch shall be designated as Class AA hydrants
and be color coded blue.
(b) Fire hydrants with available flow of 1,000 - 1,499 gallons per
minute with pressure of twenty pounds per square inch shall be
designated as Class A fire hydrants and color coded green.
(c) Fire hydrants with available flow of 500 - 999 gallons per
minute with pressure of twenty pounds per square inch shall be
designated as Class B fire hydrants and color coded orange.
(d) Fire hydrants with 0 - 499 gallons per minute with pressure
of twenty pounds per square inch shall be designated as Class C fire
hydrants and color coded red.
(2) The city's engineers shall update the system's maps to indicate the
location of the various classified fire hydrants. A copy of this chapter and the
map shall be furnished to each of the fire departments within the county and
any of those fire departments having reciprocal agreements with the city outside
the county for their use in identifying the various classifications of fire hydrants.
(as added by Ord. #JT2003-2, Oct. 2003)
Change 6, January 14, 2013 8-1
TITLE 8
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES1
CHAPTER
1. INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
2. BEER.
CHAPTER 1
INTOXICATING LIQUORS
SECTION
8-101. State laws to be complied with.
8-102. Alcoholic beverages subject to regulation.
8-103. Specific rules governing retail package stores.
8-104. Specific rules governing on-premise consumption.
8-101. State laws to be complied with. No association, corporation,
firm, partnership, or person shall engage in the wholesale, retail or on-premises
consumption ("liquor by the drink") liquor business unless all the necessary
state licenses and permits have been obtained. (1972 Code, § 2-101, as replaced
by Ord. #EWJ12-10-2012-01, Jan. 2013)
8-102. Alcoholic beverages subject to regulation. It shall be
unlawful to engage in the business of selling, storing, transporting, distributing,
or to purchase or possess alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the
City of Camden except as provided by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57. (as
added by Ord. #EWJ12-10-2012-01, Jan. 2013)
8-103. Specific rules governing retail package stores. (1)
Application for certificate of good moral character. Before any character
certificate as required by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-208 or a renewal as
required by § 57-3-213 shall be signed by the mayor, or by any alderman, an
application in writing shall be filed with the city recorder on a form to be
provided by the City of Camden, giving, inter alia, the following information:
1Municipal code references
Drinking beer, etc. on streets, etc.: § 11-101.
Minors in beer places: § 11-102.
State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57.
Change 6, January 14, 2013 8-2
(a) Name, age and address of applicant.
(b) Number of years residence in Benton County.
(c) Occupation or business and length of time engaged in such
occupation or business.
(d) Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
violation of any state or federal law or of the violation of this code or any
city ordinance, and the details of any such conviction.
(e) If employed, the name and address of employer.
(f) If in business, the kind of business and location thereof.
(g) The location of the proposed store for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
(h) The name and address of the management of the store.
(i) If the applicant is a partnership, the name, age and address
of each partner, and his or her occupation, business or employer. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name, age, and address of the stockholders,
and their degrees of ownership of stock in the corporation.
Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable investigation
fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
An application for certificate of compliance must be submitted by all
owners, partners, stockholders and directors of the store, whether same is a
firm, partnership or corporation shall be grounds for the denial of the certificate
of compliance and/or the revocation of the certificate of compliance. No applicant
shall apply individually, as a member of a partnership, or as stockholder, officer
or director on more than one (1) application, or hold any interest in more than
one (1) permit at the same time.
A copy of each application for, questionnaire, partnership agreements or
any other form of material required to be filed with the State of Tennessee
Alcoholic Beverage Commission in connection with the same application, shall
be attached to the city application form and shall become a permanent part
thereof as if copied verbatim therein. The information in the application shall
be verified by the oath of the application. If the applicant is a partnership or a
corporation, the application shall be verified by the oath of each partner, or by
the president of the corporation. All applications submitted in accordance with
this chapter shall be filed with the city recorder at least ten (10) days prior to
a regular or special called meeting.
(2) Applicant to agree to comply with laws. The applicant for a
certificate of good moral character shall agree in writing to comply with the
state and federal laws and ordinances of the city and rules and regulations of
the Alcoholic Beverage Commission of the state for sale of alcoholic beverages.
(3) Applicant to appear before board of mayor and aldermen; duty to
give information. An applicant for a certificate of good moral character may be
required to appear in person before the board of mayor and aldermen for such
reasonable examination as may be desired by the board. Before the issuance of
any character certificate or a renewal of the same, an applicant may be required
Change 6, January 14, 2013 8-3
to tender requested documentation for review and/or inspection by the board of
mayor and aldermen.
(4) Action on application. Every application for a certificate of good
moral character shall be referred to the chief of police for investigation and to
the city recorder for review, who shall submit their findings to the board of
mayor and aldermen.
The mayor or a majority of the board of mayor and aldermen may, in its
sole discretion, issue a certificate of moral character to any qualified applicant.
(5) Residency requirements. The applicant for a certificate of good
moral character shall have been a bona fide resident of Benton County,
Tennessee for not less than two (2) years prior to the time the application is
filed. If the applicant is a partnership or a corporation, each of the partners or
stockholders must have been a bona fide resident of Benton County, Tennessee
not less than two (2) prior years to the time the application is filed. This section
shall not apply to any applicant who has been continuously licensed pursuant
to Tennessee Code Annotated.
(6) Only one establishment to be operated by retailer. No retailer shall
operate, directly or indirectly, more than one (1) place of business for the sale
of alcoholic beverages in the city. The word "indirectly," as used in this section,
shall include and mean any kind of interest in another place of business by way
of stock, ownership, loan, partner's interest or otherwise.
(7) Where establishment may be located. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or maintain any retail establishment for the sale, storage or
distribution of alcoholic beverages in the city except at locations zoned for that
purpose, (which include B-1 and B-2) but in no event shall any establishment be
located within three hundred feet (300') of a hospital, church, school, day care,
public library, or any public park, measured in a straight line between the
nearest point in the property line upon which sits the building from which
alcoholic beverages will be sold, stored or distributed, and the nearest point on
the property line of the hospital, school, church, day care, or public park.
(8) Limitation on number of retailers. No more than three (3) retail
licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued by the City of Camden
under this chapter.
(9) Radios, amusement devices and seating facilities prohibited in
retail establishments. No radios, pinball machines or other devices which tend
to cause persons to congregate in such place shall be permitted in any retail
establishment. No seating shall be provided for persons other than employees.
(10) Inspection fee. The City of Camden hereby imposes an inspection
fee in the maximum amount allowed by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-501
on all licensed retailers of alcoholic beverages located within the corporate limits
of the city. Said inspection fee shall be collected and administered in line with
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 57-3-502 and 57-3-503.
(11) Violations. The license holders are responsible at all times for the
conduct of their business and are at all times directly responsible for the conduct
Change 6, January 14, 2013 8-4
of all employees. Any violation of this chapter or of Tennessee or federal law
which regulates intoxicating liquors shall constitute a civil offense and shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a penalty as enumerated under the general
penalty provisions of this code as well as state and federal law.
(12) Selection of qualified applicants. Whenever there has been
determination to be more qualified applicants than licenses available the City
of Camden shall use a lottery system to choose between such qualified
applicants, in a manner as decided by the mayor and board of aldermen.
(13) Hours and times of operation. The hours and dates of operation for
retail licenses are controlled by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-406.
(14) Regulations on premises. All retail establishments must comply
with the City of Camden building and zoning codes. (as added by Ord. #EWJ12-
10-2012-01, Jan. 2013)
8-104. Specific rules governing on-premise consumption.
(1) Consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises. Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 57, chapter 4, inclusive, is hereby adopted so as to be applicable
to all sales of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption which are
regulated by said code when such sales are conducted within the corporate
limits of the City of Camden, Tennessee. It is the intent of the mayor and board
of aldermen that the said Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, chapter 4,
inclusive, shall be effective in Camden, Tennessee, the same as if said code
sections were copied herein verbatim.
(2) Restriction on the hours for sale of intoxicating liquors. There shall
not be any intoxicating liquor sold on any Sunday between the hours of 3:00
A.M. and 12:00 P.M. All other times and dates of sales shall be as referenced
by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-203.
(3) Privilege tax on retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises. Pursuant to the authority contained in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-4-301, there is hereby levied a privilege tax (in the same
amount levied by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, chapter 4, section 301, for
the City of Camden General Fund to be paid annually as provided in this
chapter) upon any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or
association engaging in the business of selling at retail in the City of Camden
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
(4) Annual privilege tax to be paid to the city recorder. Any person,
firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or association exercising the
privilege of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in the
City of Camden shall remit annually to the city recorder the approximate tax
described in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-301. Any person, firm,
corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association failing to make
payment of the approximate tax when due shall be subject to the penalty
provided by law.
Change 6, January 14, 2013 8-5
(5) Club application. Any club, as defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 57 that seeks to obtain a license for on-premises consumption
of liquor must make an application to and obtain a permit from the City of
Camden. This application shall be made on such form as the city shall prescribe.
Each applicant shall be of good moral character and certify that he has read and
is familiar with the provisions of this chapter. Such application shall be in
writing and must be filed with the city recorder on a form to be provided by the
city. Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable investigation
fee of four hundred and fifty dollars ($450.00). A copy of each application form,
questionnaire, partnership agreement or any other form of material required to
be filed with the State of Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission in
connection with this same application, shall be attached to the city application
form and shall become a permanent part thereof as if copied verbatim therein.
The information in the application shall be verified by the oath of each
applicant. If the applicant is a partnership or a corporation, the application shall
be verified by the oath of each partner, or by the president of the corporation. All
applications submitted in accordance with this chapter shall be filed with the
city recorder at least ten (10) days prior to a regular or special called meeting.
(6) Signature requirements. All establishments authorized under this
section must comply with the City of Camden zoning code. (as added by
Ord. #EWJ12-10-2012-01, Jan. 2013)
Change 6, January 14, 2013 8-6
CHAPTER 2
BEER1
SECTION
8-201. Beer board established.
8-202. Permit required for engaging in beer business.
8-203. Hours and days when sale of alcoholic beverage prohibited.
8-204. Open beer prohibited in automobile, etc.
8-205. Issuance of permits distance requirement.
8-206. Privilege tax.
8-207. Civil penalty in lieu of suspension.
8-208. Sale of beer for consumption on-premises.
8-201. Beer board established. There is hereby created a city beer
board to be made up of not more than six members. Such beer board shall be
appointed by the council and may consist of the members of council or any
portion thereof. The terms of office of the members of said beer board shall be
for one year from the date of appointment. Said board shall meet and organize
as soon as practicable by electing a chairman and secretary. (1972 Code,
§ 2-201)
8-202. Permit required for engaging in beer business. It shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, store for sale, distribute for sale, or manufacture
beer without first making application to and obtaining a permit from the beer
board. The application shall be made on such form as the board shall prescribe
and/or furnish, and pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-101(b), and
shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00). Said fee shall be in the form of a cashier's check payable
to the City of Camden. Each applicant must be a person of good moral
character and certify that he has read and is familiar with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. #GWO-3, Oct. 1993)
8-203. Hours and days when sale of alcoholic beverage
prohibited. The sale of alcoholic beverages, within the City of Camden
between 12 o'clock midnight on Saturday and 12 o'clock midnight on Sunday, is
strictly prohibited.
1State law reference
For a leading case on a municipality's authority to regulate beer, see
the Tennessee Supreme Court decision in Watkins v. Naifeh, 635
S.W.2d 104 (1982).
Change 6, January 14, 2013 8-7
Anyone who is found violating this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to disciplinary action by the beer board of the
City of Camden. (1972 Code, § 2-203)
8-204. Open beer prohibited in automobile, etc. It shall be unlawful
for any individual to possess open beer in any automobile which is traveling or
parked upon the streets or public property of the City of Camden, or to possess
open beer or consume beer while upon any public property within the City of
Camden including streets, alleys, parking lots, parks or any other facility which
is used for public purposes, and any violation of this chapter, upon conviction is
deemed a misdemeanor. (1972 Code, § 2-204)
8-205. Issuance of permits distance requirement. The beer board
of the City of Camden shall not issue a beer permit to any establishment that
is nearer than 200 feet of a church, school, or other place of public gathering.
For purposes of calculating the distance, the measurement shall be made from
building to building in a straight line. (Ord. #EWJ-24, July 1988)
8-206. Privilege tax. There is hereby imposed on the business of
selling, distributing, storing or manufacturing beer an annual privilege tax of
one hundred dollars ($100). Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company,
syndicate or association engaged in the sale, distribution, storage or
manufacture of beer shall remit the tax on January 1, 1994, and each successive
January 1, to the City of Camden, Tennessee. At the time a new permit is
issued to any business subject to this tax, the permit holder shall be required to
pay the privilege tax on a prorated basis for each month or portion thereof
remaining until the next tax payment date. (Ord. #GWO-3, Oct. 1993)
8-207. Civil penalty in lieu of suspension. The beer board may, at
the time it imposes a revocation or suspension, offer a permit holder the
alternative of paying a civil penalty not to exceed $1,500 for each offense of
making or permitting to be made any sales to minors or, a civil penalty not to
exceed $1,000 for any other offense. If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative
to revocation or suspension, the holder shall have seven (7) days within which
to pay the civil penalty before the revocation or suspension shall be imposed. If
the civil penalty is paid within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be
deemed withdrawn.
Payment of the civil penalty in lieu of suspension by a permit holder shall
be an admission by the holder of the violation so charged and shall be paid to the
exclusion of any other penalty that the city may impose. (Ord. #GWO-3, Oct.
1993, modified)
8-208. Sale of beer for consumption on-premises. The prohibition
against the sale of beer for consumption on the premises within the City of
Change 6, January 14, 2013 8-8
Camden shall be permitted only in business establishments that have been
previously approved for the sale of intoxicating liquors for consumption on the
premises within the city limits of the City of Camden. (as added by
Ord. #EWJ12-10-2012-02, Jan. 2013)
Change 2, June 14, 2004 9-1
1Municipal code references
Building, plumbing, wiring and housing regulations: title 12.
Junkyards: title 13.
Liquor and beer regulations: title 8.
Noise reductions: title 11.
Zoning: title 14.
TITLE 9
BUSINESS, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. PEDDLERS, ETC.
3. CHARITABLE SOLICITORS.
4. TAXICABS.
5. POOL ROOMS.
6. CABLE TELEVISION.
7. POSTING OF BILLS AND POSTERS.
8. ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT REGISTRATION.
9. SALES TO DISPOSE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
9-101. "Going out of business" sales.
9-101. "Going out of business" sales. It shall be unlawful for any
person to falsely represent a sale as being a "going out of business" sale. A
"going out of business" sale, for the purposes of this section, shall be a "fire sale,"
"bankrupt sale," "loss of lease sale," or any other sale made in anticipation of the
termination of a business at its present location. When any person, after
advertising a "going out of business" sale, adds to his stock or fails to go out of
business within ninety (90) days he shall prima facie be deemed to have violated
this section. (1972 Code, § 5-102)
9-2
1Municipal code references
Privilege taxes: title 5.
CHAPTER 2
PEDDLERS, ETC.1
SECTION
9-201. Permit required.
9-202. Exemptions.
9-203. Application for permit.
9-204. Issuance or refusal of permit.
9-205. Appeal.
9-206. Bond.
9-207. Loud noises and speaking devices.
9-208. Use of streets.
9-209. Exhibition of permit.
9-210. Policemen to enforce.
9-211. Revocation or suspension of permit.
9-212. Reapplication.
9-213. Expiration and renewal of permit.
9-214. Entry upon private property, without invitation, for solicitation, etc.
prohibited.
9-201. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, canvasser
or solicitor, or transient merchant to ply his trade within the corporate limits
without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. No permit shall be used at any time by any person other than the
one to whom it is issued. (1972 Code, § 5-201)
9-202. Exemptions. The terms of this chapter shall not be applicable
to persons selling at wholesale to dealers, nor to newsboys, nor to bona fide
merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business, nor to
bona fide charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic organizations. (1972
Code, § 5-202)
9-203. Application for permit. Applicants for a permit under this
chapter must file with the recorder a sworn written application containing the
following:
(1) Name and physical description of applicant.
(2) Complete permanent home address and local address of the
applicant and, in the case of transient merchants, the local address from which
proposed sales will be made.
9-3
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) A recent clear photograph approximately two (2) inches square
showing the head and shoulders of the applicant.
(7) The names of at least two (2) reputable local property owners who
will certify as to the applicant's good moral reputation and business
responsibility, or in lieu of the names of references, such other available
evidence as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate the applicant's
moral reputation and business responsibility.
(8) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime or misdemeanor or for violating any municipal ordinance; the
nature of the offense; and, the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
(9) The last three (3) cities or towns, if that many, where applicant
carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and, in the
case of transient merchants, the addresses from which such business was
conducted in those municipalities.
(10) At the time of filing the application, a fee of five dollars ($5.00)
shall be paid to the municipality to cover the cost of investigating the facts
stated therein. (1972 Code, § 5-203)
9-204. Issuance or refusal of permit. (1) Each application shall be
referred to the chief of police for investigation. The chief shall report his
findings to the city recorder within seventy-two (72) hours.
(2) If as a result of such investigation the chief reports the applicant's
moral reputation and/or business responsibility to be unsatisfactory the recorder
shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit
will be issued.
(3) If, on the other hand, the chief's report indicates that the moral
reputation and business responsibility of the applicant are satisfactory the city
recorder shall issue a permit upon the payment of all applicable privilege taxes
and the filing of the bond required by § 9-206. The recorder shall keep a
permanent record of all permits issued. (1972 Code, § 5-204)
9-205. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police
and/or the recorder in the denial of a permit shall have the right to appeal to the
governing body. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the mayor within
fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The mayor shall set a time and
place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be given to the appellant. The notice shall be in writing and shall
be mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his last known address at least
9-4
five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a police
officer in the same manner as a summons at least three (3) days prior to the
date set for hearing. (1972 Code, § 5-205)
9-206. Bond. Every permittee shall file with the recorder a surety bond
running to the municipality in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
The bond shall be conditioned that the permittee shall comply fully with all the
provisions of the ordinances of this municipality and the statutes of the state
regulating peddlers, canvassers, solicitors, transient merchants, itinerant
merchants, or itinerant vendors, as the case may be, and shall guarantee to any
citizen of the municipality that all money paid as a down payment will be
accounted for and applied according to the representations of the permittee, and
further guaranteeing to any citizen of the municipality doing business with said
permittee that the property purchased will be delivered according to the
representations of the permittee. Action on such bond may be brought by any
person aggrieved and for whose benefit, among others, the bond is given, but the
surety may, by paying, pursuant to order of the court, the face amount of the
bond to the clerk of the court in which the suit is commenced, be relieved
without costs of all further liability. (1972 Code, § 5-206)
9-207. Loud noises and speaking devices. No permittee, nor any
person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any
sound amplifying device upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks or
other public places of the municipality or upon private premises where sound of
sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly
heard upon the adjacent sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks, or other public places,
for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which
such permittee proposes to sell. (1972 Code, § 5-207)
9-208. Use of streets. No permittee shall have any exclusive right to
any location in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary
location thereon, nor shall any be permitted to operate in a congested area
where the operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of the streets.
For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in
good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested and
the public impeded or inconvenienced. (1972 Code, § 5-208)
9-209. Exhibition of permit. Permittees are required to exhibit their
permits at the request of any policeman or citizen. (1972 Code, § 5-209)
9-210. Policemen to enforce. It shall be the duty of all policemen to
see that the provisions of this chapter are enforced. (1972 Code, § 5-210)
9-5
9-211. Revocation or suspension of permit. (1) Permits issued under
the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the council after notice and
hearing, for any of the following causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained
in the application for permit, or made in the course of carrying on the
business of solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant, itinerant
merchant, or itinerant vendor.
(b) Any violation of this chapter.
(c) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
(d) Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser, solicitor,
transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor, as the case
may be, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or
general welfare of the public.
(2) Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given by
the recorder in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and
the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the permittee at
his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing, or
it shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at
least three (3) days prior to the date set for hearing.
(3) When reasonably necessary in the public interest the mayor may
suspend a permit pending the revocation hearing. (1972 Code, § 5-211)
9-212. Reapplication. No permittee whose permit has been revoked
shall make further application until a period of at least six (6) months has
elapsed since the last revocation. (1972 Code, § 5-212)
9-213. Expiration and renewal of permit. Permits issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall expire on the same date that the permittee's
privilege license expires and shall be renewed without cost if the permittee
applies for and obtains a new privilege license within thirty (30) days thereafter.
Permits issued to permittees who are not subject to a privilege tax shall be
issued for one (1) year. An application for a renewal shall be made substantially
in the same form as an original application. However, only so much of the
application shall be completed as is necessary to reflect conditions which have
changed since the last application was filed. (1972 Code, § 5-213)
9-214. Entry upon private property without invitation, for
solicitation, etc. prohibited. Entrance in and upon private residences by
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers or itinerant merchants not having been requested
or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private
residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise and/or disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same is
declared to be a nuisance and is punishable as a misdemeanor. (1972 Code,
§ 5-214)
9-6
CHAPTER 3
CHARITABLE SOLICITORS
SECTION
9-301. Permit required.
9-302. Prerequisites for a permit.
9-303. Denial of a permit.
9-304. Exhibition of permit.
9-301. Permit required. No person shall solicit contributions or
anything else of value for any real or alleged charitable or religious purpose
without a permit from the recorder authorizing such solicitation. Provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to any locally established organization
or church operated exclusively for charitable or religious purposes if the
solicitations are conducted exclusively among the members thereof, voluntarily
and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations
are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies of any
such established organization or church. (1972 Code, § 5-301)
9-302. Prerequisites for a permit. The recorder shall issue a permit
authorizing charitable or religious solicitations when, after a reasonable
investigation, he finds the following facts to exist:
(1) The applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and
integrity, or if the applicant is not an individual person, that every member,
managing officer or agent of the applicant has a good character or reputation for
honesty and integrity.
(2) The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under
responsible and reliable persons.
(3) The applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or
enterprise.
(4) The solicitation will not be a fraud on the public but will be for a
bona fide charitable or religious purpose.
(5) The solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the
charitable cause described by the applicant. (1972 Code, § 5-302)
9-303. Denial of a permit. Any applicant for a permit to make
charitable or religious solicitations may appeal to the council if he has not been
granted a permit within fifteen (15) days after he makes application therefor.
(1972 Code, § 5-303)
9-304. Exhibition of permit. Any solicitor required by this chapter to
have a permit shall exhibit such permit at the request of any policeman or
person solicited. (1972 Code, § 5-304)
9-7
1Municipal code reference
Privilege taxes: title 5.
CHAPTER 4
TAXICABS1
SECTION
9-401. Taxicab franchise and privilege license required.
9-402. Requirements as to application and hearing.
9-403. Liability insurance required.
9-404. Revocation or suspension of franchise.
9-405. Mechanical condition of vehicles.
9-406. Cleanliness of vehicles.
9-407. Inspection of vehicles.
9-408. License and permit required for drivers.
9-409. Qualifications for driver's permit.
9-410. Revocation or suspension of driver's permit.
9-411. Drivers not to solicit business.
9-412. Parking restricted.
9-413. Drivers to use direct routes.
9-414. Taxicabs not to be used for illegal purposes.
9-415. Miscellaneous prohibited conduct by drivers.
9-416. Transportation of more than one passenger at the same time.
9-417. Cab stands on streets prohibited.
9-401. Taxicab franchise and privilege license required. It shall
be unlawful for any person to engage in the taxicab business unless he has first
obtained a taxicab franchise from the municipality and has a currently effective
privilege license. (1972 Code, § 5-401)
9-402. Requirements as to application and hearing. No person
shall be eligible to apply for a taxicab franchise if he has a bad character or has
been convicted of a felony within the last ten (10) years. Applications for taxicab
franchises shall be made under oath and in writing to the chief of police. The
application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the name and
address of the proposed place of business, the number of cabs the applicant
desires to operate, the makes and models of said cabs, and such other pertinent
information as the chief of police may require. The application shall be
accompanied by at least two (2) affidavits of reputable local citizens attesting to
the good character and reputation of the applicant. Within ten (10) days after
receipt of an application the chief of police shall make a thorough investigation
of the applicant; determine if there is a public need for additional taxicab
9-8
service; present the application to the council; and make a recommendation to
either grant or refuse a franchise to the applicant. The council shall thereupon
hold a public hearing at which time witnesses for and against the granting of
the franchise shall be heard. In deciding whether or not to grant the franchise
the council shall consider the public need for additional service, the increased
traffic congestion, parking space requirements, and whether or not the safe use
of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved by
the granting of such an additional taxicab franchise. Those persons already
operating taxicabs when this code is adopted shall not be required to make
applications under this section but shall be required to comply with all of the
other provisions hereof. (1972 Code, § 5-402)
9-403. Liability insurance required. No taxicab franchise shall be
issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a liability
insurance policy for each vehicle authorized in the amount of twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one person, fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injuries or death to more than one
person which are sustained in the same accident, and five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident. The insurance
policy required by this section shall contain a provision that it shall not be
cancelled except after at least twenty (20) days' written notice is given by the
insuror to both the insured and the recorder of the municipality. (1972 Code,
§ 5-403, modified)
9-404. Revocation or suspension of franchise. The council, after a
public hearing, may revoke or suspend any taxicab franchise for
misrepresentations or false statements made in the application therefor or for
traffic violations or violations of this chapter by the taxicab owner or any driver.
(1972 Code, § 5-404)
9-405. Mechanical condition of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any taxicab in this municipality unless such taxicab is
equipped with four (4) wheel brakes, front and rear lights, safe tires, horn,
muffler, windshield wipers, and rear vision mirror, all of which shall conform to
the requirements of the state motor vehicle law. Each taxicab shall be equipped
with a handle or latch or other opening device attached to each door of the
passenger compartment so that such doors may be operated by the passenger
from the inside of the taxicab without the intervention or assistance of the
driver. The motor and all mechanical parts shall be kept in such condition or
repair as may be reasonably necessary to provide for the safety of the public and
the continuous satisfactory operation of the taxicab. (1972 Code, § 5-405)
9-406. Cleanliness of vehicles. All taxicabs operated in the
municipality shall, at all times, be kept in a reasonably clean and sanitary
9-9
condition. They shall be thoroughly swept and dusted at least once each day.
At least once every week they shall be thoroughly washed and the interior
cleaned with a suitable antiseptic solution. (1972 Code, § 5-406)
9-407. Inspection of vehicles. All taxicabs shall be inspected at least
semiannually by the chief of police to insure that they comply with the
requirements of this chapter with respect to mechanical condition, cleanliness,
etc. (1972 Code, § 5-407)
9-408. License and permit required for drivers. No person shall
drive a taxicab unless he is in possession of a state special chauffeur's license
and a taxicab driver's permit issued by the chief of police. (1972 Code, § 5-408)
9-409. Qualifications for driver's permit. No person shall be issued
a taxicab driver's permit unless he complies with the following to the
satisfaction of the chief of police:
(1) Makes written application to the chief of police.
(2) Is at least eighteen (18) years of age and holds a state special
chauffeur's license.
(3) Undergoes an examination by a physician and is found to be of
sound physique, with good eyesight and hearing and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render
him unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle.
(4) Is clean in dress and person and is not addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquor or drugs.
(5) Produces affidavits of good character from two (2) reputable
citizens of the municipality who have known him personally and have observed
his conduct for at least two (2) years next preceding the date of his application.
(6) Has not been convicted of a felony, drunk driving, driving under the
influence of an intoxicant or drug, or of frequent minor traffic offenses.
(7) Is familiar with the state and local traffic laws. (1972 Code,
§ 5-409)
9-410. Revocation or suspension of driver's permit. The council,
after a public hearing, may revoke or suspend any taxicab driver's permit for
violation of traffic regulations, for violation of this chapter, or when the driver
ceases to possess the qualifications as prescribed in § 9-409. (1972 Code,
§ 5-410)
9-411. Drivers not to solicit business. All taxicab drivers are
expressly prohibited from indiscriminately soliciting passengers or from cruising
upon the streets of the municipality for the purpose of obtaining patronage for
their cabs. (1972 Code, § 5-411)
9-10
9-412. Parking restricted. It shall be unlawful to park any taxicab on
any street except in such places as have been specifically designated and
marked by the municipality for the use of taxicabs. It is provided, however, that
taxicabs may stop upon any street for the purpose of picking up or discharging
passengers if such stops are made in such manner as not to unreasonably
interfere with or obstruct other traffic and provided the passenger loading or
discharging is promptly accomplished. (1972 Code, § 5-412)
9-413. Drivers to use direct routes. Taxicab drivers shall always
deliver their passengers to their destinations by the most direct available route.
(1972 Code, § 5-413)
9-414. Taxicabs not to be used for illegal purposes. No taxicab shall
be used for or in the commission of any illegal act, business, or purpose. (1972
Code, § 5-414)
9-415. Miscellaneous prohibited conduct by drivers. It shall be
unlawful for any taxicab driver, while on duty, to be under the influence of, or
to drink any intoxicating beverage or beer; to use profane or obscene language;
to shout or call to prospective passengers; to unnecessarily blow the automobile
horn; or to otherwise disturb the peace, quiet and tranquility of the municipality
in any way. (1972 Code, § 5-415)
9-416. Transportation of more than one passenger at the same
time. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab already occupied by a passenger
without the consent of such other passenger. (1972 Code, § 5-416)
9-417. Cab stands on streets prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the
operator of any taxicab to use any street as a taxi stand, or to park on any street
for the purpose of loading passengers except when the services of such taxi has
been requested by a passenger. (1972 Code, § 5-417)
9-11
1Municipal code reference
Privilege taxes: title 5.
CHAPTER 5
POOL ROOMS1
SECTION
9-501. Hours of operation regulated.
9-502. Minors to be kept out; exception.
9-503. Drinking prohibited in poolrooms.
9-501. Hours of operation regulated. It shall be unlawful for any
person to open, maintain, conduct, or operate pool tables or billiard tables for
public use or hire at any time on Sunday or between the hours of 12:00 P.M.
midnight and 7:00 A.M. on other days. (Ord. #EJ-2, July 1982)
9-502. Minors to be kept out; exception. It shall be unlawful for any
person engaged regularly, or otherwise, in keeping billiard, bagatelle, or pool
rooms or tables, their employees, agents, servants, or other persons for them,
knowingly to permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to play on
said tables at any game of billiards, bagatelle, pool, or other games requiring the
use of cue and balls, without first having obtained the written consent of the
father and mother of such minor, if living; if the father is dead, then the mother,
guardian, or other person having legal control of such minor; or if the minor be
in attendance as a student at some literary institution, then the written consent
of the principal or person in charge of such school; provided that this section
shall not apply to the use of billiards, bagatelle, and pool tables in private
residences. (1972 Code, § 5-503)
9-503. Drinking prohibited in poolrooms. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation, their employees, agents, servants or other
persons to permit or allow any person to drink or consume any intoxicating
liquor, or beverage in or on the premises of any pool or billiard rooms or parlors;
or to permit any person or persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
beverage to be in or on the premises of said pool or billiard rooms or parlors.
(1972 Code, § 5-505)
9-12
1For complete details relating to the cable television franchise agreement
see Ord. #EMJ-20 dated June 13, 1988 in the office of the city recorder.
CHAPTER 6
CABLE TELEVISION
SECTION
9-601. To be furnished under franchise.
9-602. Regulation of rates charged for cable television service and equipment.
9-603. Definitions.
9-601. To be furnished under franchise. Cable television service
shall be furnished to the City of Camden and its inhabitants under franchise as
the council shall grant. The rights, powers, duties and obligations of the City of
Camden and its inhabitants and the grantee of the franchise shall be clearly
stated in the franchise agreement which shall be binding upon the parties
concerned.1
9-602. Regulation of rates charged for cable television service and
equipment. Pursuant to authority granted by the Cable Television and
Consumer Protection Act of 1992 at 47 U.S.C. 543, and Federal Communications
Commission action under the authority of said Act certifying the City of Camden
to regulate basic cable television service within the boundaries of the City of
Camden; and for the purposes of regulating the rates charged to customers of
any cable television operator franchised by the City of Camden, the regulations
contained in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 76, Subpart N,
sections 76.900 through 76.985, are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as a part of this code. (Ord. #GWO-11, June 1994)
9-603. Definitions. Whenever the regulations cited in § 9-602 refer to
"franchising authority," it shall be deemed to be a reference to the Mayor and
Board of Aldermen of the City of Camden. (Ord. #GWO-11, June 1994)
9-13
CHAPTER 7
POSTING OF BILLS AND POSTERS
SECTION
9-701. Posting of bills, posters, etc., prohibited.
9-701. Posting of bills, posters, etc., prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any cooperation, partnership, or person to post or cause to be posted any
bills, posters, signs and other public notices on any telegraph pole, electric light
pole or other pole of any nature maintained by any public utility, corporation,
partnership or person within the limits of the city or upon any tree standing in
any street or highway without first obtaining from the council a written permit
for such purpose, such permit to be signed by the mayor when authorized by
said council. Such permit may be cancelled or withdrawn at the pleasure of the
council. (1972 Code, § 5-601)
9-14
CHAPTER 8
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT REGISTRATION
SECTION
9-801. Short title.
9-802. Definitions.
9-803. Adult-oriented establishment board--massage registration board as
substitute.
9-804. License to operate--required.
9-805. License to operate--application.
9-806. License to operate--qualifications.
9-807. Inspections--notice of results.
9-808. Injunctions--contempt.
9-809. Revocation, suspension or annulment of licenses.
9-810. Hearings on disciplinary actions--judicial review--prohibition on
operation of business.
9-811. Termination and renewal of licenses--application fees.
9-812. Prohibited hours of operation--hours open for inspection.
9-813. Duties and responsibilities of operators, entertainers, and employees.
9-814. Prohibited activities.
9-815. Entertainers or escorts--permits--required.
9-816. Entertainers or escorts--permits--application.
9-817. Entertainers or escorts--permits--qualifications--investigations.
9-818. Entertainers and escorts--permits--fees.
9-819. Penalties for violation of part.
9-801. Short title. This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Adult-
Oriented Establishment Registration chapter of the City of Camden, Tennessee
of 2000." (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-802. Definitions. (1) "Adult bookstore" means a business which
offers, as its principal or predominate stock or trade, sexually oriented material,
devices, or paraphernalia or specified sexual activities, or any combination or
form thereof, whether printed, filmed, recorded or live and which restricts or
purports to restrict admission to adults or to any class of adults;
(2) "Adult cabaret" means an establishment which features as a
principal use of its business, entertainers and/or waiters and/or bartenders who
expose to public view of the patrons within such establishment, at any time, the
bare female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola,
human genitals, pubic region, or buttocks, even if partially covered by opaque
material or completely covered by translucent material; including swim suits,
lingerie, or latex covering. "Adult cabaret" includes a commercial establishment
9-15
which features entertainment or an erotic nature including exotic dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers;
(3) "Adult entertainment" means any exhibition of any adult-oriented
motion picture, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as a
significant or substantial portion of such performance, and actual or simulated
performance of specified sexual activities of exhibition and viewing of specified
anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed,
pantomime, modeling, or any other personal service offered customers;
(4) "Adult mini-motion picture theater" means an enclosed building
with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons regularly used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein;
(5) "Adult motion picture theater" means an enclosed building with a
capacity of fifty (50) or more persons regularly used for presenting material
having as a dominant theme or presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below, for
observation by patrons therein;
(6) "Adult-oriented establishment" includes, but is not limited to, an
adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture
establishment, adult cabaret, escort agency, sexual encounter center, massage
parlor, rap parlor, sauna, and further, "adult-oriented establishment" means
any premises to which the public patrons or members are invited or admitted
and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the
purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer
provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member,
when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for
a profit, direct or indirect. "Adult-oriented establishment" further includes,
without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that
is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as
an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio,
sensitivity studio, model studio, escort service, escort or any other term of like
import;
(7) "Board" means the adult-oriented establishment board, or, if there
is in existence in the City of Camden a massage registration board appointed by
the mayor, such board may be substituted for the board;
(8) "Employee" means a person who performs any service on the
premises of an adult-oriented establishment on a full-time, part-time, or
contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor agent or otherwise, and whether or not such person is
paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of such business.
"Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
9-16
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery
of goods to the premises;
(9) "Entertainer" means any person who provides entertainment
within an "adult-oriented establishment" as defined in this section, whether or
not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not
entertainment is provided as an employee, escort or an independent contractor;
(10) "Escort" means a person who, for monetary consideration in the
form of a fee, commission, salary or tip, dates, socializes, visits, consorts or
accompanies to social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement or within
any place of public resort or within any private quarters of a place of public
resort;
(a) "Service-oriented escort" is an escort which:
(i) Operates from an open office;
(ii) Does not employ or use an escort runner;
(iii) Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be
provided to the patron or work for an escort bureau which so
advertises; and
(iv) Does not offer or provide sexual conduct.
(b) "Sexually-oriented escort" is an escort which:
(i) Employs as an employee, agent, or independent
contractor an escort bureau runner;
(ii) Works for, as an agent, employee, contractor, or is
referred to as a patron by a sexually-oriented escort bureau;
(iii) Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or
works for, as an employee agent or independent contractor, or is
referred to a patron by an escort bureau which so advertises;
(iv) Solicits, offers to provide or does provide acts of
sexual conduct to an escort patron, or accepts an offer or
solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee in addition to
the fee charged by the escort bureau;
(v) Works as an escort without having a current valid
permit issued under this part, in such person's possession at all
times while working as an escort; or
(vi) Accepts a fee from a patron who has not first been
delivered a contract.
(11) "Escort service" means a "person" as defined in this section, who,
for a fee, commission, profit, payment or other monetary consideration,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts or provides or offers to introduce patrons
to escorts;
(a) "Service-oriented escort bureau" is an escort bureau which:
(i) Maintains an open office at an established place of
business;
(ii) Employs or provides only escorts which possess valid
permits issued under this part;
9-17
(iii) Does not use an escort bureau runner; and
(iv) Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be
provided to a patron.
(b) "Sexually-oriented escort bureau" is an escort bureau which:
(i) Does not maintain an open office;
(ii) Employs as an employee, agent, or independent
contractor, uses an escort bureau runner;
(iii) Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or
that escorts which provide such sexual conduct will be provided,
referred, or introduced to a patron;
(iv) Solicits, offers to provide or does provide acts of
sexual conduct to an escort patron;
(v) Employs, contracts with or provides or refers escorts
who do not possess valid permits issued under this part;
(vi) Does not deliver contracts to every patron or
customer; or
(vii) Employs, contracts with a sexually-oriented escort or
refers or provides to a patron, a sexually-oriented escort.
(12) "Massage parlor" means an establishment or place primarily in the
business of providing massage or tanning services where one (1) or more of the
employees exposes to public view of the patrons within such establishment, at
any time, the bare female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, human genitals, pubic region, or buttocks, even if partially covered by
opaque material or completely covered by translucent material;
(13) "Open office" means an office at the escort service from which the
escort business is transacted and which is open to patrons or prospective
patrons during all hours during which escorts are working; which is managed
or operated by an employee, officer, director or owner of the escort service
having authority to bind the service to escort and patron contracts and adjust
patron and consumer complaints;
(14) "Operator" means any person, partnership, or corporation
operating, conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment;
(15) "Person" means an individual, partnership, limited partnership,
firm, corporation or association.
(16) "Rap parlor" means an establishment or place primarily in the
business of providing nonprofessional conversation or similar service for adults;
(17) "Sauna" means an establishment or place primarily in the business
of providing:
(a) A steam bath; or
(b) Massage services.
(18) "Sexual conduct" means the engaging in or the commission of an
act of sexual intercourse, oral-genital contact, or the touching of the sexual
organs, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast of a person for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of another person;
9-18
(19) "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial
enterprise that, as one (1) of its primary business purposes, offers for any form
of consideration:
(a) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or
(b) Physical contact between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one (1) or more of the persons exposes to
view of the persons within such establishment, at any time, the bare
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola,
human genitals, pubic region, or buttocks, even if partially covered by
opaque material or completely covered by translucent material;
(20) "Sexual gratification" means "sexual conduct" as defined in this
part;
(21) "Sexual stimulation" means to excite or arouse the prurient
interest or to offer or solicit acts of "sexual conduct" as defined in this part;
(22) "Specified anatomical areas" means:
(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(i) Human genitals;
(ii) Pubic region;
(iii) Buttocks; and
(iv) Female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
(b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely opaquely covered;
(23) "Specified criminal acts" means the following criminal offenses as
defined by Tennessee Code Annotated:
(a) Aggravated rape;
(b) Rape;
(c) Rape of a child;
(d) Aggravated sexual battery;
(e) Sexual battery by an authority figure;
(f) Sexual battery;
(g) Statutory rape;
(h) Public indecency;
(i) Prostitution;
(j) Promoting prostitution;
(k) Distribution of obscene materials;
(l) Sale, loan or exhibition to a minor of material harmful to
minors;
(m) The display for sale or rental of material harmful to minors;
(n) Sexual exploitation of a minor;
(o) Aggravated sexual exploitation of a minor;
(p) Especially aggravated sexual exploitation of a minor;
(24) "Specified sexual activities" means:
9-19
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(b) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
or
(c) Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts; and
(25) "Specified services" means massage services, private dances,
private modeling, acting as an "escort" as defined in this part, and any other live
"adult entertainment" as defined in this part. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-803. Adult-oriented establishment board--massage registration
board as substitute. (1) There is hereby created in the City of Camden an
adult-oriented establishment and massage registration board.
(2) The board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor
of the City of Camden.
(3) A majority of the members to which the board is entitled shall
constitute a quorum.
(4) The board shall serve without compensation but the members shall
receive their actual expenses for attending adult-oriented establishment board
meetings.
(5) The board shall select a chair from among its members and the
chair shall notify interested persons and members of board meetings.
(6) The board shall meet as often as required to carry out the
provisions of this part. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-804. License to operate--required. (1) Except as provided in
subsection (5) from and after March 1, 2000, of this part, no adult-oriented
establishment shall be operated or maintained in the City of Camden without
first obtaining a license to operate issued by the City of Camden Adult-Oriented
Establishment Board.
(2) A license may be issued only for one (1) adult-oriented
establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or
corporation which desires to operate more than one (1) adult-oriented
establishment must have a license for each. No building, premises, structure
or other facility that contains any adult-oriented establishment shall contain
any other kind of adult-oriented establishment.
(3) No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person,
partnership or corporation.
(4) It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee, escort or operator to
knowingly work in or about or to knowingly perform any service directly related
to or at the request of the operation of any unlicensed adult-oriented
establishment or escort service.
(5) All existing adult-oriented establishments at the time of the
passage of this part must submit an application for a license within one hundred
twenty (120) days of March 1, 2000. If a license is not issued within such one
9-20
hundred twenty-day period, then such existing adult-oriented establishment
shall cease to operate.
(6) No license shall be issued by the board unless the applicant
certifies, by proof satisfactory to the board, that the applicant has satisfied the
rules, regulations and provisions of the applicable zoning requirements in the
City of Camden. Any zoning requirement shall be in addition to and not an
alternative to any requirement of this legislation. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-805. License to operate--application. (1) Any person, partnership,
or corporation desiring to secure a license shall make application to the adultoriented
establishment board. A copy of the application shall be distributed
promptly to the city police department.
(2) The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the
board. An applicant for a license shall furnish the following information under
oath:
(a) Name and address, including all aliases;
(b) Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18)
years of age;
(c) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant in
an adult-oriented establishment for five (5) years immediately preceding
the date of the application;
(d) The adult-oriented establishment or similar business license
history of the applicant; whether such applicant, in previously operating
in this or any other county, city, or state under license, has had such
license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business
activity or occupation subject to such action of suspension or revocation;
(e) Any conviction for or plea of nolo contendere to a specified
criminal act as defined in § 9-802(24);
(f) The address of the adult-oriented establishment to be
operated by the applicant;
(g) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify
the name, address, and telephone number of the corporation, the date and
the state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent
for service of process of the corporation, and the names and addresses of
the officers and the directors of the corporation, and the names and
addresses of any persons holding fifty percent (50%) or more of the stock
of the corporation; if the applicant is a partnership, the application shall
specify the name and address of the partnership, the names and address
of all general partners of the partnership; if the partnership is a limited
partnership, the application shall specify the name and address of all
general partners who have a controlling interest in the partnership; and
(h) A statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar
with the provisions of this legislation and is in compliance with them.
9-21
(3) Within ten (10) days of receiving the results of the investigation
conducted by the board and/or the city police department, the board shall notify
the applicant that the application is granted, denied or held for further
investigation. Such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional
thirty (30) days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon the
conclusion of such additional investigation, the board shall advise the applicant
in writing whether the application is granted or denied.
(4) Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant
to the investigation of the application or the applicant's refusal or failure to
appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding
the application or the applicant's refusal to submit to or cooperate with any
investigation required by this part constitutes an admission by the applicant
that the applicant is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial
thereof by the board. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-806. License to operate--qualifications. To receive a license to
operate an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant must meet the following
standards:
(1) If the applicant is an individual:
(a) The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(b) The applicant shall not have had a license revoked within
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application;
(c) The applicant shall not have been convicted of or pleaded
nolo contendere to any violation of this part within five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the application; and
(d) The applicant shall not have been convicted of a "specified
criminal act," as defined in § 9-802, for which:
(i) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction if the conviction is for a misdemeanor offense;
(ii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date
of conviction if the conviction is for a felony offense;
(iii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date
of conviction for two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twelve-month period;
(iv) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on disqualification of the applicant;
(2) If the applicant is a corporation:
(a) All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named
under § 9-805(b) shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(b) No officer, director, and stockholder required to be named
under § 9-805(b) shall have had an adult-oriented establishment license
revoked within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
application;
9-22
(c) No officer, director or stockholder required to be named
under § 9-805(b) shall have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere
to any violation of this part within five (5) years immediately preceding
the date of the application;
(d) The applicant or officer, director or stockholder required to
be named under § 9-805(b) shall not have been convicted of a "specified
criminal act," as defined in § 9-802, for which:
(i) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction if the conviction is for a misdemeanor offense;
(ii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date
of conviction if the conviction is for a felony offense;
(iii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date
of conviction for two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twelve-month period;
(iv) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on disqualification of the applicant;
(3) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of
organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial interest:
(a) All persons having a financial interest in the partnership,
joint venture or other type of organization shall be at least eighteen (18)
years of age;
(b) All persons having a financial interest in the partnership,
joint venture or other type of organization shall not have had a license
revoked within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
application;
(c) No applicant or person having a financial interest in the
partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been
convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any violation of this part within
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application; and
(d) The applicant or any person having a financial interest
required to be disclosed shall not have been convicted of a "specified
criminal act," as defined in § 9-802, for which:
(i) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction if the conviction is for a misdemeanor offense;
(ii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date
of conviction if the conviction is for a felony offense;
(iii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date
of conviction for two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twelve-month period;
(iv) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on disqualification of the applicant;
(4) No license shall be issued unless the board or police department
has investigated the applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The results of that
9-23
investigation shall be filed in writing with the board no later than twenty (20)
days after the date of the application.
(5) An applicant who has been convicted of any "specified criminal
activities" may not be denied a permit based on those convictions once the time
period required in this section has elapsed. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-807. Inspections--notice of results. (1) In order to effectuate the
provisions of this part, the board, its authorized representative or police
department is empowered to conduct investigations of persons engaged in the
operation of any adult-oriented establishment and inspect the license of the
operators and establishment for compliance. Refusal of an operation or
establishment to permit inspections shall be grounds for revocation, suspension
or refusal to issue licenses provided by this part.
(2) Within ten (10) days of receiving the results of the investigation,
the board shall notify the applicant that the application is granted, denied or
held for further investigation. Such additional investigation shall not exceed an
additional thirty (30) days, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon
the conclusion of such additional investigation, the board shall advise the
applicant in writing whether the application is granted or denied.
(3) If an additional investigation is held, upon the expiration of the
thirtieth day, the application shall be permitted to begin operating the business
for which the license is sought, unless or until the board or its authorized
representative notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the
reasons for that denial. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-808. Injunctions--contempt. (1) The board has the power and
authority to enter into any court of the State of Tennessee having proper
jurisdiction to seek an injunction against any person or adult-oriented
establishment not in compliance with the provisions of this part, and is further
empowered to enter into any such court to enforce the provisions of this part in
order to ensure compliance with such provisions.
(2) Any violation of an injunction obtained under this section is
contempt with a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(3) Each day in contempt of such injunction is considered a separate
offense.
(4) The circuit, chancery, or criminal courts of this state and the
chancellors and judges thereof shall have full power, authority, and jurisdiction,
upon application by sworn detailed petition filed by the board within their
respective jurisdictions, to issue any and all proper restraining orders,
temporary and permanent injunctions, and any other writs and processes
appropriate to carry out and enforce this part. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000).
9-809. Revocation, suspension or annulment of license. (1) The
board shall revoke, suspend or annul a license for any of the following reasons:
9-24
(a) Discovery that false or misleading information or data were
given on any application or material facts were omitted from any
application;
(b) The operator or entertainer, or any employee of the operator,
violates any provision of this part or any rule or regulation adopted by the
board pursuant to this part; provided, that in the case of a first offense by
an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the
penalty shall not exceed a license suspension of thirty (30) days if the
board shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive
knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence,
have had such actual or constructive knowledge;
(c) The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license;
(d) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this part is not paid;
(e) Any intoxicating liquor or malt beverage is served or
consumed on the premises of the adult-oriented establishment;
(f) An operator employs an employee who does not have a
permit or provides space on the premises, whether by lease or otherwise,
to be an independent contractor who performs or works as an entertainer
without a permit;
(g) Any operator, employee or entertainer sells, furnishes, gives
or displays, or causes to be sold, furnished, given or displayed to any
minor any adult-oriented entertainment or adult-oriented material;
(h) Any operator, employee or entertainer denies access of law
enforcement personnel to any portion of the licensed premises wherein
adult-oriented entertainment is permitted or to any portion of the
licensed premises wherein adult-oriented material is displayed or sold;
(i) Any operator fails to maintain the licensed premises in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition;
(j) Any operator, employee or entertainer is convicted of a
"specified criminal act," as defined in § 9-802, provided that such violation
occurred on the licensed premises.
(2) (a) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, before
revoking or suspending any license or permit, the chair shall give the
license holder or permit holder not less than ten (10) nor more than
twenty days' written notice of the charges against such license holder or
permit holder and of the revocation of such license or permit, or of the
period of time such license or permit is to be suspended; such notice shall
also advise the license holder or permit holder of the license holder's or
permit holder's right to request a hearing before the board. In the event
the license holder or permit holder does not request in writing a hearing
before the board within the time set forth in such notice, the suspension
or revocation shall be effective beginning the date set forth in such notice.
(b) If the license holder or permit holder desires to request a
hearing before the board to contest the suspension or revocation, such
9-25
request shall be made in writing to the Mayor of the City of Camden
within ten (10) days of the license holder's or permit holder's receipt of
the notification from the board. If the license holder or permit holder
timely requests such a hearing, the effective date of a suspension or
hearing shall be stayed pending the final outcome of judicial proceedings
to determine whether such license or permit has been properly revoked
or suspended under the law.
(c) If the license holder or permit holder timely requests such
a hearing, a public hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the
mayor's receipt of such request before the board at which time the license
holder or permit holder may present evidence contrary to the provisions
of this part. The board shall hear evidence contrary to the provisions of
this part. The board shall hear evidence concerning the basis for such
suspension or revocation and shall affirm or reverse the suspension or
revocation at the conclusion of such hearing; any such hearing shall be
concluded no later than twenty-two (22) days after the license holder's or
permit holder's receipt of the notification of the suspension or revocation,
unless an extension beyond such time period is requested by the license
holder or permit holder and granted by the board.
(3) If the board affirms the suspension or revocation, the city attorney
for the City of Camden shall institute suit for declaratory judgment in a court
of record in such city, within five (5) days of the date of any such affirmation
seeking an immediate judicial determination of whether such license or permit
has been properly revoked or suspended under the law.
(4) Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to
receive a license for five (5) years from the date of revocation.
(5) The applicant shall be entitled to judicial determination of the
issues within two (2) days after joinder of issue, and a decision shall be rendered
by the court within two (2) days of the conclusion of the hearing.
(6) The board shall have the burden of showing that a revocation or
suspension of a license under this section is not arbitrary or capricious. (Ord.
#JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-810. Hearings on disciplinary actions--judicial review--
prohibition on operation of business. (1) As used in this section,
"application" means:
(a) An application for a license;
(b) An application for a permit;
(c) An application for a license renewal; and
(d) An application for a permit renewal.
(2) Whenever an application is denied, the chair shall notify the
applicant in writing of the reasons for such action; such notice shall also advise
the applicant of the applicant's right to request a hearing before the board. If
the applicant desires to request a hearing before the board to contest the denial
9-26
of an application, such request shall be made in writing to the mayor of such city
within ten (10) days of the applicant's receipt of the notification of the denial of
the application. If the applicant timely requests such a hearing, a public
hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the mayor's receipt of such
request before the board, at which time the applicant may present evidence as
to why the application should not be denied. The board shall hear evidence
concerning the basis for denial of the application and shall affirm or reverse the
denial of an application at the conclusion of such hearing; any such hearing shall
be concluded no later than twenty-two (22) days after the applicant's receipt of
notification of denial of an application, unless an extension beyond such time
period is requested by the applicant and granted by the board.
(3) If the board affirms the denial of an application, the office of the
city attorney for the City of Camden shall institute suit for declaratory judgment
in a court of record in such city, within five (5) days of the date of any such
denial seeking an immediate judicial determination of whether such application
has been properly denied under the law.
(4) The applicant shall be entitled to judicial determination of the
issues within two (2) days after the joinder of issue, and a decision shall be
rendered by the court within two (2) days of the conclusion of the hearing.
(5) The board shall have the burden of showing that a denial of a
license under this section is not arbitrary or capricious. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan.
2000)
9-811. Termination and renewal of licenses--application fees.
(1) Every license issued under this part will terminate at the
expiration of one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and
must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. Any operator
desiring to renew a license shall make application to the board. The application
for renewal must be filed not later than sixty (60) days before the license
expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with and dated
by the board. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly
by the chair of the board to the applicable chief of police. The application for
renewal shall contain such information and data, given under oath or
affirmation, as may be required by the board, but not less than the information
contained in the original application.
(2) A license renewal fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be
submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a
late penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed against the applicant who
files for a renewal less than thirty (30) days before the license expires. If the
application is denied, one half (½) of the fee shall be returned.
(3) If the police department is aware of any information bearing on the
operator's qualifications, the information shall be filed in writing with the board
not later than ten (10) days after the date of the application for renewal.
9-27
(4) Every permit issued under this part will terminate at the
expiration of one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and
must be renewed before an entertainer is allowed to provide entertainment in
an adult-oriented establishment in the following calendar year. Any entertainer
desiring to renew a permit shall make application to the board. The application
for renewal must be filed not later than thirty (30) days before the permit
expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with and dated
by the board. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly
by the board to the chief of police. The application for renewal shall be upon a
form provided by the board and shall contain such information and data, given
under oath or affirmation, as may be required by the board.
(5) A permit renewal fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be submitted
with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty
of five dollars ($5.00) shall be assessed against the applicant who files for
renewal less than thirty (30) days before the license expires. If the application
is denied, one half (½) of the fee shall be returned.
(6) If the police department is aware of any information bearing on the
entertainer's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the
board not later than ten (10) days after the date of the application for renewal.
(7) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any application
for renewal of a license or for renewal for a permit shall be handled,
investigated, and approved or denied within the same time periods as those
established in this part for original license applications and permit applications.
In the event a license renewal application or permit renewal application is
denied, the applicant shall have all rights of appeal to the board as set forth in
§ 9-810. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-812. Prohibited hours of operation--hours open for inspection.
The public portion of all adult-oriented establishments shall be open to
inspection at all reasonable times by the applicable police department or such
other persons as the board may designate. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-813. Duties and responsibilities of operators, entertainers, and
employees. (1) The operator shall maintain a register of all employees,
showing the name, the aliases used by the employee, home address, age, birth
date, sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, telephone number, social
security number, driver license number, date of employment and termination,
and duties of each employee, and such other information as may be required by
the board. The above information on each employee shall be maintained in the
register on the premises for a period of three (3) years following termination.
(2) The operator shall make the register of employees available
immediately for inspection by the board and/or police department upon demand
of a member of the board or police department at all reasonable times.
9-28
(3) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this part shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such
act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of
the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the
employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the
omission.
(4) An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees
while on the licensed premises, and any act or omission of any employee
constituting a violation of the provisions of this part shall be deemed the act or
omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's
license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
(5) No employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow any
minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult-oriented establishment or to allow
any minor to view adult entertainment as herein defined.
(6) Every adult-oriented establishment shall be physically arranged
in such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms
or stalls, wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall be visible from the
common area of the premises. Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by
doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever.
(7) The operator shall be responsible for and shall provide that any
room or area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or
other types of live adult entertainment shall be readily accessible at all times
and shall be continuously opened to view in its entirety.
(8) The license shall be conspicuously displayed in the common area
of the premises at all times.
(9) A sign shall be conspicuously displayed in the common area of the
premises, and shall read as follows: "This Adult-Oriented Establishment is
Regulated by the Municipal Code of the City of Camden, Title 9, Chapter 8.
Entertainers are:
(a) Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct;
(b) Not permitted to expose their sex organs;
(c) Not permitted to demand or collect all or any portion of a fee
for entertainment before its completion;
(d) Not permitted to appear in a state of full nudity."
(10) The permit shall be kept by an employee, entertainer, or escort so
that it is readily available for display immediately upon request of a customer,
any member of such city police department, and board member, or any person
designated by the board. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-814. Prohibited activities. (1) No operator, entertainer or employee
of an adult-oriented establishment shall permit to be performed, offer to
perform, perform or allow, patrons to perform sexual intercourse or oral or anal
copulation or other contact stimulation of the genitalia.
9-29
(2) No operator, entertainer or employee of an adult-oriented
establishment shall encourage or permit any person upon the premises to touch,
caress or fondle the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals of any operator,
entertainer or employee.
(3) No entertainer, employee, or customer shall be permitted to have
any physical contact with any other on the premises during any performance
and all performances shall only occur upon a stage at least eighteen inches (18")
above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet (6') from the
nearest entertainer, employee, and/or customer.
(4) (a) No employee or entertainer, while on the premises of an
adult-oriented establishment, may:
(i) Engage in sexual intercourse;
(ii) Engage in deviant sexual conduct;
(iii) Appear in a state of nudity;
(iv) Fondle such person's own genitals or those of another.
(b) For the purpose of this section, "nudity" means the showing
of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than a fully
opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(5) If the license holder operates an escort bureau, such bureau shall
not be operated as a "sexually-oriented escort bureau" as defined in this part.
(6) No permit holder of an escort bureau shall conduct oneself as a
"sexually-oriented escort" as defined in this part.
(7) No license holder shall advertise that such license holder offers
"sexual stimulation" or "sexual gratification" as defined in this part. (Ord.
#JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-815. Entertainers or escorts--permits--required. No person shall
be an entertainer, employee, or escort in an adult-oriented establishment
without a valid permit issued by the board. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-816. Entertainers or escorts--permits--application. (1) Any
person desiring to secure a permit shall make application to the board. The
application shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the board. A copy of the
application shall be distributed promptly by the board to the police department.
(2) The application for a permit shall be upon a form provided by the
board. An applicant for a permit shall furnish the following information under
oath:
(a) Name and address, including all aliases;
(b) Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18)
years of age;
(c) The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair;
9-30
(d) The adult-oriented establishment or similar business permit
history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in
this or any other city or state under permit, has had such permit revoked
or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation
subject to such action of suspension or revocation;
(e) Any conviction for or plea of nolo contendere to "a specified
criminal act" as defined in § 9-802(24);
(f) Two (2) portrait photographs at least two inches by two
inches (2" x 2") of the applicant; and
(g) A statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar
with the provisions of this part and is in compliance with them.
(3) Within ten (10) days of receiving the results of the investigation
conducted by the board or police department, the board shall notify the
applicant that the applicant's application is granted, denied or held for further
investigation. Such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional
thirty (30) days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon the
conclusion of such additional investigations, the board shall advise the applicant
in writing whether the application is granted or denied.
(4) If an additional investigation is held, upon the expiration of the
thirtieth day, the applicant shall be permitted to operate the business for which
the license is sought, unless or until, the board or its authorized representative
notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons for
that denial.
(5) Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant
to the investigation of the application, or the applicant's refusal or failure to
appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding
the applications, or the applicant's refusal to submit to or cooperate with any
investigation required by this part, constitutes an admission by the applicant
that the applicant is ineligible for such permit, and is grounds for denial thereof
by the board. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-817. Entertainers or escorts--permits--qualifications--
investigations. (1) To receive a permit as an entertainer or escort, an
applicant must meet the following standards:
(a) The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(b) The applicant shall not have had a permit revoked within
two (2) years immediately preceding the date of the application;
(c) The applicant shall not have been convicted of a "specified
criminal act," as defined in § 9-802, for which:
(i) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction if the conviction is for a misdemeanor offense;
(ii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date
of conviction is for a felony offense;
9-31
(iii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date
of conviction for two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twelve-month period;
(iv) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on disqualification of the applicant;
(d) An applicant who has been convicted of any specified
criminal activities may not be denied a permit based on those convictions
once the time period required in subdivision (1)(c) has elapsed.
(2) No permit shall be issued until the board or police department has
investigated the applicant's qualifications to receive a permit. The results of
that investigation shall be filed in writing with the board no later than thirty
(30) days after the date of the application. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-818. Entertainers and escorts--permits--fees. (1) A license fee of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be submitted with the application for a
license.
(2) A permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be submitted
with the application for a permit. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
9-819. Penalties for violation of part. (1) Any person, partnership
or corporation found to have violated this part shall be fined a definite sum not
exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall result in the suspension or revocation
of any license.
(2) Each violation of this part shall be considered a separate offense,
and any violation continuing more than one (1) hour of time shall be considered
a separate offense for each hour of violation. (Ord. #JT9905, Jan. 2000)
Change 2, June 14, 2004 9-32
CHAPTER 9
SALES TO DISPOSE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
SECTION
9-901. Definitions.
9-902. Property permitted to be sold.
9-903. Permit required.
9-904. Permit procedure.
9-905. Permit conditions.
9-906. Hours of operation.
9-907. Exceptions.
9-908. Display of sale property.
9-909. Display of permit.
9-910. Advertising signs.
9-911. Persons exempted from chapter.
9-912. Penalty.
9-901. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
(1) "Garage sales" shall mean and include all general sales open to the
public, conducted from or on any premises in any residential or nonresidential
zone, as defined by the zoning ordinance for the purpose of disposing of personal
property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard,"
"attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sale.
This definition does not include the operation of such businesses carried on in
a nonresidential zone where the person conducting the sale does so on a regular
day-to-day basis. This definition shall not include a situation where no more
than five (5) specific items or articles are held out for sale and all
advertisements of such sale specifically names those items to be sold.
(2) "Personal property" shall mean property which is owner, utilized
and maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and
acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does
not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on
consignment. (as added by Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
9-902. Property permitted to be sold. It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell or offer for sale under authority granted by this chapter, property
other than personal property. (as added by Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
9-903. Permit required. Non-residential garage sales shall not be
conducted unless and until the individuals desiring to conduct such sale obtain
a permit from the city recorder. Four (4) residential garage sales are allowed at
Change 2, June 14, 2004 9-33
each location each calendar year. No permit is required for the four (4)
residential garage sales. (as added by Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
9-904. Permit procedure. (1) Application. The applicant or applicants
for a garage sale permit shall file a written application with the city recorder at
least three (3) days in advance of the proposed sale setting forth the following
information:
(a) Full name and address of applicant or applicants.
(b) The location at which the proposed garage sale is to be held.
(c) The date or dates upon which the sale shall be held.
(d) The date or dates of any other garage sales by the same
applicant or applicants within the current calendar year.
(e) A statement that the property to be sold was owned by the
applicant as his own personal property and was neither acquired nor
consigned for the purpose of resale.
(f) A statement that the applicant will fully comply with this
and all other applicable ordinances and laws.
(2) Permit fee. An administrative processing fee will not be charged
for the issuance of such permit.
(3) Issuance of permit. Upon the applicant complying with the terms
of this chapter, the city recorder shall issue a permit. (as added by
Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
9-905. Permit conditions. No more than four (4) permits may be
issued to any one person or family household during any calendar year. If
members of more than one household join in requesting a permit, then such
permit shall be considered having been issued for each and all persons. No more
than four (4) permits may be issued for any nonresidential location during any
calendar year. (as added by Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
9-906. Hours of operation. Such garage sales shall be limited in time
to no more than 7:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. of two (2) consecutive days. (as added
by Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
9-907. Exceptions. If a garage sale is not held on the dates for which
the permit is issued or is terminated during the first day of sale because of
inclement weather conditions, and an affidavit by the permit holder to this effect
is submitted, the city recorder shall issue another permit to the applicant for a
garage sale to be conducted at the same location within thirty (30) days from the
date when the first sale was to be held. No additional permit fee is required.
(as added by Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
9-908. Display of sale property. Personal property offered for sale
may be displayed within the residence, in a garage, carport, and/or in a front,
Change 2, June 14, 2004 9-34
side or rear yard, but only in such areas. No personal property offered for sale
at a garage sale shall be displayed on any public right-of-way. A vehicle offered
for sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within such
front or side yard. (as added by Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
9-909. Display of permit. Any permit in possession of the holder or
holders of a garage sale shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place
so as to be seen by the public or any city official. (as added by Ord. #JT2004-3,
June 2004)
9-910. Advertising signs. (1) Signs permitted. Only the following
specified signs may be displayed in relation to a pending garage sale:
(a) Two signs permitted. Two (2) signs of not more than four (4)
square feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the
residence or nonresidential site where the garage sale is being conducted.
(b) Directional signs. Two (2) signs of not more than two (2)
square feet each are permitted, provided that the premises on which the
garage sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare, and written
permission to erect such signs is received from the property owners on
whose property such signs are to be placed.
(2) Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be
exhibited for more than seven (7) days prior to the day such sale is to commence
and two (2) days after. (as added by Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
9-911. Persons exempted from chapter. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to or affect the following:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
(3) Persons conducting home estate sales, moving sales, or auctions at
the residence or participating in a city promoted garage sale event. (as added
by Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
9-912. Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this
chapter shall be punished according to the general penalty provisions of this
municipal code of ordinances. (as added by Ord. #JT2004-3, June 2004)
Change 3, May 8, 2006 10-1
TITLE 10
ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. IN GENERAL.
2. HOGS.
3. NOISES PRODUCED BY ANIMALS AND FOWLS.
4. DOGS.
CHAPTER 1
IN GENERAL
SECTION
10-101. Running at large prohibited.
10-102. Keeping livestock on less than five acres within city limits prohibited.
10-101. Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons, owning, or having control and custody of horses, mules,
donkeys, sheep, goats or other livestock, to permit the same to run at large
within the corporate limits of this municipality. (1972 Code, § 3-101)
10-102. Keeping livestock on less than five acres within city limits
prohibited. No person or entity shall permit the keeping of livestock on any
tract of land located within the city limits of the City of Camden of acreage less
than five acres (5).
Livestock shall be defined as horses, cows, goats, hogs, chickens, and
other fowl. (as added by Ord. #JT-2005-11, Nov. 2005)
10-2
CHAPTER 2
HOGS
SECTION
10-201. Keeping of hogs prohibited.
10-201. Keeping of hogs prohibited. It shall be unlawful to keep hogs
within the city limits. (1972 Code, § 3-201)
10-3
CHAPTER 3
NOISES PRODUCED BY ANIMALS AND FOWLS
SECTION
10-301. Loud noises produced by fowls, prohibited.
10-302. Loud noises produced by animals, prohibited.
10-301. Loud noises produced by fowls, prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep or possess any chickens, ducks,
geese, fowls or other birds which by loud and frequent quacking, crowing, or
cackling, or by any other noises, disturb the peace or cause annoyance to any of
the citizens of the city. (1972 Code, § 3-301)
10-302. Loud noises produced by animals, prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or possess any animals which by
loud and frequent howling, barking, yelping, growling, bleating, braying or
bawling or by any other noise, or cause of annoyance to any citizen of the city.
(1972 Code, § 3-302)
10-4
CHAPTER 4
DOGS
SECTION
10-401. Rabies vaccination and registration required.
10-402. Dogs to wear tags.
10-403. Dogs running at large and/or creating a nuisance prohibited.
10-404. Vicious dogs to be securely restrained.
10-405. Noisy dogs prohibited.
10-406. Confinement of dogs suspected of being rabid.
10-407. Apprehension and disposition of dogs.
10-408. Fees.
10-409. Dogs to be neutered.
10-410. Female dogs coming in heat.
10-411. Fines for violation of this chapter.
10-401. Rabies vaccination and registration required. It shall be
unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog within the corporate
limits of the City of Camden without having the same duly vaccinated against
rabies and registered in accordance with the provisions of the "Tennessee
Anti-Rabies Law" Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 68-8-101 to 68-8-114, or other
applicable law. (Ord. #GWO-4, Oct. 1993)
10-402. Dogs to wear tags. It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
keep, or harbor any dog within the corporate limits of the City of Camden which
does not wear a tag evidencing the vaccination and registration required by the
preceding section. (Ord. #GWO-4, Oct. 1993)
10-403. Dogs running at large and/or creating a nuisance
prohibited. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person having a right of property
in a dog, or who keeps or harbors a dog, or who has it in his care, or acts as its
custodian, or who permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied or
controlled by such person, to allow such animal to run at large off the premises
of said person unless the animal is under such control so as to reasonably
provide for the protection of persons, other animals, or property by means of a
leash, cord or chain secured to an adequate stationary object or to the hand of
the owner or other qualified person so that it shall not be able to bite or injure
any person or animal, or damage any property. Further, if said animal is on the
premises of said person but outside of adequate fencing or other restraining
device, said animal shall be under the direct supervision and control of said
person or his agent of responsible age.
10-5
1For a Tennessee Supreme Court case upholding the summary destruction
(continued...)
(2) It shall be unlawful to keep a dog in such a manner, place, or
condition so as to become a nuisance either because of noise, odor, contagious
disease, or other offensive habits or reason.
(3) For the purpose of this chapter a dog shall be defined as any
member of the canine family three (3) months or more of age. (Ord. #GWO-4,
Oct. 1993)
10-404. Vicious dogs to be securely restrained. It shall be unlawful
for any person to own or keep any dog known to be vicious or dangerous within
the corporate limits of the City of Camden unless such dog is so confined and/or
otherwise securely restrained as to provide reasonably for the protection of other
animals and persons. (Ord. #GWO-4, Oct. 1993)
10-405. Noisy dogs prohibited. No person shall own, keep, or harbor
any dog which, by loud and frequent barking, whining, or howling, disturbs the
peace and quiet of any neighborhood. (Ord. #GWO-4, Oct. 1993)
10-406. Confinement of dogs suspected of being rabid. If any dog
has bitten any person or is suspected of having bitten any person or is for any
reason suspected of being infected with rabies, a state or county health officer,
the animal warden, any police officer or other official designated by the council
may cause such dog to be confined or isolated for such time as he deems
reasonably necessary to determine if such dog is rabid. (Ord. #GWO-4, Oct.
1993)
10-407. Apprehension and disposition of dogs. Any dog found
running at large and/or creating a nuisance may be seized by the animal
warden, any police officer, or other official designated by the council, and placed
in a pound provided or designated by the city council. If said dog is wearing a
tag, the owner shall be notified in person, by telephone, or by a postcard
addressed to his last known mailing address, to appear within five (5) days and
redeem his dog by paying the apprehension fee and boarding fee established by
this chapter, or the dog will be humanely destroyed or sold. If said dog is not
wearing a tag it shall be humanely destroyed or sold unless legally claimed by
the owner within two (2) days. No dog shall be released in any event from the
pound unless or until such dog has been vaccinated and has a tag evidencing
such vaccination placed on its collar. The owner shall be responsible for paying
the vaccination fee. When, because of its viciousness or apparent infection with
rabies, a dog found running at large cannot be safely apprehended and
impounded, it may be summarily destroyed by the animal warden or any
policeman.1
10-6
1(...continued)
of dogs pursuant to appropriate legislation, see Darnell v. Shepard, 156 Tenn.
544, 3 S.W. 2d 661 (1927).
For these purposes the animal warden, any police officer, or other official
designated by the council, shall hereby be authorized to utilize tranquilizer dart
guns, or other capture devices in the apprehension or destruction of same. (Ord.
#GWO-4, Oct. 1993)
10-408. Fees. Apprehension and impoundment fees shall be ten dollars
($10.00). Boarding fees for dogs impounded by the city shall be two dollars
($2.00) per day, not including the first day of impoundment. Should the dog
have required the services of a veterinarian or other professional animal
services while in the custody of the city, the cost of such services shall be added
to the apprehension and impoundment fees. (Ord. #GWO-4, Oct. 1993)
10-409. Dogs to be neutered. Dogs which are to be released from the
animal shelter for adoption by a new owner shall be neutered by a competent
veterinarian, and the cost of which shall be added to any impoundment fees and
paid by the new owner(s). (Ord. #GWO-4, Oct. 1993)
10-410. Female dogs coming in heat. All female dogs within the city
upon coming in heat, shall be kept in a secure enclosure or under complete
control by the owner for a minimum period of twenty-one (21) days beginning
the first day the evidence of attraction is noticeable to the owner. Any such
female dog running loose, with or without the tags evidencing vaccination and
registration, demonstrating evidence of attraction, shall be picked up by the
animal warden and confined in a separate compartment at the impoundment
facility. If said dog is wearing a tag, the owner shall be notified by telephone or
by postcard addressed to his last known mailing address, to appear within five
(5) days and redeem his dog by paying the apprehension fee and boarding fee
established by this chapter, or the dog will be humanely destroyed or sold. If
said dog is not wearing a tag, it shall be humanely destroyed or sold unless
legally claimed by the owner within two (2) days. (Ord. #GWO-4, Oct. 1993)
10-411. Fines for violation of this chapter. The animal warden, any
police officer or other official designated by the council shall have the authority
to investigate all violations observed by him, and to investigate all complaints
filed by any person. Any owner found guilty of violating any section of this
chapter, may, upon conviction, be subject to a civil penalty of up to five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. #GWO-4, Oct. 1993, modified)
11-1
1Municipal code references
Animals and fowls: title 10.
Housing and utilities: title 12.
Fireworks and explosives: title 7.
Traffic offenses: title 15.
Streets and sidewalks (non-traffic): title 16.
2Municipal code reference
Sale of alcoholic beverages, including beer: title 8.
State law reference
See Tennessee Code Annotated § 33-8-203 (Arrest for Public
Intoxication, cities may not pass separate legislation).
TITLE 11
MUNICIPAL OFFENSES1
CHAPTER
1. ALCOHOL.
2. FORTUNE TELLING, ETC.
3. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET.
4. INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL.
5. FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES.
6. TRESPASSING, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND INTERFERENCE WITH
TRAFFIC.
7. MISCELLANEOUS.
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOL2
SECTION
11-101. Drinking beer, etc., on streets, etc.
11-102. Minors in beer places.
11-101. Drinking beer, etc., on streets, etc. Unless while in a
business place in possession of a beer permit and license for premises
consumption, it shall be unlawful to consume or drink, or to have an open
container of beer on any street, alley, parking lot or other public facility of this
municipality. (1972 Code, § 10-229)
11-2
11-102. Minors in beer places. It shall be unlawful for any minor to
loiter in or around, work in, or otherwise frequent any place where beer is sold
at retail for consumption on the premises. (1972 Code, § 10-222)
11-3
CHAPTER 2
FORTUNE TELLING, ETC.
SECTION
11-201. Fortune telling, etc.
11-201. Fortune telling, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold
himself forth to the public as a fortune teller, clairvoyant, hypnotist, spiritualist,
palmist, phrenologist, or other mystic endowed with supernatural powers. (1972
Code, § 10-235)
11-4
1Municipal code reference: § 15-118.
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET
SECTION
11-301. Disturbing the peace.
11-302. Anti-noise regulations.
11-301. Disturbing the peace. No person shall disturb, tend to disturb,
or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive, or
obstreperous conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon
any premises owned or possessed by him or under his control. (1972 Code,
§ 10-202)
11-302. Anti-noise regulations. Subject to the provisions of this
section, the creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary
noise is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be
detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public
peace and welfare, is prohibited.
(1) Miscellaneous prohibited noises enumerated. The following acts,
among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in
violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
(a) Blowing horns.1 The sounding of any horn or signal device
on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar, or other vehicle while not
in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching,
apparently out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or
as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended;
the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud
or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time.
(b) Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio,
phonograph, or any musical instrument or sound device, including but
not limited to loudspeakers or other devices for reproduction or
amplification of sound, either independently of or in connection with
motion pictures, radio, or television, in such a manner or with such
volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.,
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office
or hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any
person in the vicinity.
11-5
(c) Yelling, shouting, hooting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours
of 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., or at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person in any hospital,
dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.
(d) Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which by
causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any person in the vicinity.
(e) Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle,
streetcar, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to
cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
(f) Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin
or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper
city authorities.
(g) Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
motor vehicle, or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device
which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(h) Building operations. The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in any residential area or
section or the construction or repair of streets and highways in any
residential area or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and
6:00 P.M. on week days, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest
of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building
inspector granted for a period while the emergency continues not to
exceed thirty (30) days. If the building inspector should determine that
the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection,
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of
streets and highways between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., and
if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to
any party in interest through delay, he may grant permission for such
work to be done between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or
during the process of the work.
(i) Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation
of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital or adjacent
to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same is
in session.
(j) Loading and unloading operations. The creation of any loud
and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and other
containers.
11-6
(k) Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum,
loudspeaker, or other instrument or device emitting noise for the purpose
of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale or display of
merchandise.
(l) Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of
mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or
standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes.
(2) Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply
to or be enforced against:
(a) City vehicles. Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon
necessary public business.
(b) Repair of streets, etc. Excavations or repairs of bridges,
streets, or highways at night, by or on behalf of the city, the county, or
the state, when the public welfare and convenience renders it
impracticable to perform such work during the day.
(c) Noncommercial and nonprofit use of loudspeakers or
amplifiers. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the
course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character and in
the course of advertising functions sponsored by nonprofit organizations.
However, no such use shall be made until a permit therefor is secured
from the chief of police. Hours for the use of an amplifier or public
address system will be designated in the permit so issued and the use of
such systems shall be restricted to the hours so designated in the permit.
(1972 Code, § 10-234)
11-7
CHAPTER 4
INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION
11-401. Impersonating a municipal officer or employee.
11-402. False emergency alarms.
11-403. Coercing people not to work.
11-401. Impersonating a government officer or employee. No
person other than an official police officer of the city shall wear the uniform,
apparel, or badge, or carry any identification card or other insignia of office like
or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the
official police officers of the city. Furthermore, no person shall deceitfully
impersonate or represent that he is any other government officer or employee.
(1972 Code, § 10-211)
11-402. False emergency alarms. It shall be unlawful for any person
to intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need for police
or ambulance assistance, or to aid or abet in the commission of such act. (1972
Code, § 10-217)
11-403. Coercing people not to work. It shall be unlawful for any
person in association or agreement with any other person to assemble,
congregate, or meet together in the vicinity of any premises where other persons
are employed or reside for the purpose of inducing any such other person by
threats, coercion, intimidation, or acts of violence to quit or refrain from
entering a place of lawful employment. It is expressly not the purpose of this
section to prohibit peaceful picketing. (1972 Code, § 10-231)
11-8
CHAPTER 5
FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES
SECTION
11-501. Air rifles, etc.
11-502. Throwing missiles.
11-503. Weapons and firearms generally.
11-501. Air rifles, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to
discharge any air gun, air pistol, air rifle, "BB" gun, or sling shot capable of
discharging a metal bullet or pellet, whether propelled by spring, compressed
air, expanding gas, explosive, or other force-producing means or method. (1972
Code, § 10-213)
11-502. Throwing missiles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
maliciously throw any stone, snowball, bottle, or any other missile upon or at
any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property or upon or at any
person. (1972 Code, § 10-214)
11-503. Weapons and firearms generally. It shall be unlawful for any
unauthorized person to discharge a firearm within the municipality. (1972
Code, § 10-212, modified)
11-9
CHAPTER 6
TRESPASSING, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND INTERFERENCE
WITH TRAFFIC
SECTION
11-601. Trespassing.
11-602. Trespassing on trains.
11-603. Malicious mischief.
11-604. Interference with traffic.
11-601. Trespassing. The owner or person in charge of any lot or parcel
of land or any building or other structure within the corporate limits may post
the same against trespassers. It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any
such posted lot or parcel of land or into any such posted building or other
structure without the consent of the owner or person in charge.
It shall also be unlawful and deemed to be a trespass for any peddler,
canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, or other person to fail to promptly leave
the private premises of any person who requests or directs him to leave. (1972
Code, § 10-226)
11-602. Trespassing on trains. It shall be unlawful for any person to
climb, jump, step, stand upon, or cling to, or in any other way attach himself to
any locomotive engine or railroad car unless he works for the railroad
corporation and is acting in the scope of his employment or unless he is a lawful
passenger or is otherwise lawfully entitled to be on such vehicle. (1972 Code,
§ 10-221)
11-603. Malicious mischief. It shall be unlawful and deemed to be
malicious mischief for any person to willfully, maliciously, or wantonly damage,
deface, destroy, conceal, tamper with, remove, or withhold real or personal
property which does not belong to him. (1972 Code, § 10-225)
11-604. Interference with traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person
to stand, sit, or engage in any activity whatever on any public street, sidewalk,
bridge, or public ground in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere
with the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon. (1972 Code,
§ 10-233)
11-10
CHAPTER 7
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
11-701. Abandoned refrigerators, etc.
11-702. Caves, wells, cisterns, etc.
11-703. Posting notices, etc.
11-704. Curfew for minors.
11-705. Wearing masks.
11-706. Cruelty to animals.
11-707. Unauthorized mounting of fire equipment prohibited.
11-708. Trespassing on water works or sewage disposal plant, prohibited.
11-709. Defacing or removing of street or traffic signs prohibited.
11-710. Leasing or renting a house knowingly to another for immoral or
unlawful purposes prohibited.
11-701. Abandoned refrigerators, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person to leave in any place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended,
unused, or discarded refrigerator, icebox, or other container with any type
latching or locking door without first removing therefrom the latch, lock, or door.
(1972 Code, § 10-223)
11-702. Caves, wells, cisterns, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to permit to be maintained on property owned or occupied by him any cave, well,
cistern, or other such opening in the ground which is dangerous to life and limb
without an adequate cover or safeguard. (1972 Code, § 10-232)
11-703. Posting notices, etc. No person shall fasten, in any way, any
show-card, poster, or other advertising device upon any public or private
property unless legally authorized to do so. (1972 Code, § 10-227)
11-704. Curfew for minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor, to be
abroad at night after 11:00 P.M. unless upon a legitimate errand for, or
accompanied by, a parent, guardian, or other adult person having lawful custody
of such minor. (1972 Code, § 10-224)
11-705. Wearing masks. It shall be unlawful for any person to appear
on or in any public way or place while wearing any mask, device, or hood
whereby any portion of the face is so hidden or covered as to conceal the identity
of the wearer. The following are exempted from the provisions of this section:
(1) Children under the age of ten (10) years.
(2) Workers while engaged in work wherein a face covering is
necessary for health and/or safety reasons.
11-11
(3) Persons wearing gas masks in civil defense drills and exercises or
emergencies.
(4) Any person having a special permit issued by the city recorder to
wear a traditional holiday costume. (1972 Code, § 10-236)
11-706. Cruelty to animals. It shall be unlawful for any person within
the City of Camden to inhumanely or cruelly beat or abuse any dumb animal,
or to confine it for more than twelve hours without having been fed or watered.
It shall be the duty of the police to water and feed any such animal until proper
disposition can be made of it, and any cost arising from the care given shall be
charged against the violator upon conviction. (1972 Code, § 10-237)
11-707. Unauthorized mounting of fire equipment prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person other than members of the fire department or
persons authorized by the chief of the fire department to mount or ride on any
fire equipment while such equipment is in use. (1972 Code, § 10-238)
11-708. Trespassing on water works or sewage disposal plant,
prohibited. It shall be unlawful to go upon or trespass upon either the city
owned property where the water works or the sewage disposal plant are located
without proper authority. (1972 Code, § 10-239)
11-709. Defacing or removal of street or traffic signs prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or disfigure any street or
traffic sign, or any other such public property belonging to the city. (1972 Code,
§ 10-240)
11-710. Leasing or renting a house knowingly to another for
immoral or unlawful purposes prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
landlord or other such person to knowingly lease or rent property to any person
for the purpose of operating a house of prostitution. (1972 Code, § 10-241,
modified)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-1
1Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
TITLE 12
BUILDING, UTILITY, ETC. CODES
CHAPTER
1. BUILDING CODE.
2. PLUMBING CODE.
3. ELECTRICAL CODE.
4. GAS CODE.
5. RESIDENTIAL CODE.
6. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
7. [DELETED.]
8. [DELETED.]
9. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
10. MECHANICAL CODE.
11. EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE.
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE1
SECTION
12-101. Building code adopted.
12-102. Modifications.
12-103. Available in recorder's office.
12-104. Violations and penalty.
12-101. Building code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of regulating the construction, alteration, repair, use, occupancy, location,
maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any
appurtenance connected or attached to any building or structure, the
International Building Code,2 2006 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-2
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred to as the building code. (1972
Code, § 4-101, modified, as amended by Ord. #JT-01-2005-01, Feb. 2005,
Ord. #AW2009-04, Dec. 2009, and Ord. #AW2010, June 2010, and repealed and
replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-102. Modifications. (1) Definitions. Whenever the building code
refers to the " Chief Appointing Authority," it shall be deemed to be a reference
to the mayor. When the "Building Official" is named it shall, for the purposes
of the building code, mean such person as the mayor shall have appointed or
designated to administer and enforce the provisions of the building code.
(2) Permit fees. Permit fees required to be collected under the building
code shall be as established from time to time by resolution adopted by the
council. (1972 Code, § 4-102, modified, as amended by Ord. #AW2010-06, Jan.
2011, and repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-103. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the building code
with the above modifications has been placed on file in the recorder's office and
shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. (1972 Code, § 4-103,
modified, as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-104. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of the building code as herein
adopted by reference and modified. (1972 Code, § 4-104, as repealed and
replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-3
1Municipal code references
Cross connections: title 18.
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE1
SECTION
12-201. Plumbing code adopted.
12-202. Modifications.
12-203. Available in recorder's office.
12-204. Violations and penalty.
12-201. Plumbing code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of regulating plumbing installations, including alterations, repairs, equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings, and the appurtenances thereto, within or without
the municipality, when such plumbing is or is to be connected with the
municipal water or sewerage system, the International Plumbing Code,2 2006
edition, as prepared and adopted by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this code and is hereinafter
referred to as the plumbing code. (1972 Code, § 4-201, modified, as amended by
Ord. #JT-01-2005-01, Feb. 2005, and Ord. #2010-01, June 2010, and repealed
and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-202. Modifications. Wherever the plumbing code refers to the
"Chief Appointing Authority," it shall be deemed to be a reference to the mayor.
Wherever "Code Official" is named or referred to, it shall mean the person
appointed or designated by the mayor to administer and enforce the provisions
of the plumbing code. (1972 Code, § 4-202, modified, as repealed and replaced
by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-203. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the plumbing code has
been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (1972 Code, § 4-203, modified, as repealed and replaced
by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-4
12-204. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of the plumbing code as herein
adopted by reference and modified. (1972 Code, § 4-204, as repealed and
replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-5
1Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks and explosives: title 7.
2Copies of this code may be purchased from the National Fire Protection
Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269-9101.
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE1
SECTION
12-301. Electrical code adopted.
12-302. Available in recorder's office.
12-303. Permit required for doing electrical work.
12-304. Violations and penalty.
12-305. Enforcement.
12-306. Fees.
12-301. Electrical code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of providing practical minimum standards for the safeguarding of persons and
of buildings and their contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity
for light, heat, power, radio, signaling, or for other purposes, the National
Electrical Code,2 2008 edition, as prepared by the National Fire Protection
Association, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this
code and is hereinafter referred to as the electrical code. (1972 Code, § 4-301,
modified, as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-302. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the electrical code has
been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (1972 Code, § 4-302, modified, as repealed and replaced
by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-303. Permit required for doing electrical work. No electrical
work shall be done within this municipality until a permit therefor has been
issued by the municipality. The term "electrical work" shall not be deemed to
include minor repairs that do not involve the installation of new wire, conduits,
machinery, apparatus, or other electrical devices generally requiring the
services of an electrician. (1972 Code, § 4-303, as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-6
12-304. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
do or authorize any electrical work or to use any electricity in such manner or
under such circumstances as not to comply with this chapter and/or the
requirements and standards prescribed by the electrical code. (1972 Code,
§ 4-304, as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-305. Enforcement. The electrical inspector shall be such person as
the mayor shall appoint or designate. It shall be his duty to enforce compliance
with this chapter and the electrical code as herein adopted by reference. He is
authorized and directed to make such inspections of electrical equipment and
wiring, etc., as are necessary to insure compliance with the applicable
regulations, and may enter any premises or building at any reasonable time for
the purpose of discharging his duties. He is authorized to refuse or discontinue
electrical service to any person or place not complying with this chapter and/or
the electrical code. (1972 Code, § 4-305, as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-306. Fees. The electrical inspector shall collect the same fees as are
authorized in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-102-143, for electrical inspections
by deputy inspectors of the state fire marshal. (1972 Code, § 4-306, as repealed
and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-7
1Municipal code reference
Gas system administration: title 19, chapter 2.
CHAPTER 4
GAS CODE1
SECTION
12-401. Title and definitions.
12-402. Purpose and scope.
12-403. Use of existing piping and appliances.
12-404. Bond and license.
12-405. Gas inspector and assistants.
12-406. Powers and duties of inspector.
12-407. Permits.
12-408. Inspections.
12-409. Certificates.
12-410. Fees.
12-411. Violations and penalty.
12-412. Nonliability.
12-401. Title and definitions. This chapter and the code herein
adopted by reference shall be known as the gas code of the city. The following
definitions are provided for the purpose of interpretation and administration of
the gas code.
(1) "Certain appliances" means conversion burners, floor furnaces,
central heating plants, vented wall furnaces, water heaters, and boilers.
(2) "Certificate of approval" means a document or tag issued and/or
attached by the inspector to the inspected material, piping, or appliance
installation, filled out, together with date, address of the premises, and signed
by the inspector.
(3) "Gas company" means any person distributing gas within the
corporate limits or authorized and proposing to so engage.
(4) "Inspector" means the person appointed as inspector, and shall
include each assistant inspector, if any, from time to time acting as such under
this chapter by appointment of the mayor.
(5) "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, or
any other organized group of individuals. (as amended by Ord. #AW2010-01,
June 2010, and repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-402. Purpose and scope. The purpose of the gas code is to provide
minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe installation of
consumer's gas piping and gas appliances. All gas piping and gas appliances
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-8
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
installed, replaced, maintained, or repaired within the corporate limits shall
conform to the requirements of this chapter and to the International Fuel Gas
Code,1 2006 edition, which is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. One (1) copy of the gas code shall be
kept on file in the office of the city recorder for the use and inspection of the
public. (Ord. #GWO-29, Aug. 1996, modified, as amended by
Ord. #JT-01-2005-01, Feb. 2005, and repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-403. Use of existing piping and appliances. Notwithstanding any
provision in the gas code to the contrary, consumer's piping installed prior to the
adoption of the gas code or piping installed to supply other than natural gas may
be converted to natural gas if the inspector finds, upon inspection and proper
tests, that such piping will render reasonably satisfactory gas service to the
consumer and will not in any way endanger life or property; otherwise, such
piping shall be altered or replaced, in whole or in part, to conform with the
requirements of the gas code. (as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05,
July 2011)
12-404. Bond and license. (1) No person shall engage in or work at the
installation, extension, or alteration of consumer's gas piping or certain gas
appliances, until such person shall have secured a license as hereinafter
provided, and shall have executed and delivered to the mayor a good and
sufficient bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), with
corporate surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of all such work,
entered upon or contracted for, in strict accordance and compliance with the
provisions of the gas code. The bond herein required shall expire on the first
day of January next following its approval by the city recorder, and thereafter
on the first day of January of each year a new bond, in form and substance as
herein required, shall be given by such person to cover all such work as shall be
done during such year.
(2) Upon approval of said bond, the person desiring to do such work
shall secure from the city recorder a nontransferable license which shall run
until the first day of January next succeeding its issuance, unless sooner
revoked. The person obtaining a license shall pay any applicable license fees to
the city recorder.
(3) Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting an
individual from installing or repairing his own appliances or installing,
extending, replacing, altering, or repairing consumer's piping on his own
premises, or as requiring a license or a bond from an individual doing such work
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-9
on his own premises; provided, however, all such work must be done in
conformity with all other provisions of the gas code, including those relating to
permits, inspections, and fees. (as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05,
July 2011)
12-405. Gas inspector and assistants. To provide for the
administration and enforcement of the gas code, the office of gas inspector is
hereby created. The inspector, and such assistants as may be necessary in the
proper performance of the duties of the office, shall be appointed or designated
by the city council. (as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-406. Powers and duties of inspector. (1) The inspector is
authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of the gas code. Upon
presentation of proper credentials, he may enter any building or premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections or preventing violations
of the gas code.
(2) The inspector is authorized to disconnect any gas piping or fixture
or appliance for which a certificate of approval is required but has not been
issued with respect to same, or which, upon inspection, shall be found defective
or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such a
disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping, fixture, or
appliance disconnected by the inspector, which notice shall state that the same
has been disconnected by the inspector, together with the reason or reasons
therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove said notice or
reconnect said gas piping or fixture or appliance without authorization by the
inspector and such gas piping or fixture or appliance shall not be put in service
or used until the inspector has attached his certificate of approval in lieu of his
prior disconnection notice.
(3) It shall be the duty of the inspector to confer from time to time with
representatives of the local health department, the local fire department, and
the gas company, and otherwise obtain from proper sources all helpful
information and advice, presenting same to the appropriate officials from time
to time for their consideration. (as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05,
July 2011)
12-407. Permits. (1) No person shall install a gas conversion burner,
floor furnace, central heating plant, vented wall furnace, water heater, boiler,
consumer's gas piping, or convert existing piping to utilize natural gas without
first obtaining a permit to do such work from the mayor; however, permits will
not be required for setting or connecting other gas appliances, or for the repair
of leaks in house piping.
(2) When only temporary use of gas is desired, the recorder may issue
a permit for such use, for a period of not to exceed sixty (60) days, provided the
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-10
consumer's gas piping to be used is given a test equal to that required for a final
piping inspection.
(3) Except when work in a public street or other public way is involved
the gas company shall not be required to obtain permits to set meters, or to
extend, relocate, remove, or repair its service lines, mains, or other facilities, or
for work having to do with its own gas system. (as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-408. Inspections. (1) A rough piping inspection shall be made after
all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such
piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been
attached thereto.
(2) A final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized
by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be
concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any
fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. This inspection shall
include a pressure test, at which time the piping shall stand an air pressure
equal to not less than the pressure of a column of mercury six inches (6") in
height, and the piping shall hold this air pressure for a period of at least ten (10)
minutes without any perceptible drop. A mercury column gauge shall be used
for the test. All tools, apparatus, labor, and assistance necessary for the test
shall be furnished by the installer of such piping. (as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-409. Certificates. The inspector shall issue a certificate of approval
at the completion of the work for which a permit for consumer piping has been
issued if after inspection it is found that such work complies with the provisions
of the gas code. A duplicate of each certificate issued covering consumer's gas
piping shall be delivered to the gas company and used as its authority to render
gas service. (as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-410. Fees. The permit fee schedule as amended from time to time is
available in the office of the recorder. (as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-411. Violations and penalty. Any person who shall violate or fail
to comply with any of the provisions of the gas code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined under the general
penalty clause for this code of ordinances, or the license of such person may be
revoked, or both fine and revocation of license may be imposed. (as repealed and
replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-412. Nonliability. This chapter shall not be construed as imposing
upon the municipality any liability or responsibility for damages to any person
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-11
injured by any defect in any gas piping or appliance mentioned herein, or by
installation thereof, nor shall the municipality, or any official or employee
thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the
inspection authorized hereunder or the certificate of approval issued by the
inspector. (as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-12
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION
12-501. Residential code adopted.
12-502. Modifications.
12-503. Available in recorder's office.
12-504. Violations and penalty.
12-501. Residential code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of providing building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical provisions, the
International Residential Code,1 2006 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred to as the residential code. (1972
Code, § 4-401, modified, as amended by Ord. #JT-01-2005-01, Feb. 2005, and
Ord. #AW2010-01, June 2010, and repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05,
July 2011)
12-502. Modifications. Wherever the residential code refers to the
"Building Official," it shall mean the person appointed or designated by the
mayor to administer and enforce the provisions of the residential code.
Wherever the "Chief Appointing Authority" is referred to it shall mean the
mayor. (1972 Code, § 4-402, modified, as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-503. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the residential code
has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use
and inspection of the public. (1972 Code, § 4-403, modified, as repealed and
replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-504. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of the residential code as herein
adopted by reference and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter
shall be punishable by a penalty under the general penalty provision of this
code. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate
offense. (1972 Code, § 4-404, as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05,
July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-13
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-19-106 requires Tennessee cities
either to adopt the Model Energy Code, 1992 edition, or to adopt local
standards equal to or stricter than the standards in the energy code.
Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 6
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE1
SECTION
12-601. Energy conservation code adopted.
12-602. Modifications.
12-603. Available in recorder's office.
12-604. Violations and penalty.
12-601. Energy conservation code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for
the purpose of regulating the design of energy-efficient building envelopes and
the installation of energy-efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems to
establish energy-efficient buildings using prescriptive and performance-related
provisions which will make possible the use of new materials and innovative
techniques that conserve energy, the International Energy Conservation Code,2
2006 edition, as prepared and maintained by the International Code Council, is
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this code, and is
hereinafter referred to as the energy code. (as amended by Ord. #AW2010-01,
June 2010, and repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-602. Modifications. When the "Code Official" is named it shall, for
the purposes of the energy code, mean such person as the mayor shall have
appointed or designated to administer and enforce the provisions of the energy
code. (as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-603. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the energy
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-14
conservation code has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be
kept there for the use and inspection of the public. (as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-604. Violations and penalty. It shall unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of the energy code as herein adopted
by reference and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter shall be
punishable by a penalty under the general penalty provision of this code. Each
day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (as
repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-15
CHAPTER 7
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-16
CHAPTER 8
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-17
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 9
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION
12-901. Property maintenance code adopted.
12-902. Modifications.
12-903. Available in recorder's office.
12-904. Violations and penalty.
12-901. Property maintenance code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for
the purpose of providing minimum requirements and standards for premises,
structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating,
sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other
hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance, the International Property
Maintenance Code,1 2006 edition, as prepared and adopted by the International
Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this
code, and is hereinafter referred to as the property maintenance code.
(Ord. #GWO-29, Aug. 1996, modified, as amended by Ord. #JT-01-2005-01, Feb.
2005, and Ord. #AW2010-01, June 2010, and repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-902. Modifications. Whenever the property maintenance code refers
to the "Chief Appointing Authority," it shall be deemed to be a reference to the
mayor. When the "Code Official" is named it shall, for the purposes of the
property maintenance code, mean such person as the mayor has appointed or
designated to administer and enforce the provisions of the property maintenance
code. (as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-903. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the property
maintenance code has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be
kept there for the use and inspection of the public. (as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-904. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of the property maintenance code as
herein adopted by reference and modified. The violation of any section of this
chapter shall be punishable by a penalty under the general penalty provision of
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-18
this code. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate
offense. (as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-19
1Municipal code references
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 10
MECHANICAL CODE1
SECTION
12-1001. Mechanical code adopted.
12-1002. Modifications.
12-1003. Available in recorder's office.
12-1004. Violations and penalty.
12-1001. Mechanical code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-516, and for the purpose
of regulating the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations,
repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or
appurtenances thereto, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning,
and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, the
International Mechanical Code,2 2006 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as the mechanical code.
(Ord. #GWO-29, Aug. 1996, modified, as amended by Ord. #JT-01-2005-01, Feb.
2005, and Ord. #AW2010-01, June 2010, and repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-1002. Modifications. Wherever the mechanical code refers to the
"Code Official," it shall mean the person appointed or designated by the mayor
to administer and enforce the provisions of the mechanical code. (as repealed
and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-1003. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the mechanical code
has been placed on file in the city recorder's office and shall be kept there for the
use and inspection of the public. (as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-20
12-1004. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate or fail to comply with any provision of the mechanical code as herein
adopted by reference and modified. (as repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-21
1Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 11
EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE1
SECTION
12-1101. Existing buildings code adopted.
12-1102. Modifications.
12-1103. Available in recorder's office.
12-1104. Violations and penalty.
12-1101. Existing buildings code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-516, and for
the purpose of providing a concise set of regulations and procedures to effect
safety in occupancy, the International Existing Building Code,2 2006 edition, as
prepared by the International Code Council, is adopted and the same is
incorporated herein by reference, subject to modifications as hereinafter
provided, and shall be known and referred to as the existing buildings code.
(Ord. #GWO-29, Aug. 1996, modified, as amended by Ord. #JT-01-2005-01, Feb.
2005, and Ord. #AW2010-01, June 2010, and repealed and replaced by
Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-1102. Modifications. Whenever the standard existing buildings code
refers to the "Chief Appointing Authority," it shall be deemed to be a reference
to the mayor of the town Whenever the existing buildings code shall refer to the
"Code Official," it shall mean such person designated by the mayor to administer
and enforce the provisions of the various codes of the town. (as repealed and
replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
12-1103. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the existing
buildings code shall be placed on file in the office of the recorder and the same
shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. (as repealed and
replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 12-22
12-1104. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate or fail to comply with any provision of the standard existing buildings
code or any final order made pursuant thereto. Such violation is declared an
offense against the town and for which punishment shall be a fine of not more
than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such violation. Each day that a violation
occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. The building official or his or her
deputy or assistant is empowered to issue citations to answer in the municipal
court of the city by any person, firm or corporation found to be in such violation.
(as repealed and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-05, July 2011)
13-1
1Municipal code references
Animal control: title 10.
Littering streets, etc.: § 16-107.
Toilet facilities in beer places: § 8-211(10).
TITLE 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. JUNKYARDS.
3. NUISANCES.
4. ELIMINATION OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES OR DWELLINGS.
5. ACCUMULATION OF WEEDS, JUNK CARS, ABANDONED
APPLIANCES AND OTHER DEBRIS PROHIBITED.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
13-101. Health officer.
13-102. Smoke, soot, cinders, etc.
13-103. Stagnant water.
13-104. Weeds.
13-105. Dead animals.
13-106. Health and sanitation nuisances.
13-107. House trailer court requirements.
13-101. Health officer. The "health officer" shall be such municipal,
county, or state officer as the council shall appoint or designate to administer
and enforce health and sanitation regulations within the municipality. (1972
Code, § 8-401)
13-102. Smoke, soot, cinders, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to permit or cause the escape of such quantities of dense smoke, soot, cinders,
noxious acids, fumes, dust, or gases as to be detrimental to or to endanger the
health, comfort, and safety of the public or so as to cause or have a tendency to
cause injury or damage to property or business. (1972 Code, § 8-405)
13-2
13-103. Stagnant water. It shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly allow any pool of stagnant water to accumulate and stand on his
property without treating it so as to effectively prevent the breeding of
mosquitoes. (1972 Code, § 8-406)
13-104. Weeds. Every owner or tenant of property shall periodically cut
the grass and other vegetation commonly recognized as weeds on his property,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an order by the city
recorder or chief of police to cut such vegetation when it has reached a height of
over one (1) foot. (1972 Code, § 8-407)
13-105. Dead animals. Any person owning or having possession of any
dead animal not intended for use as food shall promptly bury the same or notify
the health officer and dispose of such animal in such manner as the health
officer shall direct. (1972 Code, § 8-408)
13-106. Health and sanitation nuisances. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him to become
or remain in a filthy condition, or permit the use or occupation of same in such
a manner as to create noxious or offensive smells and odors in connection
therewith, or to allow the accumulation or creation of unwholesome and
offensive matter or the breeding of flies, rodents, or other vermin on the
premises to the menace of the public health or the annoyance of people residing
within the vicinity. (1972 Code, § 8-409)
13-107. House trailer court requirements. It shall be unlawful for
any person to maintain or operate any house trailer court within the limits of
the City of Camden except in compliance with the following requirements:
(1) Definitions. The terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:
(a) "Trailer court." The term trailer court shall mean any plot
of ground within the City of Camden upon which two (2) or more trailer
coaches, occupied or dwelling of sleeping purposes, are located.
(b) "Trailer coach." The term shall mean any vehicle used, or
so constructed as to permit its being used, as a conveyance upon the
public streets or highways and duly licensable as such, and constructed
in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or
sleeping place for one (1) or more persons, provided that this definition
shall not include transport trucks or vans equipped with sleeping space
for a driver or drivers.
(c) "Dependent trailer coach." The term shall mean a trailer
coach which does not have a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
(d) "Independent trailer coach." The term shall mean a trailer
coach that has a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
13-3
(e) "Trailer coach space." The term shall mean a plot of ground
within a trailer court designated for the accommodation of one (1) trailer
coach.
(f) "Service building." The term shall mean a building housing
toilet facilities for men and women, with slop-water closet and laundry
facilities, and with separate bath or shower accommodations.
(g) "Health officer." Any person appointed by the council to
serve in such capacity.
(h) "Person." Any and all persons, including any individual,
firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation organized
or existing under the laws of this or any other state.
(2) Supervision by council of public health-rules and regulations. It
shall be the duty of the council to exercise general supervision over the
planning, location, and method of operation of trailer courts, and to adopt rules
and regulations deemed necessary for the protection of the public health,
welfare and comfort.
(3) Permits for trailer courts-issuance, suspension and revocation. No
place or site within the City of Camden shall be established or maintained by
any person as a trailer court unless he holds a valid permit issued by the health
officer in the name of such person for the specific trailer court. The health
officer is authorized to issue, suspend, or revoke permits in accordance with the
provision of this chapter and any rules and regulations as may be adopted by the
council.
(4) Inspections by health officer. The health officer is hereby
authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of trailer
courts in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and
safety of occupants of trailer courts and of the general public. The health officer
shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public
property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to
the enforcement of this section or of regulations promulgated thereunder.
(5) Location and planning. The trailer court shall be located on a
well-drained site, shall be so located that its drainage will not endanger any
water supply, and shall be in conformity with a plan approved by the health
officer. The health officer may promulgate regulations for trailer-court location
and plan approval, which shall provide for adequate drainage, space, lighting,
safety, service buildings and other sanitary facilities necessary to protect the
public health and prevent nuisances.
(6) Service buildings. Each trailer court that accepts a dependent
trailer coach for parking shall be provided with one or more service buildings
adequately equipped with flush-type toilet fixtures. No service building shall
contain less than one (1) toilet for women, one (1) toilet for males, one (1)
lavatory and shower for each sex, one (1) laundry tray, and one (1) slop-water
closet. Dependent trailer coaches shall be parked not more than two hundred
(200) feet from the service building.
13-4
Service buildings shall:
(a) Be located fifteen (15) feet or more from any trailer-coach
space;
(b) Be of permanent construction, and be adequately lighted;
(c) Be of moisture-resistant material, to permit frequent
washing and cleaning;
(d) Have sufficient toilet and laundry facilities, according to
requirements promulgated by the health officer, to serve adequately both
males and females;
(e) Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature
of 700 F. during cold weather, and to supply a minimum of three (3)
gallons of hot water per hour per coach space during time of peak
demands;
(f) Have all rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively
screened;
(g) Have at least one (1) slop-water closet, supplied with hot and
cold water, in a separate room.
(7) Water supply. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of
water shall be provided in each trailer court, capable of furnishing a minimum
of one hundred twenty-five (125) gallons per day per trailer-coach space. Where
a public supply of water of such quality is available, connection shall be made
thereto and its supply shall be used exclusively. The development of an
independent water supply to serve the trailer court shall be made only after
express approval has been granted by the health officer.
(8) Plumbing. All plumbing in the trailer court shall comply with state
and local plumbing laws and regulations.
(9) Sewage disposal. Trailer courts shall be served by a public sewer
system, if available, or by a private disposal system which has the approval of
the health officer. Each trailer-coach space shall be provided with a satisfactory
sewer connection. All sewage-disposal apparatus, including appurtenances
thereto, shall be provided, maintained, and operated so as not to create a
nuisance or health hazard.
(10) Refuse storage, collection and disposal. The storage, collection, and
disposal of refuse in the court shall be so managed as to create no health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect-breeding areas, accident hazards, or air
pollution. All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof
containers, which shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to prevent
any refuse from overflowing. Satisfactory container racks or holders shall be
provided, and shall be located not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from
any trailer-coach space. Garbage shall be collected and disposed of in an
approved manner at least twice per week.
(11) Insect and rodent control. Insect and rodent-control measures to
safeguard public health, as recommended by the health officer, shall be applied
in the trailer court. The trailer court shall be kept free of rubbish, and shall be
13-5
maintained in a satisfactory condition at all times. All harborage places for
rodents or hosts of insect vectors shall be eliminated. All breeding places for
flies and mosquitoes shall be eliminated or effectively treated.
(12) Electric power. An electrical outlet supplying at least one hundred
ten (110) volts shall be provided for each trailer-coach space. The installation
shall comply with all state and local electrical codes and ordinances. Such
electrical outlets shall be weatherproof. No power line shall be permitted to lie
on the ground, or to be suspended less than eighteen (18) feet above the ground.
(13) Liquefied petroleum gas. Liquefied petroleum gas for cooking
purposes shall not be used at individual trailer coach spaces unless the
containers are properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing.
Liquefied petroleum gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place, and
adequately protected from the weather. No cylinder containing liquefied
petroleum gas shall be located in a trailer coach, nor within five (5) feet of a door
thereof.
(14) Fire prevention. The court area shall be subject to the rules and
regulations of the fire-prevention authorities having jurisdiction.
(15) Additions to trailers--parking restrictions. No permanent additions
of any kind shall be built onto, nor become a part of, any trailer coach. Skirting
of coaches is permissible, but such skirting shall not permanently attach the
coach to the ground, provide a harborage for rodents, or create a fire hazard.
The wheels of the coach shall not be removed, except temporarily when
necessary for repairs. Jacks or stabilizers may be placed under the frame of the
coach to prevent movement on the springs while the coach is parked and
occupied.
(16) Communicable or contagious diseases. Every owner, operator,
attendant, or other person operating a trailer court shall notify the local health
officer immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within
the trailer court. In the case of diseases diagnosed by a physician as
quarantinable, such owner, operator, attendant, or other person operating a
trailer court shall not permit the departure of a trailer coach or its occupants,
or the removal therefrom of clothing or other articles which have been exposed
to infection, without approval of the health officer.
(17) Register to be maintained. Every trailer-court owner or operator
shall maintain a register containing a record of all trailer coaches and occupants
using the trailer court. Such register shall be available to any authorized person
inspecting the court, and shall be preserved for the period required by the public
health officer. Such register shall contain
(a) The names and addresses of all trailer-coach occupants stopping
in the court,
(b) The make, model, and license number of each motor vehicle and
trailer coach,
(c) The state, territory, or county issuing the trailer license, and
(d) The dates of arrival and departure of each trailer coach.
13-6
(18) Enforcement of regulations. It shall be the duty of the health
officers to enforce the provisions of this section.
(19) Violation of statute or regulations--penalty. Any person or
corporation who violates the provisions of this section or the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or fails to perform the reasonable
requirements of the health officer after receipt of thirty (30) days' written notice
of such requirements, shall be fined for each offense, and each day of continued
violation after conviction shall constitute a separate offense.
(20) Application for permit. Each application for permit shall be made
on a form prepared and distributed by the health officer and in the name of the
person making application, and shall be accompanied by a diagram or map
drawn to a scale no smaller than 1"-100' setting forth therein the geographical
location, boundaries, drainage, buildings and sanitation facilities such as
location of water and sewer lines, the number, location and size of all trailer
coach spaces, together with the approval of other departments of the city or
county as deemed necessary by the health officer.
(21) Trailer coach plot size and spacing of coaches. Trailer coach spaces
shall be clearly defined and coaches parked so that there will be at least 15 feet
of clear space between coaches or any attachment, such as a garage or porch, 15
feet between coaches and any building or structure, and at least 5 feet between
any coach and trailer court property line. No trailer coach shall be located closer
than 15 feet to any public street or highway.
The individual plot sizes for trailer coach spaces shall be determined as
follows:
(a) Minimum width shall be equal to the width of trailer plus 20
feet.
(b) Minimum depth with end parking of automobile shall be
equal to the length of trailer plus 30 feet.
(c) Minimum depth with side or street parking shall be equal
to the length of trailer plus 20 feet.
In no case shall the minimum width be less than 28 feet and the
minimum depth less than 55 feet and such spaces shall be used only for parking
trailer coaches no larger than 8 feet wide and 35 feet long.
(22) Water supply. Where a public water supply is available it shall be
used exclusively. The development of an independent water supply to serve the
trailer court shall be made only after express approval has been granted by the
health officer. In those instances where an independent system is approved the
water shall be from a supply properly located, protected, and operated, and shall
be adequate and of a safe, sanitary quality. Samples of water for bacteriological
examination shall be taken upon the initial approval of the physical structure
and thereafter at least every four months and when any repair or alteration of
the water supply system has been made. If a positive sample is obtained it will
be the responsibility of the trailer court operator to provide such treatment as
13-7
is deemed necessary to maintain a safe, potable water supply. An individual
water-service connection shall be provided for each trailer coach space.
(23) Sewage disposal. Each coach space shall be equipped with at least
a 3-inch sewer connection, trapped below frost line and reaching at least 4
inches above the surface of the ground. The sewer connection should be
protected by a concrete collar, at least 3 inches deep and extending, 12 inches
from the connection in all directions. All sewer lines should be laid in trenches
separated at least 10 feet horizontally from any drinking-water-supply line.
Every effort should be made to dispose of the sewage through a public
sewerage system. In lieu of this a septic tank and subsurface soil absorption
system may be used provided the soil characteristics are suitable and adequate
disposal area is available. The minimum size of any septic tank to be installed
under any condition shall be not less than 750 gallons working capacity. This
size tank would accommodate a maximum of two trailer coaches. For each
additional trailer coach on such a single tank, a minimum liquid capacity of 175
gallons per trailer coach space shall be provided. The sewage from no more than
12 trailer coaches shall be disposed of in any one single tank installation. The
size of such tank would be a minimum of 2500 gallons liquid capacity.
The amount of effective soil absorption area or total bottom area of
overflow trenches will depend on local soil conditions and should be determined
only on the basis of the percolation rate of the soil. The percolation rate should
be determined as outlined in Appendix A of the Tennessee Department of Public
Health Bulletin, entitled "Recommended Construction of Large Septic Tank
Disposal Systems for Schools, Factories, and Institutions." This bulletin is
available on request from the department. No trailer coach shall be placed over
a soil absorption field.
(24) Disposal of refuse. All refuse shall be stored in standard metal
containers, constructed of non-corrosive materials, equipped with tight-fitting
lids, and with handles. Such containers shall have a capacity of not less than
20 gallons nor more than 30 gallons, except that the maximum size limitation
shall not apply where facilities are available for handling containers
mechanically. Each trailer coach shall be provided with a sufficient number of
containers of adequate capacity to prevent overflow. The containers shall be
stored above the ground level and so fastened or supported as not to be easily
overturned. Centralized refuse storage facilities may be utilized provided that
the maximum distance from any trailer coach served does not exceed 150 feet.
Garbage and refuse shall be collected and/or disposed of in an approved manner
at intervals not exceeding every 4 days.
(25) Electricity. An electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts shall
be provided for each trailer coach space, and shall be weatherproof and
accessible to the parked trailer coach. All electrical installations shall be in
compliance with the National Electrical Code, and shall satisfy all requirements
of the local electrical service organization. (1972 Code, § 8-404)
13-8
1State law reference
The provisions of this section were taken substantially from the Bristol
ordinance upheld by the Tennessee Court of Appeals as being a
reasonable and valid exercise of the police power in the case of
Hagaman v. Slaughter, 49 Tenn. App. 338, 354 S.W.2d 818 (1961).
CHAPTER 2
JUNKYARDS
SECTION
13-201. Junkyards.
13-201. Junkyards.1 All junkyards within the corporate limits shall be
operated and maintained subject to the following regulations:
(1) All junk stored or kept in such yards shall be so kept that it will not
catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may breed and so that it will not
constitute a place, or places in which rats, mice, or other vermin may be
harbored, reared, or propagated.
(2) All such junkyards shall be enclosed within close fitting plank or
metal solid fences touching the ground on the bottom and being not less than six
(6) feet in height, such fence to be built so that it will be impossible for stray cats
and/or stray dogs to have access to such junkyards.
(3) Such yards shall be so maintained as to be in a sanitary condition
and so as not to be a menace to the public health or safety. (1972 Code, § 8-410)
13-9
CHAPTER 3
NUISANCES
SECTION
13-301. Generally.
13-302. Violations enumerated.
13-303. Enforcement.
13-301. Generally. The council may by resolution declare the existence
or continuance of any insanitary, unhealthy, unsafe, dangerous, hazardous,
noisy, obnoxious or offensive condition which adversely affects the public health,
safety, welfare and happiness of this municipality to be a nuisance. (1972 Code,
§ 4-501)
13-302. Violations enumerated. The specifications in this section of
certain unhealthy, insanitary, unsafe, dangerous, hazardous, noisy, obnoxious
or offensive conditions or situations shall not be held or construed to exclude
others within the meaning of the general terms of § 13-301, of this chapter nor
to limit the full application of the same. Any such insanitary, unhealthy,
dangerous, obnoxious or offensive condition on, coming from, or related to the
following conditions or situations may, in the sound discretion of the council, be
declared a nuisance:
(1) Any awning or marquee similar to those usually or customarily
placed above the pavement in front of business and public buildings,
(2) Any situation or condition arising in connection with any
manufacturing business or establishment,
(3) Any lavatory unclean for more than three (3) weeks,
(4) Any dead animal left unburned or unburied for more than twenty
four (24) hours,
(5) Any situation or condition that pollutes the atmosphere, water or
soil of this municipality. (1972 Code, § 4-502)
13-303. Enforcement. In order to enforce the aforesaid resolution
directing the abatement of a nuisance, such resolution shall describe fully the
nature of the alleged nuisance, state the name or names of the suspected
violators, the location or address where such nuisance is perpetrated, an order
directing its abatement which provides a specified time which is reasonable for
the suspected offender to either abate the alleged nuisance or to answer or deny
the allegation before council.
Such resolution shall be served upon the suspected offender in the same
manner that service of process is executed in similar suits at law. Upon the
failure of the said offender to comply with the direction of the council, it may
13-10
order the abatement of the said nuisance at the expense of the person, persons
or organization in question without further notice. (1972 Code, § 4-503)
13-11
CHAPTER 4
ELIMINATION OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES OR DWELLINGS
SECTION
13-401. Purpose.
13-402. Definitions.
13-403. Unfit or dangerous structures.
13-404. Conditions rendering structure unfit or dangerous.
13-405. Designation of public officer.
13-406. Powers given public officer.
13-407. Service of complaints or orders.
13-408. Hearings on complaints or petitions.
13-409. Finding of dangerous or unfit structures.
13-410. Failure to comply with order of public officer.
13-411. Removal or demolition by municipality.
13-412. Recovery of cost and placement of liens.
13-413. Allocation of funds for program.
13-414. Applicability.
13-415. Conflicts.
13-401. Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to provide the
necessary administrative and legal procedures as required by Section 6.01 of the
Charter of the City of Camden and Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-21-103, for
the designation of unsafe, hazardous or dangerous dwellings and structures and
for the abatement of same within the municipality. (Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-402. Definitions. The following terms wherever used or referred to
in this chapter shall have the following respective meanings for the purposes of
this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
(1) "Municipality" shall mean the City of Camden, Tennessee.
(2) "Governing body" shall mean the Council of the City of Camden.
(3) "Public officer" shall mean the officer or officers who are authorized
hereinbelow to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter.
(4) "Public authority" shall mean any housing authority or any officer
who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the
municipality relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities
concerning structures in the municipality.
(5) "Owner" shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple and every
mortgagee of record.
(6) "Parties of interest" shall mean all individuals, associations,
corporations and others who have interest of record in a structure and any who
are in possession thereof.
13-12
(7) "Dwelling" shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof,
used and occupied for human residential habitation or abode or use, or intended
to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto
or usually enjoyed therewith.
(8) "Place of public accommodation" shall mean any building or
structure in which goods are supplied or services performed, or in which the
trade of the general public is solicited.
(9) "Structure" shall mean any dwelling, any place of public
accommodation; any place wherein business, trade, commerce or manufacture
is conducted; any advertising sign; fences or any other similar man-made facility
or object. (Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-403. Unfit or dangerous structures. All dwellings, structures and
other similar facilities within the municipality which are unsuitable or unsafe
for human occupancy or use due to dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards
of fire, accident or other calamities; damage from fire; lack of ventilation, light
or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such structures unsafe
or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or morals, or
otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City of Camden, shall
be upon proper investigation by the appropriate public official declared as an
"Unfit or Dangerous Structure," and shall be and is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, which shall be upon application of the proper procedure by a
public authority abated as directed. (Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-404. Conditions rendering structure unfit or dangerous. The
public officer may determine that a structure is unfit for human occupation or
use, if he finds that conditions exist in such structure which are dangerous or
injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such structure; the
occupants of neighboring structures or other residents of the municipality. Such
conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the
foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other
calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation,
caused by neglect or fire or other such damage; disrepair; structural defects, or
uncleanliness. The public officer or public authority may also utilize the
standards and requirements of other related adopted codes of the municipality,
such as the building code, housing code, etc. (Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-405. Designation of public officer. The codes enforcement
official/building inspector is designated as the principal public officer for the
administering and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; however, the
following duly elected or appointed and serving officers or employees of the City
of Camden are also authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(1) Fire marshal/fire chief
(2) Chief of police
13-13
(3) City recorder
(4) City attorney
(5) City mayor (Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-406. Powers given public officer. The Council of the City of
Camden hereby authorizes the public officer to exercise such powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions
of this chapter, including the following powers in addition to others herein
granted:
(1) To investigate conditions in the municipality in order to determine
which structures therein are unfit for human occupation or use.
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he may designate. (Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-407. Service of complaints or orders. Complaints or orders issued
by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon persons either
personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the
exercise of reasonable diligence and the public officer shall make an affidavit to
that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may
be made by publishing the same once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks
in the city's official newspaper. A copy of such complaint or order shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.
A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed for record in the Office of the
Register, Benton County, Tennessee, and such filing of the complaint or order
shall have the same force and effect as other lis penden notices provided by law.
(Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-408. Hearings on complaints or petitions. Whenever a petition
is filed with the public officer by a public authority; or by at least five (5)
residents of the municipality charging that any structure is dangerous or unfit
for human occupation or use; or whenever it appears to the public officer (on his
own motion) that any structure is dangerous or unfit for human occupation or
use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of, and parties in
interest of, such structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer (or his
13-14
designated agent) at a place therein fixed, not less than ten (10) days nor more
than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and
parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and
to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed
in the complaint, and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts in law or
equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer. (Ord.
#EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-409. Finding of dangerous or unfit structures. If after such
notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the structure under
consideration is dangerous or unfit for human occupation or use, he shall state
in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue
and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order stating that:
(1) If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (fifty percent
(50%) shall be considered a reasonable value) the owner will be required, within
the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such structure to
render it safe or fit for human occupation or use, or to vacate and close the
structure as a place of human occupation or use; or
(2) If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (fifty percent
(50%) shall be considered reasonable), the owner will be required, within the
time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such structure. (Ord.
#EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-410. Failure to comply with order of public officer. If the owner
fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, or improve, or to vacate and close
the structure, the public officer may cause such structure to be repaired, altered
or improved, or to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be
posted on the main entrance of any structure so closed (or on the most publicly
visible point of a structure such as a billboard or a fence) a placard with the
following words: "This structure or building is dangerous or unfit for human
occupation or use, and the utilization of this structure of building for human
occupation or use is prohibited and unlawful." (Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-411. Removal or demolition by municipality. If the owner fails
to comply with an order to remove or demolish the structures, the public officer
may cause such structure to be removed or demolished. (Ord. #EWJ-27, May
1989)
13-412. Recovery of cost and placement of liens. The amount of the
cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or
removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred.
13-15
(1) If the structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he
shall sell the materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such
sale against the cost of removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall
be deposited in the chancery court by the public officer; shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court
to the person found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court.
(2) Nothing in this section or chapter shall be construed to impair or
limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances
and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise.
(Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-413. Allocation of funds for program. The governing body of the
municipality shall prepare an estimate of the annual expenses or cost to
establish, maintain and administer the program authorized by this chapter, and
same shall be allocated and funded as a component of the city's annual general
fund budget. (Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-414. Applicability. The provisions of this chapter extend to all
man-made structures within the municipality, including, but not limited to:
residential dwellings or abodes; commercial, business or industrial facilities;
storage buildings; barns, sheds, and outbuildings; towers; outdoor advertising
signs or billboards, and fences. (Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
13-415. Conflicts. In any case where the provisions of this chapter may
be in conflict with the provisions of other chapters of the "Camden Municipal
Code" which relate to the regulation of dangerous, unfit or nonconforming
buildings or structures, the provisions of the chapter or regulation providing the
highest degree of protection to the residents of the municipality shall prevail.
(Ord. #EWJ-27, May 1989)
Change 2, June 14, 2004 13-16
CHAPTER 5
ACCUMULATION OF WEEDS, JUNK CARS, ABANDONED
APPLIANCES AND OTHER DEBRIS PROHIBITED
SECTION
13-501. Unlawful to allow weeds, junk cars, abandoned appliances and other
debris to accumulate on the premises.
13-502. Definitions.
13-503. Notice to clean up premises by owner.
13-504. Cleaning up the premises by the city.
13-505. Collection of costs incurred by the city.
13-506. Administration.
13-507. Attorney's fee for collecting costs.
13-501. Unlawful to allow weeds, junk cars, abandoned appliances
and other debris to accumulate on the premises. The owners of all lots or
property within the corporate limits of the City of Camden are hereby required
to cut, trim, or remove all weeds, grass, tree branches and offensive or
hazardous materials from the site. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow
junk cars, abandoned appliances and other debris to accumulate on property
under his control. (Ord. #EWJ-28, May 1989)
13-502. Definitions. The purpose of this section is to eliminate
ambiguity by providing full definition of certain words which are used in this
chapter.
(1) "Weeds." Any of various usually common or abundantly growing
plants measured to be a minimal of one foot in height, measuring from the base
of the plant at ground-surface level.
(2) "Grass." Any of numerous plants of the family Graminea measured
to be a minimal of one foot in height measuring from the base of the plant at
ground-surface level.
(3) "Offensive or hazardous materials." Any tangible or intangible
material which is disagreeable to the senses, and/or a material which may be
dangerous to the environment or the people.
(4) "Junk car." Any automobile or any motor vehicle manufactured for
transportation which is incapable of being self-propelled upon the public streets
or which does not meet the requirements for operation upon the public streets,
including current license and registration. Also, if the vehicle is not functional
within 15 days of the notice and registered within 15 days is considered a junk
car.
(5) "Abandoned appliances." Any manufactured appliance(s) not
functional and not presently used for its manufactured purpose. (Ord. #EWJ-28,
May 1989, as amended by Ord. #JT2003-3, Jan. 2004)
13-17
13-503. Notice to clean up premises by owner. Upon the failure of
any owner to cut, trim, and remove all weeds, grass, tree branches, and offensive
or hazardous materials and/or junk cars, abandoned appliances, and other
debris as noted in the first section of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the
building inspector/code enforcement officer, to serve a notice mailed by certified
mail to the last known address of the person or persons having control over the
offending premises, or such notice may be served personally to the owner of the
property or may be posted on the property on which the violation exists. Service
of notice shall consist of any of the above methods and shall state:
You are hereby notified that the premises under your control,
being (property description) have been found to be in an
unsanitary, unhealthy and unattractive condition.
You are directed by the City of Camden, Tennessee, to remove all
accumulation of ___________________ (weeds, grass, tree branches,
offensive or hazardous materials to include junk cars, abandoned
appliances and other debris) from the premises with the next five
(5) days at your own expense.
Should you fail to act upon this directive within the above
described time the city shall take appropriate action. (Ord.
#EWJ-28, May 1989)
13-504. Cleaning up the premises by the city. The owners of all lots
or property in violation may request that the City of Camden, Tennessee, clean
up the premises with the property owner re-imbursing the City of Camden for
the costs incurred by the City of Camden for such cutting, cleaning or removal
of his, her, or their property, and all such costs and payment methods shall be
set by the City of Camden.
Upon the failure of any owner of lots or property to cut/remove or to cause
to be cut/removed all violations specified in this chapter upon the property
described in the sections above, within five (5) days thereof, the street
department, acting through the direction of public works and at his direction,
is authorized and directed to cut/remove or have cut/removed, trimmed, clipped,
or cleared all such violations as specified in this chapter and a statement of the
cost thereof shall be prepared by the office of the director of public works and
filed with the city clerk for collection. Pursuant to the authority conferred by
the General Assembly of Tennessee, a tax lien may be declared on such property
for all costs and expenses, of cutting, clearing, or removing incurred by the
street department if costs incurred are not re-imbursed to the City of Camden
by the property owner after submission of statement of costs. (Ord. #EWJ-28,
May 1989)
13-18
13-505. Collection of costs incurred by the city. Upon receipt of
such statement of costs, the city clerk shall bill the owner, by certified mail, in
a manner similar to that followed in mailing monthly utility bills, for the
amount of the costs incurred by the City of Camden for such cutting or clearing
of his property and all such bills or charges shall bear interest at the rate of 10%
per annum, during that period of time commencing thirty (30) days after the
date of mailing such bills or statements of charges and ending on the date of
payment. At the same time unpaid real estate taxes are certified or turned over
to the city attorney for collection, the city clerk may also certify or turn over to
him for collection all unpaid and uncollected bills or charges for the cutting,
trimming, or removal of the accumulated debris specified in this chapter and the
city attorney shall file suit or take such other steps as may be necessary to
enforce the lien for same on such property. (Ord. #EWJ-28, May 1989)
13-506. Administration. The city building inspector shall be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
#EWJ-28, May 1989)
13-507. Attorney's fee for collecting costs. All uncollected sums for
the cutting, trimming, and removal of the accumulated debris, as specified in
this chapter, for each year, including interest and all costs incurred by the City
of Camden for remedying the specified violation, after notice to the property
owner as herein provided, are hereby declared to be a special tax to be collected
as other general taxes levied by the City of Camden, including real estate taxes
and special assessments. When placed in the hands of the city attorney for
collection, 15% of the unpaid charges for such costs incurred by the City of
Camden, shall be added to the principal and interest for the attorney's services
in making such collections and retained by him. (Ord. #EWJ-28, May 1989)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 14-1
1The bylaws of the municipal planning commission are available in the
recorder's office.
TITLE 14
ZONING AND LAND USE CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION.
2. ZONING ORDINANCE.
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION1
SECTION
14-101. Creation and membership.
14-102. Organization, powers, duties, etc.
14-103. Additional powers.
14-101. Creation and membership. Pursuant to the provisions of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-101 there is hereby created a municipal
planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission. The
planning commission shall consist of nine (9) members; the terms of one (1)
member appointed by the mayor shall be three (3) years; the terms of three (3)
of the members appointed by the mayor shall be two (2) years; the terms of three
(3) member appointed by the mayor shall be one (1) year. Two (2) of the
members with one (1) year terms shall reside within the area outside the
municipal boundaries in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-3-102
as amended by Public Chapter No. 253, Public Acts 2007 and as referenced in
§§ 14-102 and 14-103 of this municipal code. The terms of the mayor and the
member elected by the city council shall run concurrently with their terms of
office. Any vacancy in an appointive membership shall be filled for the
unexpired term by the mayor. All members of the planning commission shall
serve as such without compensation. (Ord. #HK-7, Sept. 1991, as amended by
Ord. #AW2007-03, Aug. 2007)
14-102. Organization, powers, duties, etc. The planning commission
shall be organized and shall carry out its powers, functions, and duties in
accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, title 13. (1972 Code, § 11-102)
14-103. Additional powers. Having been designated as a regional
planning commission, the municipal planning commission shall have the
additional powers granted by, and shall otherwise be governed by the provisions
of the state law relating to regional planning commissions. (1972 Code,
§ 11-103)
14-2
1Ordinance #98-09, and any amendments thereto, are published as
separate documents and are of record in the office of the city recorder.
Amendments to the zoning map are of record in the office of the city
recorder.
CHAPTER 2
ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance.
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance. Land use
within the City of Camden shall be governed by Ordinance #98-09, titled
"Zoning Ordinance, Camden, Tennessee," and any amendments thereto.1
15-1
1Municipal code reference
Excavations and obstructions in streets, etc.: title 16.
2State law references
Under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-307, the following offenses
are exclusively state offenses and must be tried in a state court or a
court having state jurisdiction: driving while intoxicated or drugged,
as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-401; failing to
stop after a traffic accident, as prohibited by Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 55-10-101, et seq.; driving while license is suspended or
revoked, as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-7-116; and
drag racing, as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-501.
TITLE 15
MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
3. SPEED LIMITS.
4. TURNING MOVEMENTS.
5. STOPPING AND YIELDING.
6. PARKING.
7. ENFORCEMENT.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS2
SECTION
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements.
15-102. Driving on streets closed for repairs, etc.
15-103. Reckless driving.
15-104. One-way streets.
15-105. Unlaned streets.
15-106. Laned streets.
15-107. Yellow lines.
15-108. Miscellaneous traffic-control signs, etc.
15-109. General requirements for traffic-control signs, etc.
15-110. Unauthorized traffic-control signs, etc.
15-111. Presumption with respect to traffic-control signs, etc.
15-112. School safety patrols.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 15-2
15-113. Driving through funerals or other processions.
15-114. Clinging to vehicles in motion.
15-115. Riding on outside of vehicles.
15-116. Backing vehicles.
15-117. Projections from the rear of vehicles.
15-118. Causing unnecessary noise.
15-119. Vehicles and operators to be licensed.
15-120. Passing.
15-121. Damaging pavements.
15-122. Bicycle riders, etc.
15-123. Motorcycle riders, etc. required to wear helmets.
15-124. More than one person prohibited from riding motorcycles, etc.
15-125. Following too closely.
15-126. Pedestrians soliciting rides, etc. prohibited.
15-127. Compliance with financial responsibility law required.
15-128. Mini trucks, four wheel off-road vehicles, etc., prohibited.
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any motor vehicle within the corporate limits unless such
vehicle is equipped with properly operating muffler, lights, brakes, horn, and
such other equipment as is prescribed and required by Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 55, chapter 9. (1972 Code, § 9-101)
15-102. Driving on streets closed for repairs, etc. Except for
necessary access to property abutting thereon, no motor vehicle shall be driven
upon any street that is barricaded or closed for repairs or other lawful purpose.
(1972 Code, § 9-106)
15-103. Reckless driving. Irrespective of the posted speed limit, no
person, including operators of emergency vehicles, shall drive any vehicle in
willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. (1972 Code,
§ 9-107)
15-104. One-way streets. On any street for one-way traffic with posted
signs indicating the authorized direction of travel at all intersections offering
access thereto, no person shall operate any vehicle except in the indicated
direction. (1972 Code, § 9-109)
15-105. Unlaned streets. (1) Upon all unlaned streets of sufficient
width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the street except:
(a) When lawfully overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction.
(b) When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while
under construction or repair.
(c) Upon a roadway designated and signposted by the city for
one-way traffic.
15-3
1Municipal code references
Stop signs, yield signs, flashing signals, pedestrian control signs,
traffic control signals generally: §§ 15-505--15-509.
2This manual may be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents,
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402.
(2) All vehicles proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at
the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven as
close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or
when preparing for a left turn. (1972 Code, § 9-110)
15-106. Laned streets. On streets marked with traffic lanes, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep his vehicle
within the boundaries of the proper lane for his direction of travel except when
lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning
movement.
On two (2) lane and three (3) lane streets, the proper lane for travel shall
be the right hand lane unless otherwise clearly marked. On streets with four
(4) or more lanes, either of the right hand lanes shall be available for use except
that traffic moving at less than the normal rate of speed shall use the extreme
right hand lane. On one-way streets either lane may be lawfully used in the
absence of markings to the contrary. (1972 Code, § 9-111)
15-107. Yellow lines. On streets with a yellow line placed to the right
of any lane line or center line, such yellow line shall designate a no-passing
zone, and no operator shall drive his vehicle or any part thereof across or to the
left of such yellow line except when necessary to make a lawful left turn from
such street. (1972 Code, § 9-112)
15-108. Miscellaneous traffic-control signs, etc.1 It shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle to violate or fail to comply with
any traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device placed or erected by the state
or the municipality unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle to
willfully violate or fail to comply with the reasonable directions of any police
officer. (1972 Code, § 9-113)
15-109. General requirements for traffic-control signs, etc. All
traffic-control signs, signals, markings, and devices shall conform to the latest
revision of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways,2 published by the U. S. Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration, and shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type
15-4
and location throughout the municipality. This section shall not be construed
as being mandatory but is merely directive. (1972 Code, § 9-114, modified)
15-110. Unauthorized traffic-control signs, etc. No person shall
place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any street, any unauthorized sign,
signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles
an official traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to control the movement of traffic or parking of
vehicles, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device or any railroad sign or
signal. (1972 Code, § 9-115)
15-111. Presumption with respect to traffic-control signs, etc.
When a traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device has been placed, the
presumption shall be that it is official and that it has been lawfully placed by
the proper authority. (1972 Code, § 9-116)
15-112. School safety patrols. All motorists and pedestrians shall obey
the directions or signals of school safety patrols when such patrols are assigned
under the authority of the chief of police and are acting in accordance with
instructions; provided, that such persons giving any order, signal, or direction
shall at the time be wearing some insignia and/or using authorized flags for
giving signals. (1972 Code, § 9-117)
15-113. Driving through funerals or other processions. Except
when otherwise directed by a police officer, no driver of a vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while
they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. (1972
Code, § 9-118)
15-114. Clinging to vehicles in motion. It shall be unlawful for any
person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any
other vehicle to cling to, or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving
vehicle upon any street, alley, or other public way or place. (1972 Code, § 9-120)
15-115. Riding on outside of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to ride, or for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle being operated
on a street, alley, or other public way or place, to permit any person to ride on
any portion of such vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers.
This section shall not apply to persons engaged in the necessary discharge of
lawful duties nor to persons riding in the load-carrying space of trucks. (1972
Code, § 9-121)
15-5
15-116. Backing vehicles. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the
same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without
interfering with other traffic. (1972 Code, § 9-122)
15-117. Projections from the rear of vehicles. Whenever the load or
any projecting portion of any vehicle shall extend beyond the rear of the bed or
body thereof, the operator shall display at the end of such load or projection, in
such position as to be clearly visible from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag
being not less than twelve (12) inches square. Between one-half (½) hour after
sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed in place of
the flag a red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least
two hundred (200) feet from the rear of such vehicle. (1972 Code, § 9-123)
15-118. Causing unnecessary noise. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cause unnecessary noise by unnecessarily sounding the horn, "racing"
the motor, or causing the "screeching" or "squealing" of the tires on any motor
vehicle. (1972 Code, § 9-124)
15-119. Vehicles and operators to be licensed. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate a motor vehicle in violation of the "Tennessee Motor
Vehicle Title and Registration Law" or the "Uniform Motor Vehicle Operators'
and Chauffeurs' License Law." (1972 Code, § 9-125)
15-120. Passing. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the driver of a vehicle passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
The driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
When the street is wide enough, the driver of a vehicle may overtake and
pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left
turn.
The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a street of
sufficient width for four (4) or more lanes of moving traffic when such movement
can be made in safety.
No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the street
in overtaking or passing on the right.
When any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an intersection
to permit a pedestrian to cross the street, no operator of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
No vehicle operator shall attempt to pass another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction unless he can see that the way ahead is sufficiently clear and
15-6
unobstructed to enable him to make the movement in safety. (1972 Code,
§ 9-126)
15-121. Damaging pavements. No person shall operate upon any
street of the municipality any vehicle, motor propelled or otherwise, which by
reason of its weight or the character of its wheels, or track is likely to damage
the surface or foundation of the street. (1972 Code, § 9-119)
15-122. Bicycle riders, etc. The following regulations shall apply to the
operation of all bicycles in the City of Camden:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this
section.
(2) No person or guardian of a child shall authorize or knowingly
permit any such child to violate the provisions of this section.
(3) Regulations contained in this section shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any highway, street or path.
(4) Bicycle riders shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject
to all the duties applicable to the driver or a motor vehicle.
(5) Persons operating bicycles upon a roadway shall ride as near the
right side of such roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
(6) Persons shall not ride bicycles abreast on any thoroughfare except
on those designated for that purpose.
(7) No person shall ride a bicycle other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
(8) No bicycle shall be used to carry more than one person.
(9) No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevent the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handle
bars.
(10) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which
shall emit a white light visible from a distance, at night time, of at least five
hundred (500) feet to the front with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the chief of police which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet
to three hundred (300) feet in the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible for
a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be used in addition to the
red reflector.
(11) It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with
a bell or other signaling device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance
of one hundred (100) feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor
shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
(12) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry level pavement. (1972 Code,
§ 9-127)
15-7
15-123. Motorcycle riders, etc. required to wear helmets. It shall
be unlawful to operate or ride upon any motorcycle, motorbike or motor scooter
unless such person is equipped with and wearing on the head a safety helmet
with secured chin strap and suspension lining, which said helmet shall conform
to the type and design manufactured for the use of the operators and riders of
such motor vehicles. (1972 Code, § 9-128)
15-124. More than one person prohibited from riding motorcycle,
etc. It shall be unlawful for more persons to ride on a motorcycle than it is
designed to carry, or for the operator to not sit upon a regular and permanent
seat attached to the vehicle. (1972 Code, § 9-129)
15-125. Following too closely. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a
motor vehicle to follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonably prudent,
having due regard for the speed of the vehicles and the traffic upon and the
condition of the street. (1972 Code, § 9-130)
15-126. Pedestrians soliciting rides, etc. prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway or street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the occupant of any vehicle. (1972 Code, § 9-131)
15-127. Compliance with financial responsibility law required.
(1) Every vehicle operated within the corporate limits must be in
compliance with the financial responsibility law.
(2) At the time the driver of a motor vehicle is charged with any
moving violation under title 55, chapters 8 and 10, parts 1-5, chapter 50; any
provision in this title of this municipal code; or at the time of an accident for
which notice is required under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-106, the
officer shall request evidence of financial responsibility as required by this
section. In case of an accident for which notice is required under Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 55-10-106, the officer shall request such evidence from all
drivers involved in the accident, without regard to apparent or actual fault.
(3) For the purposes of this section, "financial responsibility" means:
(a) Documentation, such as the declaration page of an insurance
policy, and insurance binder, or an insurance card from an insurance
company authorized to business in Tennessee, stating that a policy of
insurance meeting the requirements of the Tennessee Financial
Responsibility Law of 1977, compiled in Tennessee Code Annotated,
chapter 12, title 55, has been issued;
(b) A certificate, valid for one (1) year, issued by the
commissioner of safety, stating that a cash deposit or bond in the amount
required by the Tennessee Financial Responsibility Law of 1977, compiled
in Tennessee Code Annotated, chapter 12, title 55, has been paid or filed
Change 5, July 11, 2011 15-8
with the commissioner, or has qualified as a self-insurer under Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 55-12-111; or
(c) The motor vehicle being operated at the time of the violation
was owned by a carrier subject to the jurisdiction of the department of
safety or the interstate commerce commission, or was owned by the
United States, the State of Tennessee or any political subdivision thereof,
and that such motor vehicle was being operated with the owner's consent.
(4) Civil offense. It is a civil offense to fail to provide evidence of
financial responsibility pursuant to this section. Any violation of this section is
punishable by a civil penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50). The civil penalty
prescribed by this section shall be in addition to any other penalty prescribed by
the laws of this state or by the city's municipal code of ordinances.
(5) Evidence of compliance after violation. On or before the court date,
the person charged with a violation of this section may submit evidence of
compliance with this section in effect at the time of the violation. If the court is
satisfied that compliance was in effect at the time of the violation, the charge of
failure to provide evidence of financial responsibility may be dismissed. (as
added by Ord. #JT2002-1, April 2002)
15-128. Mini trucks, four wheel off-road vehicles, etc., prohibited.
Mini trucks, four (4) wheel off-road vehicles, and golf carts are hereby prohibited
from operating on the streets and highways of the City of Camden being so far
as they may be used for the conveyance of an operator or passenger on a regular
basis or as a substitute for a regularly registered and licensed automobile or
other vehicle which is authorized to be licensed and registered under the general
law of the State of Tennessee. (as added by Ord. #AW2011-02, July 2011)
15-9
1Municipal code reference
Operation of other vehicle upon the approach of emergency vehicles:
§ 15-501.
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
SECTION
15-201. Authorized emergency vehicles defined.
15-202. Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-203. Following emergency vehicles.
15-204. Running over fire hoses, etc.
15-201. Authorized emergency vehicles defined. Authorized
emergency vehicles shall be fire department vehicles, police vehicles, and such
ambulances and other emergency vehicles as are designated by the chief of
police. (1972 Code, § 9-102)
15-202. Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.1 (1) The
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency
call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when
responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the
privileges set forth in this section, subject to the conditions herein stated.
(2) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may park or stand,
irrespective of the provisions of this title; proceed past a red or stop signal or
stop sign, but only after slowing down to ascertain that the intersection is clear;
exceed the maximum speed limit and disregard regulations governing direction
of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger
life or property.
(3) The exemptions herein granted for an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion
sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle and when the vehicle
is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle
need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the
vehicle.
(4) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1972 Code,
§ 9-103)
15-10
15-203. Following emergency vehicles. No driver of any vehicle shall
follow any authorized emergency vehicle apparently travelling in response to an
emergency call closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive or park such vehicle
within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1972 Code, § 9-104)
15-204. Running over fire hoses, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive over any hose lines or other equipment of the fire department
except in obedience to the direction of a fireman or policeman. (1972 Code,
§ 9-105)
15-11
CHAPTER 3
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION
15-301. In general.
15-302. At intersections.
15-303. In school zones and near playgrounds.
15-304. In congested areas.
15-305. Speed limit increase by resolution.
15-301. In general. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
drive a motor vehicle upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of
thirty (30) miles per hour except where official signs have been posted indicating
other speed limits, in which cases the posted speed limit shall apply. (1972
Code, § 9-201)
15-302. At intersections. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or drive a motor vehicle through any intersection at a rate of speed in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour unless such person is driving on a street regulated by
traffic-control signals or signs which require traffic to stop or yield on the
intersecting streets. (1972 Code, § 9-202)
15-303. In school zones and near playgrounds. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle through any school zone or
near any playground at a rate of speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour
when official signs indicating such speed limit have been posted by authority of
the municipality. This section shall not apply at times when children are not in
the vicinity of a school and such posted signs have been covered by direction of
the chief of police. (1972 Code, § 9-203)
15-304. In congested areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate or drive a motor vehicle through any congested area at a rate of speed
in excess of any posted speed limit when such speed limit has been posted by
authority of the municipality. (1972 Code, § 9-204)
15-305. Speed limit increase by resolution. The established speed
limit of thirty (30) miles per hour may be increased by resolution of the council
to a speed of forty-five (45) miles per hour where official signs have been posted
authorizing such speed. (1972 Code, § 9-205)
15-12
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-143.
CHAPTER 4
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION
15-401. Generally.
15-402. Right turns.
15-403. Left turns on two-way roadways.
15-404. Left turns on other than two-way roadways.
15-405. U-turns.
15-401. Generally. No person operating a motor vehicle shall make any
turning movement which might affect any pedestrian or the operation of any
other vehicle without first ascertaining that such movement can be made in
safety and signaling his intention in accordance with the requirements of the
state law.1 (1972 Code, § 9-301)
15-402. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right
turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
roadway. (1972 Code, § 9-302)
15-403. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the
right of the intersection of the center lines of the two roadways. (1972 Code,
§ 9-303)
15-404. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any
intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the
roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection
shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available
to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly
as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such
direction upon the roadway being entered. (1972 Code, § 9-304)
15-405. U-turns. U-turns are prohibited. (1972 Code, § 9-305)
15-13
1Municipal code reference
Special privileges of emergency vehicles: title 15, chapter 2.
CHAPTER 5
STOPPING AND YIELDING
SECTION
15-501. Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-502. When emerging from alleys, etc.
15-503. To prevent obstructing an intersection.
15-504. At railroad crossings.
15-505. At "stop" signs.
15-506. At "yield" signs.
15-507. At traffic-control signals generally.
15-508. At flashing traffic-control signals.
15-509. At pedestrian control signals.
15-510. Stops to be signaled.
15-511. Traffic signs must be in place and legible.
15-501. Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles.1 Upon
the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and/or visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state,
or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only,
the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive to a position parallel
to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear
of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer. (1972 Code, § 9-401)
15-502. When emerging from alleys, etc. The drivers of all vehicles
emerging from alleys, parking lots, driveways, or buildings shall stop such
vehicles immediately prior to driving onto any sidewalk or street. They shall not
proceed to drive onto the sidewalk or street until they can safely do so without
colliding or interfering with approaching pedestrians or vehicles. (1972 Code,
§ 9-402)
15-503. To prevent obstructing an intersection. No driver shall
enter any intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of such intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he
is operating without obstructing the passage of traffic in or on the intersecting
street or crosswalk. This provision shall be effective notwithstanding any
traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (1972 Code, § 9-403)
15-14
15-504. At railroad crossings. Any driver of a vehicle approaching a
railroad grade crossing shall stop within not less than fifteen (15) feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed further while any of the
following conditions exist:
(1) A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the approach of a railroad train.
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman signals the
approach of a railroad train.
(3) A railroad train is approaching within approximately fifteen
hundred (1500) feet of the highway crossing and is emitting an audible signal
indicating its approach.
(4) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to the crossing. (1972 Code, § 9-404)
15-505. At "stop" signs. The driver of a vehicle facing a "stop" sign shall
bring his vehicle to a complete stop immediately before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then immediately
before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until he can proceed
through the intersection in safety. (1972 Code, § 9-405)
15-506. At "yield" signs. The drivers of all vehicles shall yield the right
of way to approaching vehicles before proceeding at all places where "yield"
signs have been posted. (1972 Code, § 9-406)
15-507. At traffic-control signals generally. Traffic-control signals
exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored
lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, shall show the following colors
only and shall apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green alone, or "Go":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits such
turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Steady yellow alone, or "Caution":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the
red or "Stop" signal is exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
15-15
(3) Steady red alone, or "Stop":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go"
is shown alone.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(4) Steady red with green arrow:
(a) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk
and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(5) In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section
shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have
no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
such sign or marking the stop shall be made a vehicle length short of the signal.
(1972 Code, § 9-407)
15-508. At flashing traffic-control signals. (1) Whenever an
illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal placed
or erected in the municipality it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows:
(a) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated
with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked,
or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed
shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(b) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(2) This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct
of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
the rules set forth in § 15-504 of this code. (1972 Code, § 9-408)
15-509. At pedestrian control signals. Wherever special pedestrian
control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't Walk" have been
placed or erected by the municipality, such signals shall apply as follows:
(1) "Walk." Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
15-16
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-143.
(2) "Wait or Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk
or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. (1972 Code, § 9-409)
15-510. Stops to be signaled. No person operating a motor vehicle
shall stop such vehicle, whether in obedience to a traffic sign or signal or
otherwise, without first signaling his intention in accordance with the
requirements of the state law,1 except in an emergency. (1972 Code, § 9-410)
15-511. Traffic signs must be in place and legible. No provision of
this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforceable against an alleged
violator, if at the time and place of the alleged violation the sign herein required
is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinary
observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are
required, such section shall be effective without signs being erected to give
notice. (1972 Code, § 9-411)
15-17
CHAPTER 6
PARKING
SECTION
15-601. Generally.
15-602. Angle parking.
15-603. Occupancy of more than one space.
15-604. Where prohibited.
15-605. Loading and unloading zones.
15-606. Regulation by parking meters.
15-607. Lawful parking in parking meter spaces.
15-608. Unlawful parking in parking meter spaces.
15-609. Unlawful to occupy more than one parking meter space.
15-610. Unlawful to deface or tamper with meters.
15-611. Unlawful to deposit slugs in meters.
15-612. Presumption with respect to illegal parking.
15-601. Generally. No person shall leave any motor vehicle unattended
on any street without first setting the brakes thereon, stopping the motor,
removing the ignition key, and turning the front wheels of such vehicle toward
the nearest curb or gutter of the street.
Except as hereinafter provided, every vehicle parked upon a street within
this municipality shall be so parked that its right wheels are approximately
parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the right edge or curb of the street.
On one-way streets where the municipality has not placed signs prohibiting the
same, vehicles may be permitted to park on the left side of the street, and in
such cases the left wheels shall be required to be within eighteen (18) inches of
the left edge or curb of the street.
Notwithstanding anything else in this code to the contrary, no person
shall park or leave a vehicle parked on any public street or alley within the fire
limits on any public street or alley for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive
hours without the prior approval of the chief of police.
Furthermore, no person shall wash, grease, or work on any vehicle, except
to make repairs necessitated by an emergency, while such vehicle is parked on
a public street. (1972 Code, § 9-501)
15-602. Angle parking. On those streets which have been signed or
marked by the municipality for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle other than at the angle indicated by such signs or markings. No person
shall angle park any vehicle which has a trailer attached thereto or which has
a length in excess of twenty-four (24) feet. (1972 Code, § 9-502)
15-18
1Municipal code reference
Impoundment of vehicle: § 15-704.
15-603. Occupancy of more than one space. No person shall park a
vehicle in any designated parking space so that any part of such vehicle occupies
more than one such space or protrudes beyond the official markings on the
street or curb designating such space unless the vehicle is too large to be parked
within a single designated space. (1972 Code, § 9-503)
15-604. Where prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle in violation
of any sign placed or erected by the municipality, nor:
(1) On a sidewalk.
(2) In front of any public or private driveway, or in or on any private
way or place where the motoring public is invited, in such manner as to impede,
block or unreasonably delay the free ingress or egress of motor traffic.
(3) Within an intersection or within fifteen (15) feet thereof.
(4) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.
(5) Within a pedestrian crosswalk.
(6) Within fifty (50) feet of a railroad crossing.
(7) On any street or public place so as to hinder the fire department
in the execution of its duties, nor within twenty (20) feet of the driveway
entrance to any fire station, nor within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance on
the opposite side of the street. The chief of the fire department is authorized to
have any vehicle in violation of this provision towed away and held by the
municipality at the expense of the owner.1
(8) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
other traffic would be obstructed.
(9) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
(10) Upon any bridge.
(11) Alongside any curb painted yellow or red by the municipality.
(12) On a merchants parking lot after business hours, provided the
merchant has a letter on file with the police department prohibiting parking
after posted business hours. (1972 Code, § 9-504, modified)
15-605. Loading and unloading zones. No person shall park a vehicle
for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers or merchandise in any place marked by the
municipality as a loading and unloading zone. (1972 Code, § 9-505)
15-606. Regulation by parking meters. In the absence of an official
sign to the contrary which has been installed by the municipality, between the
hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M., on all days except Sundays and holidays
15-19
declared by the council, parking shall be regulated by parking meters where the
same have been installed by the municipality. The presumption shall be that
all installed parking meters were lawfully installed by the municipality. (1972
Code, § 9-506)
15-607. Lawful parking in parking meter spaces. Any parking space
regulated by a parking meter may be lawfully occupied by a vehicle only after
a proper coin has been deposited in the parking meter and the said meter has
been activated or placed in operation in accordance with the instructions printed
thereon. (1972 Code, § 9-507)
15-608. Unlawful parking in parking meter spaces. It shall be
unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park or allow his vehicle to
be parked in a parking space regulated by a parking meter for more than the
maximum period of time which can be purchased at one time. Insertion of
additional coin or coins in the meter to purchase additional time is unlawful.
No owner or operator of any vehicle shall park or allow his vehicle to be
parked in such a space when the parking meter therefor indicates no parking
time allowed, whether such indication is the result of a failure to deposit a coin
or to operate the lever or other actuating device on the meter, or the result of the
automatic operation of the meter following the expiration of the lawful parking
time subsequent to depositing a coin therein at the time the vehicle was parked.
(1972 Code, § 9-508)
15-609. Unlawful to occupy more than one parking meter space.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park or allow his
vehicle to be parked across any line or marking designating a parking meter
space or otherwise so that such vehicle is not entirely within the designated
parking meter space; provided, however, that vehicles which are too large to
park within one space may be permitted to occupy two adjoining spaces provided
proper coins are placed in both meters. (1972 Code, § 9-509)
15-610. Unlawful to deface or tamper with meters. It shall be
unlawful for any unauthorized person to open, deface, tamper with, willfully
break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. (1972 Code,
§ 9-510)
15-611. Unlawful to deposit slugs in meters. It shall be unlawful for
any person to deposit in a parking meter any slug or other substitute for a coin
of the United States.
15-612. Presumption with respect to illegal parking. When any
unoccupied vehicle is found parked in violation of any provision of this chapter,
15-20
there shall be a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle
is responsible for such illegal parking. (1972 Code, § 9-512)
15-21
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-63-101, et seq.
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
15-701. Issuance of traffic citations.
15-702. Failure to obey citation.
15-703. Illegal parking.
15-704. Impoundment of vehicles.
15-705. Parking in restricted areas.
15-706. Violation and penalty.
15-701. Issuance of traffic citations.1 When a police officer halts a
traffic violator other than for the purpose of giving a warning, and does not take
such person into custody under arrest, he shall issue a written citation to him
containing the following information:
(1) The violator's name and address.
(2) The operator's driving license number.
(3) The license number of the motor vehicle involved.
(4) Specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven
and the speed limit in the area.
(5) The date that the operator is cited to appear in city court.
(6) Receive a written promise of the alleged violator to answer as
specified in the citation.
It shall be unlawful for any alleged violator to give false information as
to his name or address. (1972 Code, § 9-601)
15-702. Failure to obey citation. It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate his written promise to appear in court after giving said promise to an
officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the
charge for which the citation was originally issued. (1972 Code, § 9-602)
15-703. Illegal parking. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver
is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this
code, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its license number and may take
any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and
shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a citation for the driver and/or owner
to answer for the violation within ten (10) days during the hours and at a place
specified in the citation. (1972 Code, § 9-603, modified)
15-22
15-704. Impoundment of vehicles. Members of the police department
are hereby authorized, when reasonably necessary to prevent obstruction of
traffic, to remove from the streets and impound any vehicle whose operator is
arrested or any vehicle which is illegally parked, abandoned, or otherwise
parked so as to constitute an obstruction or hazard to normal traffic. Any
vehicle left parked on any street or alley for more than seventy-two (72)
consecutive hours without permission from the chief of police shall be presumed
to have been abandoned if the owner cannot be located after a reasonable
investigation. Such an impounded vehicle shall be stored until the owner claims
it, gives satisfactory evidence of ownership and pays all applicable fines and
costs. The fee for impounding a vehicle shall be five dollars ($5.00) and the
storage cost shall be one dollar ($1.00) per day shall also be charged. (1972
Code, § 9-604)
15-705. Parking in restricted areas. It shall be unlawful for any
vehicle, other than emergency vehicles, to be parked in an area designated as
a restricted area. Restricted areas include areas designated for emergency
vehicles, i.e. ambulances, fire fighting equipment, police vehicles, and any other
type of emergency vehicles. Violations of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 or more than
$25.00. (Ord. #MPW-5, May 1992)
15-706. Violation and penalty. Any violation of this title shall be a
civil offense punishable as follows:
(1) Traffic citations. Traffic citations shall be punishable by a civil
penalty up to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each separate offense.
(2) Parking citations. (a) Parking meter. If the offense is a parking
meter violation, the offender may, within ten (10) days, have the charge
against him disposed of by paying to the city recorder a fine of one dollar
($1.00) provided he waives his right to a judicial hearing. If he appears
and waives his right to a judicial hearing after ten (10) days his fine shall
be three dollars ($3.00).
(b) Other parking violations. For other parking violations
except as provided in § 15-705, the offense is punishable by a fine of not
less than $10.00 or more than $25.00. (1972 Code, § 9-603, modified)
Change 2, June 14, 2004 16-1
1Municipal code reference
Related motor vehicle and traffic regulations: title 15.
TITLE 16
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS, ETC1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
16-101. Obstructing streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-102. Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated.
16-103. Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited.
16-104. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted.
16-105. Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted.
16-106. Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-107. Littering streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-108. Obstruction of drainage ditches.
16-109. Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc.
16-110. Parades, etc., regulated.
16-111. Operation of trains at crossings regulated.
16-112. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks prohibited.
16-113. Fires in streets, etc.
16-114. Skating on sidewalks and pavement.
16-115. Prohibiting the washing of automobiles on the streets.
16-116. Repairing of motor vehicles on streets.
16-117. Breaking or destroying trees.
16-118. Entertainment on streets prohibited without permit.
16-119. Accumulation of ice and snow on sidewalks.
16-120. Basketball goals alongside or within public rights-of-way.
16-101. Obstructing streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. No
person shall use or occupy any portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk, or
right of way for the purpose of storing, selling, or exhibiting any goods, wares,
merchandise, or materials. (1972 Code, § 12-201)
16-2
1Municipal code reference
Building code: title 12, chapter 1.
16-102. Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated. It shall be
unlawful for any property owner or occupant to allow any limbs of trees on his
property to project out over any street, alley, or sidewalk at a height of less than
fourteen (14) feet. (1972 Code, § 12-202)
16-103. Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to have or maintain on
his property any tree, hedge, billboard, or other obstruction which prevents
persons driving vehicles on public streets or alleys from obtaining a clear view
of traffic when approaching an intersection. (1972 Code, § 12-203)
16-104. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted. Signs,
awnings, or other structures which project over any street or other public way
shall be erected subject to the requirements of the building code.1 (1972 Code,
§ 12-204)
16-105. Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted. It
shall be unlawful for any person to place or have placed any banner or sign
across any public street or alley except when expressly authorized by the
council. (1972 Code, § 12-205)
16-106. Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys, or sidewalks
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property
to allow any gate or door to swing open upon or over any street, alley, or
sidewalk except when required by statute. (1972 Code, § 12-206)
16-107. Littering streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person to litter, place, throw, track, or allow to fall on any
street, alley, or sidewalk any refuse, glass, tacks, mud, or other objects or
materials which are unsightly or which obstruct or tend to limit or interfere
with the use of such public ways and places for their intended purposes. (1972
Code, § 12-207)
16-108. Obstruction of drainage ditches. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit or cause the obstruction of any drainage ditch in any public
right of way. (1972 Code, § 12-208)
16-109. Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc. The
occupants of property abutting on a sidewalk are required to keep the sidewalk
clean. Also, immediately after a snow or sleet, such occupants are required to
16-3
remove all accumulated snow and ice from the abutting sidewalk. (1972 Code,
§ 12-209)
16-110. Parades, etc., regulated. It shall be unlawful for any club,
organization, or similar group to hold any meeting, parade, demonstration, or
exhibition on the public streets without some responsible representative first
securing a permit from the recorder. No permit shall be issued by the recorder
unless such activity will not unreasonably interfere with traffic and unless such
representative shall agree to see to the immediate cleaning up of all litter which
shall be left on the streets as a result of the activity. Furthermore, it shall be
unlawful for any person obtaining such a permit to fail to carry out his
agreement to immediately clean up the resulting litter. (1972 Code, § 12-210)
16-111. Operation of trains at crossings regulated. No person shall
operate any railroad train across any street or alley without giving a warning
of its approach as required by state law. It shall be unlawful to stop a railroad
train so as to block or obstruct any street or alley for a period of more than five
(5) consecutive minutes. (1972 Code, § 12-211, modified)
16-112. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to ride, lead, or tie any animal, or ride, push, pull, or
place any vehicle across or upon any sidewalk in such manner as to
unreasonably interfere with or inconvenience pedestrians using the sidewalk.
It shall also be unlawful for any person knowingly to allow any minor under his
control to violate this section. (1972 Code, § 12-212)
16-113. Fires in streets, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to set
or contribute to any fire in any public street, alley, or sidewalk. (1972 Code,
§ 12-213)
16-114. Skating on sidewalks and pavement. It shall be unlawful to
use roller skates on the sidewalks or pavements of the City of Camden. (1972
Code, § 12-214)
16-115. Prohibiting the washing of automobiles on the streets. It
shall be unlawful for any corporation, partnership, or person to use or cause to
be used the streets and/or sidewalks of the City of Camden for the purpose of
washing automobiles. (1972 Code, § 12-215)
16-116. Repairing of motor vehicles on streets. It shall be unlawful,
except in case of emergency, to repair or attempt to repair any motor vehicle
upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the city. (1972 Code, § 12-216)
Change 2, June 14, 2004 16-4
16-117. Breaking or destroying trees. It shall be unlawful for any
person to willfully break, pull down, injure or destroy any tree which is now or
may be planted within the limits of the town; such person so offending shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor; providing, that nothing in this section shall be so
construed as to prevent the city from removing any shrub, hedge, tree, fence, or
wall which it may deem so situated as to obstruct any street or sidewalk, or to
prevent any owner of a lot from cutting down any tree on his lot. (1972 Code,
§ 12-217)
16-118. Entertainment on streets prohibited without permit. It
shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct any show or
entertainment or any public gathering upon any street of the city without first
having obtained permission of the recorder so to do. (1972 Code, § 12-218)
16-119. Accumulation of ice and snow on sidewalk. It shall be
unlawful for any owner or proprietor of any dwelling house, business house, or
other house abutting on any public street within the city to allow snow or ice to
accumulate for more than one (1) day on the sidewalk in front of his premises.
(1972 Code, § 12-219)
16-120. Basketball goals alongside or within public rights-of-way.
No portable or fixed basketball goal shall be placed, erected or maintained on or
alongside the right-of-way of any public street within the municipal limits of the
City of Camden so as to allow a person or persons to play within the street. The
placement of any basketball goal within a public right-of-way or the presence of
persons within a public street playing basketball on such a goal shall be a
violation of this section.
Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars
($50). (as added by Ord. #JT2004-4, June 2004)
16-5
1State law reference
This chapter was patterned substantially after the ordinance upheld
by the Tennessee Supreme Court in the case of City of Paris,
Tennessee v. Paris-Henry County Public Utility District, 207 Tenn.
388, 340 S.W.2d 885 (1960).
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS1
SECTION
16-201. Permit required.
16-202. Applications.
16-203. Fee.
16-204. Deposit or bond.
16-205. Manner of excavating--barricades and lights--temporary sidewalks.
16-206. Restoration of streets, etc.
16-207. Insurance.
16-208. Time limits.
16-209. Supervision.
16-210. Driveway curb cuts.
16-201. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, association, or others, to make any excavation in any street, alley,
or public place, or to tunnel under any street, alley, or public place without
having first obtained a permit as herein required, and without complying with
the provisions of this chapter; and it shall also be unlawful to violate, or vary
from, the terms of any such permit; provided, however, any person maintaining
pipes, lines, or other underground facilities in or under the surface of any street
may proceed with an opening without a permit when emergency circumstances
demand the work to be done immediately and a permit cannot reasonably and
practicably be obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter apply for a
permit on the first regular business day on which the office of the recorder is
open for business, and said permit shall be retroactive to the date when the
work was begun. (1972 Code, § 12-101)
16-202. Applications. Applications for such permits shall be made to
the recorder, or such person as he may designate to receive such applications,
and shall state thereon the location of the intended cut, excavation or tunnel,
the size thereof, the purpose thereof, the person, firm, corporation, association,
or others doing the actual excavating, the name of the person, firm, corporation,
association, or others for whom the work is being done, and shall contain an
agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating
16-6
to the work to be done. Such application shall be rejected or approved by the
recorder within twenty-four (24) hours of its filing. (1972 Code, § 12-102)
16-203. Fee. The fee for such permits shall be set from time to time by
the board of mayor and aldermen by resolution. (1972 Code, § 12-103, modified)
16-204. Deposit or bond. No such permit shall be issued unless and
until the applicant therefor has deposited with the recorder a cash deposit. The
deposit shall be in the sum provided by resolution of the board of mayor and
aldermen. Where the amount of the deposit is clearly inadequate to cover the
cost of restoration, the recorder may increase the amount of the deposit to an
amount considered by him to be reasonably adequate to cover the said cost.
From this deposit shall be deducted the expense to the municipality of relaying
the surface of the ground or pavement, and of making the refill if this is done
by the municipality or at its expense. The balance shall be returned to the
applicant without interest after the tunnel or excavation is completely refilled
and the surface or pavement is restored.
In lieu of a deposit the applicant may deposit with the recorder a surety
bond in such form and amount as the recorder shall deem adequate to cover the
costs to the municipality if the applicant fails to make proper restoration. (1972
Code, § 12-104, modified)
16-205. Manner of excavating--barricades and lights--temporary
sidewalks. Any person, firm, corporation, association, or others making any
excavation or tunnel shall do so according to the terms and conditions of the
application and permit authorizing the work to be done. Sufficient and proper
barricades and lights shall be maintained to protect persons and property from
injury by or because of the excavation being made. If any sidewalk is blocked
by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed and provided
which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. (1972 Code, § 12-105)
16-206. Restoration of streets, etc. Any person, firm, corporation,
association, or others making any excavation or tunnel in or under any street,
alley, or public place in this municipality shall restore said street, alley, or
public place to its original condition except for the surfacing, which shall be done
by the municipality, but shall be paid for by such person, firm, corporation,
association, or others promptly upon the completion of the work for which the
excavation or tunnel was made. In case of unreasonable delay in restoring the
street, alley, or public place, the recorder shall give notice to the person, firm,
corporation, association, or others that unless the excavation or tunnel is refilled
properly within a specified reasonable period of time, the municipality will do
the work and charge the expense of doing the same to such person, firm,
corporation, association, or others. If within the specified time the conditions
of the above notice have not been complied with, the work shall be done by the
16-7
municipality, an accurate account of the expense involved shall be kept, and the
total cost shall be charged to the person, firm, corporation, association, or others
who made the excavation or tunnel. (1972 Code, § 12-106)
16-207. Insurance. In addition to making the deposit or giving the bond
hereinbefore required to insure that proper restoration is made, each person
applying for an excavation permit shall file a certificate of insurance indicating
that he is insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as
against claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the
performance of the work, whether such performance be by himself, his
subcontractor, or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance
shall cover collapse, explosive hazards, and underground work by equipment on
the street, and shall include protection against liability arising from completed
operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the recorder in
accordance with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, that the
liability insurance for bodily injury shall not be less than $100,000 for each
person and $300,000 for each accident, and for property damages not less than
$25,000 for any one (1) accident, and a $75,000 aggregate. (1972 Code, § 12-107)
16-208. Time limits. Each application for a permit shall state the
length of time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work
until the restoration of the surface of the ground or pavement, or until the refill
is made ready for the pavement to be put on by the municipality if the
municipality restores such surface pavement. It shall be unlawful to fail to
comply with this time limitation unless permission for an extension of time is
granted by the recorder. (1972 Code, § 12-108)
16-209. Supervision. The chief of police shall from time to time inspect
all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley, or
other public place in the municipality and see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be given to him at least ten (10) hours
before the work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences. (1972
Code, § 12-109)
16-210. Driveway curb cuts. No one shall cut, build, or maintain a
driveway across a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the
recorder. Such a permit will not be issued when the contemplated driveway is
to be so located or constructed as to create an unreasonable hazard to pedestrian
and/or vehicular traffic. No driveway shall exceed twenty (20) feet in width at
its outer or street edge and when two (2) or more adjoining driveways are
provided for the same property the total width of the two way ingress and/or
egress drive shall not exceed fifty (50) feet, and no part of the driveway shall
extend into the street. (1972 Code, § 12-110)
17-1
1Municipal code reference
Property maintenance regulations: title 13.
TITLE 17
REFUSE AND TRASH DISPOSAL1
CHAPTER
1. REFUSE.
CHAPTER 1
REFUSE
SECTION
17-101. Refuse defined.
17-102. Premises to be kept clean.
17-103. Storage.
17-104. Disturbing containers.
17-105. Collection.
17-106. Collection vehicles.
17-107. Disposal.
17-101. Refuse defined. Refuse shall mean and include garbage,
rubbish, leaves, brush, and refuse as those terms are generally defined except
that dead animals and fowls, body wastes, hot ashes, rocks, concrete, bricks, and
similar materials are expressly excluded therefrom and shall not be stored in
refuse containers. (1972 Code, § 8-101)
17-102. Premises to be kept clean. All persons within the City of
Camden are required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary condition,
free from accumulations of refuse except when stored as provided in this
chapter. (1972 Code, § 8-102)
17-103. Storage. Each owner, occupant, or other responsible person
using or occupying any building or other premises within this municipality
where refuse accumulates or is likely to accumulate, shall provide and keep
covered an adequate number of refuse containers. The refuse containers shall
be strong, durable, and rodent and insect proof. They shall each have a capacity
of not less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty-two (32) gallons, except that
this maximum capacity shall not apply to larger containers which the
municipality handles mechanically. Furthermore, except for containers which
the municipality handles mechanically, the combined weight of any refuse
17-2
container and its contents shall not exceed thirty (30) pounds. No refuse shall
be placed in a refuse container until such refuse has been drained of all free
liquids and placed in garbage bags. (Ord. #GWO-7, Feb. 1994)
17-104. Disturbing containers. No unauthorized person shall uncover,
rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn over, or in any other manner disturb or use any refuse
container belonging to another. This section shall not be construed to prohibit
the use of public refuse containers for their intended purpose. (1972 Code,
§ 8-105)
17-105. Collection. All refuse accumulated within the corporate limits
shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of under the supervision of such officer
as the council shall designate. Collections shall be made regularly in accordance
with an announced schedule. (1972 Code, § 8-106)
17-106. Collection vehicles. The collection of refuse shall be by means
of vehicles with beds constructed of impervious materials which are easily
cleanable and so constructed that there will be no leakage of liquids draining
from the refuse onto the streets and alleys. Furthermore, all refuse collection
vehicles shall utilize closed beds or such coverings as will effectively prevent the
scattering of refuse over the streets or alleys. (1972 Code, § 8-107)
17-107. Disposal. The disposal of refuse in any quantity by any person
in any place, public or private, other than at the site or sites designated for
refuse disposal by the council is expressly prohibited.
The disposal of any type medical wastes thru the use of the city sanitation
collection system, either directly or indirectly is expressly prohibited.
Medical waste shall include but not be limited to the following:
Wastes generated by hospitalized patients who are isolated to protect
others from communicable diseases (see the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
Guidelines for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals, July, 1983 for definition of
diseases requiring such isolation).
Cultures and stocks of infectious agents, including specimen cultures
from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious
agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of
biologicals, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and
devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures.
Waste human blood and blood products such as serum, plasma, and other
blood components.
Pathological wastes (i.e., tissues, organs, body parts, and body fluids) that
are removed during surgery and autopsy.
All discarded sharps (e.g., hypodermic needles, syringes, pasteur pipettes,
broken glass, scalpel blades) used in patient care for which have come into
17-3
contact with infectious agents during use in medical, research, or industrial
laboratories.
Contaminated carcasses, body parts, and bedding of animals that were
intentionally exposed to pathogens in research, in the production of biologicals,
or in the in vivo testing of pharmaceuticals.
Wastes from patients known or not known to be infected with blood-borne
diseases.
Contaminated wastes from surgery and autopsy (such as soiled dressings,
sponges, drapes, lavage tubes, drainage sets, underpads, surgical gloves).
Wastes from medical, pathological, pharmaceutical, or other research,
commercial, or industrial laboratories that were in contact with infectious
agents (e.g., specimen containers, slides and cover slips, disposable sheets,
towels, gloves, aprons, and lab coats).
Discarded equipment and parts that were used in patient care, medical
and industrial laboratories, research, and in the production and testing of
certain pharmaceuticals and that may be contaminated with infectious agents.
(1972 Code, § 8-108, as amended by Ord. #GWO-27, July 1996)
Change 3, May 8, 2006 18-1
TITLE 18
WATER AND SEWERS1
CHAPTER
1. SEWAGE AND HUMAN EXCRETA DISPOSAL.
2. WATER AND SEWERS.
3. SEWER USE ORDINANCE.
4. CROSS CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES, ETC.
5. FATS, OILS, AND GREASE.
CHAPTER 1
SEWAGE AND HUMAN EXCRETA DISPOSAL2
SECTION
18-101. Definitions.
18-102. Places required to have sanitary disposal methods.
18-103. When a connection to the public sewer is required.
18-104. Repair and replacement of sewer outfall lines.
18-105. When a septic tank shall be used.
18-106. Registration and records of septic tank cleaners, etc.
18-107. Use of pit privy or other method of disposal.
18-108. Approval and permit required for septic tanks, privies, etc.
18-109. Owner to provide disposal facilities.
18-110. Occupant to maintain disposal facilities.
18-111. Only specified methods of disposal to be used.
18-112. Discharge into watercourses restricted.
18-113. Pollution of ground water prohibited.
18-114. Enforcement of chapter.
18-115. Carnivals, circuses, etc.
18-116. Violations.
18-101. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation of this chapter:
(1) "Accessible sewer." A public sanitary sewer located in a street or
alley abutting on the property in question or otherwise within two hundred (200)
1Municipal code references
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
Refuse disposal: title 17.
Waterworks and sewerage commission: title 2, chapter 4.
2Municipal code reference
Plumbing code: title 12, chapter 2.
18-2
feet of any boundary of said property measured along the shortest available
right-of-way;
(2) "Health officer." The health officer shall be any qualified person
appointed or named for such position by the council.
(3) "Human excreta." The bowel and kidney discharges of human
beings;
(4) "Sewage." All water-carried human and household wastes from
residences, buildings, or industrial establishments;
(5) "Approved septic tank system." A watertight covered receptacle of
monolithic concrete, either precast or cast in place, constructed according to
plans approved by the health officer. Such tanks shall have a capacity of not
less than 750 gallons and in the case of homes with more than two (2) bedrooms
the capacity of the tank shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the
Tennessee Department of Public Health as provided for in its 1958 bulletin
entitled "Recommended Construction of Septic Tanks and Disposal Fields for
Residential Users." A minimum liquid depth of four (4) feet should be provided
with a minimum depth of air space above the liquid of one (1) foot. The septic
tank dimensions should be such that the length from inlet to outlet is at least
twice but not more than three (3) times the width. The liquid depth should not
exceed five (5) feet. The discharge from the septic tank shall be disposed of in
such a manner that it may not create a nuisance on the surface of the ground or
pollute the underground water supply, and such disposal shall be in accordance
with recommendations of the health officer as determined by acceptable soil
percolation data;
(6) "Sanitary pit privy." A privy having a fly-tight floor and seat over
an excavation in earth, located and constructed in such a manner that flies and
animals will be excluded, surface water may not enter the pit, and danger of
pollution of the surface of the ground or the underground water supply will be
prevented;
(7) "Other approved method of sewage disposal." Any privy, chemical
toilet, or other toilet device (other than a sanitary sewer, septic tank, or sanitary
pit privy as described above) the type, location, and construction of which have
been approved by the health officer;
(8) "Watercourse." Any natural or artificial drain which conveys water
either continuously or intermittently. (1972 Code, § 8-201)
18-102. Places required to have sanitary disposal methods. Every
residence, building, or place where human beings reside, assemble, or are
employed within the corporate limits shall be required to have a sanitary
method for disposal of sewage and human excreta. (1972 Code, § 8-202)
18-103. When a connection to the public sewer is required.
Wherever an accessible sewer exists and water under pressure is available,
approved plumbing facilities shall be provided and the wastes from such
18-3
facilities shall be discharged through a connection to said sewer made in
compliance with the requirements of the official responsible for the public
sewerage system. On any lot or premise accessible to the sewer no other method
of sewage disposal shall be employed. (1972 Code, § 8-203)
18-104. Repair and replacement of sewer outfall lines. (1) Any
property owner in the City of Camden, Tennessee, who is presently connected
to the Camden Sewer System or who may hereinafter be connected to the City
of Camden Sewer System shall maintain sewer outfall lines in a safe and
sanitary condition free of leaks which may result in infiltration of the city sewer
system.
(2) Upon discovery of an existing leak in the sewer outfall lines of a
property owner, the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Camden shall
give written notice to the property owner requiring that such property owner
make immediate repairs to the sewer outfall line.
(3) Upon receipt of the notice, the property owner shall immediately
take steps to correct the condition of the outfall line. Should such property
owner fail to make the necessary repairs in accordance with the specifications
and requirements of the board of mayor and aldermen within a reasonable time,
then and in that event, the city shall make the necessary repairs and assess the
property owner for such repairs.
(4) In the event said property owner fails to make the repairs or to
allow the city to make said repairs as hereinabove set forth, or should the
property owner refuse to pay the assessment for the repairs if done by the city,
then and in that event, the property owner shall forfeit his right to all utility
services offered by the city including sewer and water services in addition to
being subject to a fine not to exceed $50.00 and costs of the cause. Each day that
the condition exists shall constitute a new and separate offense. (1972 Code,
§ 8-204)
18-105. When a septic tank shall be used. Wherever water carried
sewage facilities are installed and their use is permitted by the health officer,
and an accessible sewer does not exist, the wastes from such facilities shall be
discharged into an approved septic tank system.
No septic tank or other water-carried sewage disposal system except a
connection to a public sewer shall be installed without the approval of the health
officer or his duly appointed representative. The design, layout, and
construction of such systems shall be in accordance with specifications approved
by the health officer and the installation shall be under the general supervision
of the department of health. (1972 Code, § 8-205)
18-106. Registration and records of septic tank cleaners, etc.
Every person, firm, or corporation who operates equipment for the purpose of
removing digested sludge from septic tanks, cesspools, privies, and other sewage
18-4
disposal installations on private or public property must register with the health
officer and furnish such records of work done within the corporate limits as may
be deemed necessary by the health officer. (1972 Code, § 8-206)
18-107. Use of pit privy or other method of disposal. Wherever a
sanitary method of human excreta disposal is required under § 18-102 and
water-carried sewage facilities are not used, a sanitary pit privy or other
approved method of disposal shall be provided. (1972 Code, § 8-207)
18-108. Approval and permit required for septic tanks, privies,
etc. Any person, firm, or corporation proposing to construct a septic tank
system, privy, or other sewage disposal facility, requiring the approval of the
health officer under this chapter, shall before the initiation of construction
obtain the approval of the health officer for the design and location of the system
and secure a permit from the health officer for such system. (1972 Code,
§ 8-208)
18-109. Owner to provide disposal facilities. It shall be the duty of
the owner of any property upon which facilities for sanitary sewage or human
excreta disposal are required by § 18-102, or the agent of the owner to provide
such facilities. (1972 Code, § 8-209)
18-110. Occupant to maintain disposal facilities. It shall be the
duty of the occupant, tenant, lessee, or other person in charge to maintain the
facilities for sewage disposal in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and
no refuse or other material which may unduly fill up, clog, or otherwise interfere
with the operation of such facilities shall be deposited therein. (1972 Code,
§ 8-210)
18-111. Only specified methods of disposal to be used. No sewage
or human excreta shall be thrown out, deposited, buried, or otherwise disposed
of, except by a sanitary method of disposal as specified in this chapter. (1972
Code, § 8-211)
18-112. Discharge into watercourses restricted. No sewage or
excreta shall be discharged or deposited into any lake or watercourse except
under conditions specified by the health officer and specifically authorized by
the Tennessee Stream Pollution Control Board. (1972 Code, § 8-212)
18-113. Pollution of ground water prohibited. No sewage, effluent
from a septic tank, sewage treatment plant, or discharges from any plumbing
facility shall empty into any well, either abandoned or constructed for this
purpose, cistern, sinkhole, crevice, ditch, or other opening either natural or
18-5
artificial in any formation which may permit the pollution of ground water.
(1972 Code, § 8-213)
18-114. Enforcement of chapter. It shall be the duty of the health
officer to make an inspection of the methods of disposal of sewage and human
excreta as often as is considered necessary to insure full compliance with the
terms of this chapter. Written notification of any violation shall be given by the
health officer to the person or persons responsible for the correction of the
condition, and correction shall be made within forty-five (45) days after
notification. If the health officer shall advise any person that the method by
which human excreta and sewage is being disposed of constitutes an immediate
and serious menace to health such person shall at once take steps to remove the
menace, and failure to remove such menace immediately shall be punishable
under the general penalty clause for this code; but such person shall be allowed
the number of days herein provided within which to make permanent correction.
(1972 Code, § 8-214)
18-115. Carnivals, circuses, etc. Whenever carnivals, circuses, or
other transient groups of persons come within the corporate limits such groups
of transients shall provide a sanitary method for disposal of sewage and human
excreta. Failure of a carnival, circus, or other transient group to provide such
sanitary method of disposal and to make all reasonable changes and corrections
proposed by the health officer shall constitute a violation of this section. In
these cases the violator shall not be entitled to the notice of forty-five (45) days
provided for in the preceding section. (1972 Code, § 8-215)
18-116. Violations. Any person, persons, firm, association, or
corporation or agent thereof, who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable under the general penalty clause for this code. (1972 Code, § 8-216)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-6
CHAPTER 2
WATER AND SEWERS
SECTION
18-201. Application for services.
18-202. Connection charges for water.
18-203. Charges for connection to sewer main.
18-204. Rates for water services.
18-205. Rates for sewer services.
18-206. All water users to be charged.
18-207. Billing.
18-208. Meter reading formula.
18-209. Inoperative or inaccurate meters.
18-210. Connection cost to be paid by the owner.
18-211. Tampering with system prohibited.
18-212. Charges for disconnecting and reconnecting of service.
18-213. Resident owners required to use sewer facilities.
18-214. Waterworks and sewer inspector, appointment, duties, etc.
18-215. Supply and resale of water.
18-201. Application for services. Each person desiring to subscribe
for purchase of water or to tap into a sewer line shall be required to file a
written application with the recorder setting forth the location of the purchaser,
the date the proposed tap is to be made, and that it will be made by a qualified
person.1 Rules and regulations established by the waterworks and sewerage
commission shall be considered a part of the agreement between the user and
the municipality. All applications for such utility services shall be accompanied
by a deposit in an amount and under such terms established by the council from
time to time by resolution, as security for the prompt payment of all accounts.
(1972 Code, § 13-201, modified)
18-202. Connection charges for water. Any person or corporation
desiring to establish and/or connect to the city's water supply shall be required
to provide the city with the following information:
(1) A current State of Tennessee contractors license;
(2) Bonding and insurance documentation;
(3) All lines must be installed in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the State of Tennessee and the Benton County Highway
Department;
(4) The contractor performing the installation shall be required to
obtain an inspection by the city prior to connecting the line to the city's system;
1Municipal code reference
Plumbing code: § 12-201.
Change 6, January 14, 2013 18-7
(5) The contractor or owner of the line shall be responsible for its
maintenance for a period of one (1) year following the installation of the
waterline. (1972 Code, § 13-202, modified, as amended by Ord. #AW2007-06,
Dec. 2007)
18-203. Charges for connection to sewer main. Any person who
desires to subscribe for use of the municipal sewage system shall pay to the
recorder such tapping fees as the council shall establish from time to time by
resolution. (1972 Code, § 13-203, modified)
18-204. Rates for water services.1 The monthly rate for purchase of
water shall be furnished under such rate schedule as the municipality may from
time to time adopt by resolution, providing that no rate shall be set, for the sale
of water, which will impair or adversely affect the retirement of any bonds or
interest arising out of the financial obligation created by the construction of the
municipal waterworks system. (1972 Code, 13-204)
18-205. Rates for sewer services. The monthly rate for use of the
sewer system shall be such as may be established by the council by resolution
from time to time, providing that no rate shall be established, for the use of such
sewers, which will impair or adversely affect the retirement of any bonds or
interest arising out of the financial obligation created by the construction of the
municipal sewer system. (1972 Code, § 13-205)
18-206. All water users to be charged. No water service shall be
furnished or rendered free of charge to any person, firm or corporation. (1972
Code, § 13-206)
18-207. Billing. All bills for service rendered or furnished by the
consolidated system shall include the charges for both water and sewers where
the sewer charge applies. Each service shall be itemized but the charges shall
be paid as one bill.
Any bill for services that remains past due and payable after the 10th of
the month at which time the bill was due and payable, shall be paid by the 15th
of said month including penalty as established by the council from time to time
by resolution. Should it remain unpaid after that date, the city clerk recorder is
authorized to order such users' service disconnected. (1972 Code, § 13-207,
modified, as amended by Ord. #AW2007-05, Dec. 2007)
18-208. Meter reading formula. All meters shall be read monthly to
the nearest one hundred (100) gallons. (1972 Code, § 13-208)
1Ordinances affecting rates for water and services are available in the
office of the city recorder.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-8
18-209. Inoperative or inaccurate meters. Any meter found to be
inoperative or inaccurate will be replaced or repaired as soon as possible. The
charge for water used during such period shall be the average of the last three
monthly bills. (1972 Code, § 13-209)
18-210. Connection cost to be paid by owner. Cost of completed
service connections which include installing service lines, meters, meter boxes,
yoke and other fittings, including pavement repair and other restorative work
shall be paid by the owner. (1972 Code, § 13-210)
18-211. Tampering with system prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to tamper with or change any water or sewerage system
without first obtaining permission from the mayor. This provision particularly
applies in all cases where service has been disconnected because of non-payment
of a bill for services. (1972 Code, § 13-211)
18-212. Charges for disconnecting and reconnecting of service.
When water services are disconnected as a result of any user's failure to pay
charges for service, a fee shall be assessed against such user. At such time when
services are reconnected a fee shall be assessed against the user for
reconnection. Both fees, as the council shall establish from time to time by
resolution, shall be paid by the user before service will be continued. (1972
Code, § 13-212, modified)
18-213. Resident owners required to use sewer facilities. Each
property owner of the municipality shall be and is hereby required to connect
and use the sewer facilities where such facilities are available. (1972 Code,
§ 13-213)
18-214. Waterworks and sewer inspector, appointment, duties,
etc. The waterworks and sewer inspector shall be appointed by the council and
shall serve during their pleasure. He shall be required to be present and
supervise the tapping or any water and sewer main. No completed water or
sewer line shall be covered until the waterworks and sewer inspector has made
an inspection and approved or disapproved its installation. (1972 Code,
§ 13-214)
18-215. Supply and resale of water. All water shall be supplied
within the city limits of the City of Camden, and no customer shall directly or
indirectly sell, sublet, assign, or otherwise dispose of water or any part thereof.
There shall be no private water wells established within the city limits of the
City of Camden with the exception of existing wells that were grandfathered in
prior to the adoption of this section. (as added by Ord. #AW2010-05, Dec. 2010)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-9
CHAPTER 3
SEWER USE ORDINANCE1
SECTION
18-301. Purpose and policy.
18-302. Definitions.
18-303. Use of public sewers.
18-304. Building sewers, connections, and permits.
18-305. Private domestic wastewater disposal.
18-306. Prohibitions and limitations.
18-307. Control of prohibited pollutants.
18-308. Wastewater discharge permits.
18-309. Inspections, monitoring, and entry.
18-310. Enforcement.
18-311. Wastewater volume determination.
18-312. Wastewater charges and fees.
18-313. Administration.
18-314. Validity.
18-301. Purpose and policy. The purpose of this ordinance is to set
uniform requirements for users of the city's wastewater collection system and
treatment works to enable the city to comply with the provisions of the Clean
Water Act and other applicable federal and state laws and regulations, and to
provide for the public health and welfare by regulating the quality of
wastewater discharged into the city's wastewater collection system and
treatment works. This ordinance establishes conditions for connection to the
sanitary sewer system. Certain acts which may be detrimental to the sewer
system are prohibited. This ordinance provides a means for determining
wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics, the setting of charges and
fees, and the issuance of permits to specific users. This ordinance also
establishes effluent limitations and other discharge criteria and provides that
certain users shall pretreat waste to prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the POTW which will interfere with the operation of the POTW, may cause
environmental damage, interfere with the use or disposal of sewage sludge, and
to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through
the treatment works into the receiving waters or the atmosphere, or otherwise
be incompatible with the treatment works; and to improve the opportunities to
recycle and reclaim the wastewater or sludge resulting from such treatment.
1The enforcement response plan for the City of Camden Pretreatment
Program is presented in its entirety as Appendix B.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-10
This ordinance provides measures for the enforcement of its provisions and
abatement of violations thereof.
This ordinance shall apply to the City of Camden and to persons outside
the city limits who are, by contract or agreement with the City of Camden, users
of the Camden POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent
of the Camden POTW shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this ordinance. (Ord. #EWJ-16, Dec. 1987, as replaced by Ord. #AW2011-04,
July 2011)
18-302. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following
phrases and words shall have the meaning defined below:
(1) "Act" or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251, et seq.
(2) "Approved pretreatment program." A program administered by a
POTW that meets the criteria established in chapter 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (40 CFR) 403.8 and 403.9, and which has been approved by the
regional administrator or state director in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11.
(3) "Best Management Practices" or "BMPs" means schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 403.5(a)(1)
and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal,
or drainage from raw materials storage.
(4) "Board." The elected Mayor and Board of Alderman for the City of
Camden.
(5) "BODs." Biochemical Oxygen Demand (five (5) day).
(6) "Building sewer." A sewer conveying wastewater from the
premises of a user to a community sanitary sewer.
(7) "Bypass." The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a treatment facility.
(8) "Categorical standards." National pretreatment standards
established by the EPA for specific industrial user Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) code categories.
(9) "Combined sewer." A sewer which has been designed to carry both
sanitary sewage and storm water runoff.
(10) "Composite sample." Sample consisting of several sample portions
collected during a specified period (usually twenty-four (24) hours) and
combined to form a representative sample. Composite samples can be collected
on a flow proportional or timed basis, depending on the nature of the discharge.
(11) "Conventional pollutant." Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD),
Total Suspended Solids (TSS), pH, fecal coliform, and oil and grease.
(12) "Direct discharge." The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Tennessee.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-11
(13) "Discharge monitoring report." A report submitted by an industrial
user to the superintendent containing information regarding the nature and
concentration of pollutants and flow characteristics of a discharge by the user
to the POTW.
(14) "Environmental Protection Agency" or "EPA." An agency of the
United States or its duly authorized representative.
(15) "Grab sample." A single sample of wastewater taken at neither set
time nor flow over a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
(16) "Grease interceptor." An interceptor whose rated flow is fifty (50)
gpm or less and is typically located inside the building.
(17) "Grease trap." An interceptor whose rated flow exceeds fifty (50)
gpm and is located outside the building.
(18) "Holding tank waste." Any waste from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks. This specifically includes wastewater from industrial users conveyed to
the POTW by any means other than by a standard sewer tie-on.
(19) "Indirect discharge." The discharge or the introduction of
pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act into
the POTW for treatment before direct discharge to state waters.
(20) "Industrial user." A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to
section 402 of the Act. For the purposes of this ordinance, an industrial user is
a source of non-domestic wastes from industrial processes.
(21) "Infiltration." Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer
system from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections, or manholes.
(22) "Inflow." Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system
from sources such as roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains,
fountain drains, drains from springs and swamp areas, manhole covers, cross
connections between storm and sanitary sewers, catch basins, storm water,
surface runoff, street wash water, and drainage.
(23) "Interceptor." A device designed and installed to separate and
retain for removal, by automatic or manual means, deleterious, hazardous or
undesirable matter from normal wastes, while permitting normal sewage or
waste to discharge into the drainage system by gravity.
(24) "Interference." A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or
exceeds the design capacity of the treatment works or the collection system.
(25) "Mass discharge rate." The weight of material discharged to
community sewer during a given time interval, normally given in pounds per
day.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-12
(26) "Medical wastes." Wastes capable of producing an infectious
disease because they contain pathogens of sufficient virulence and quantity that
exposure to the waste by a susceptible host could result in an infectious disease.
(27) "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)." The
program for issuing, conditioning, and denying permits for the discharge of
pollutants from point sources into navigable waters, the contiguous zone, and
the oceans pursuant to section 402 of the Act.
(28) "National pretreatment standard." Any regulations containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections
307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to industrial users. These terms also
include prohibited discharges promulgated in 40 CFR 403.5 and local limits
adopted as part of the city's pretreatment program.
(29) "New source." (a) Any building, structure, facility, or installation
from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under section 307(c) of the Federal Clean Water Act which will
be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated
in accordance with that section, provided that:
(i) The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
(ii) The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(iii) The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source should be
considered.
(b) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of parts (a)(ii) or (a)(iii) of this definition but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(c) Construction of a new source as defined under this
paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:
(i) Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous
onsite construction program:
(A) Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment; or
(B) Significant site preparation work including
cleaning, excavation, or removal of existing buildings,
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-13
structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
(ii) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the
purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used
in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
(30) "Normal wastewater." Effluent which contains constituents and
characteristics similar to effluent from a domestic premises, and specifically for
the purpose of this ordinance, does not contain these constituents in excess of
the following concentrations:
BOD5 300 mg/l
COD 600 mg/l
TKN 60 mg/l
NH3-N 30 mg/l
TSS 300 mg/l
Oil and grease 100 mg/l
(31) "Pass through." A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with other discharges, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NPDES permit.
(32) "Person." Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
government entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives,
agents, or assigns.
(33) "Pollution." The man made or man induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
(34) "Pretreatment." The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties
in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such
pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes, process change or by other means,
except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). Appropriate pretreatment technology
includes control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities, for
protection against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise
be incompatible with the POTW. Where wastewater from a regulated process
is mixed with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another
regulated process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an
adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-14
(35) "Pretreatment requirements." Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment other than a national pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.
(36) "Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW)." A treatment works
as defined by section 212 of the Act, which is owned in this instance by the City
of Camden. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to such
a treatment works and any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or liquid industrial waste, but
does not include pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected to a facility
providing treatment.
(37) "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
(38) "Significant industrial user." (a) All dischargers subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR
chapter I, subchapter N.
(b) All non-categorical dischargers that contribute a process
waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average
dry weather capacity of the Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP), or
more than an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of
process wastewater to the WWTP.
(c) All non-categorical dischargers that, in the opinion of the
superintendent, have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the
POTW's operations. This shall include but shall not be limited to all
centralized waste treatment discharges, all tank and drum cleaning
facilities, and all paint manufacturing facilities.
(d) All non-categorical discharges that contain more than one
hundred (100) pounds per day of combined BOD5 and TSS load above that
level found in normal wastewater, or that contain more than one
thousand (1,000) pounds in a month of combined BOD5 and TSS load
above that level found in normal wastewater.
(39) "Significant noncompliance." (a) Chronic violations of wastewater
discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six percent (66%)
or more of all of the measurements taken during a six (6) month
period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the
average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
(b) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those
in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements
taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of the
daily average maximum limit or average limit times the applicable TRC
(TRC =1.4 for BOD, TSS, and oil and grease; and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH).
(c) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily
maximum or longer term average) that the superintendent believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, or
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-15
pass through, including endangering the health of the POTW personnel
and the general public.
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health and welfare or to the environment and
has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge.
(e) Violation by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date
of a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance.
(f) Failure to provide required reports, such as baseline
monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules within thirty (30) days of the due date.
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(h) Any other violation or group of violations which the
superintendent considers to be significant.
(40) "Slug discharge." Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants, released in a discharge of such volume or strength as to cause
interference in the POTW or individual unit operations or cause adverse effects
upon its employees or the environment. No user shall be permitted to discharge
into the system until the need for slug control plans or procedures has been
reviewed by the superintendent.
(41) "Standard industrial classification." A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
(42) "Superintendent." The person designated by the City of Camden
to supervise the operation of the POTW and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this ordinance or his duly authorized representative.
(43) "Toxic pollutants." Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
listed as toxic in 40 CFR part 401 as promulgated by the administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Act.
(44) "User." Any person, firm, corporation, or government entity that
discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of wastewater into a community
sewer system.
(45) "Wastewater." The liquid and water borne industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or
permitted to enter the POTW.
(46) "Wastewater constituents and characteristics." The individual
chemical, physical, bacteriological, and radiological parameters, including
toxicity, volume, and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to classify,
define, or measure the contents, quality, quantity, and strength of wastewater.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-16
(47) "Waters of the State of Tennessee." Any water, surface or
underground, within the boundaries of the state.
The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings:
(a) BAT Best Available Technology
(b) BMP Best Management Practices
(c) BPT Best Practical Technology
(d) BOD5 Biochemical Oxygen Demand (five (5) day)
(e) CFR Code of Federal Regulations
(f) COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
(g) CWA Clean Water Act
(h) EPA Environmental Protection Agency
(i) BMP Best Management Practices
(j) MBAS Methylene Blue Activated Solids
(k) mg/l milligrams per liter
(l) NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System
(m) POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
(n) RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(o) SIC Standard Industrial Classification
(p) SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act
(q) TDEC Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation
(r) TSS Total Suspend Solids
(s) USC United States Code
(t) WWTP Wastewater Treatment Plant. (Ord. #EWJ-16,
Dec. 1987, as amended by #GWO-35, April
1997, and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-04, July
2011)
18-303. Use of public sewers. (1) Connection with sanitary sewer
required. (a) Sewer connection required. Every building having
plumbing fixtures installed and intended for human habitation,
occupancy, or use on premises abutting a street, alley, or easement in
which segment there is a sanitary sewer which is within five hundred feet
(500') of the building drain of the parcel shall be considered as being
served by the city's sanitary sewer system.
All buildings hereafter constructed on property which is served by
the POTW shall not be occupied until the connection has been made. The
owner or occupant of each lot or parcel of land which is now served or
which may hereafter be served by the POTW shall cease to use any other
method for the disposal of sewage except as provided for direct discharge
by the TDEC or by discharge to a properly functioning and approved
septic tank. Septic tanks shall not be used where sewers are available.
The superintendent shall make any decision as to the availability of
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-17
sewers. Not withstanding the above exceptions, all premises served by
the POTW are subject to sewer use charges as described in § 18-312 of
this ordinance.
(b) Unconnected sewer service lines prohibited. Except for
discharge to a properly functioning septic tank system or discharges
permitted by an NPDES permit issued by the TDEC, the discharge of
sewage into places other than the POTW is prohibited. Newly annexed
premises may continue to discharge to a properly functioning septic tank
system until such time that the system is no longer functioning properly.
At this time, the premises would be required to connect to the sanitary
sewer.
(c) Insufficient capacity, connection moratorium. In those parts
of the sewer system where no additional capacity exists and a sewer
moratorium has been established pursuant to orders of the TDEC, no new
or additional sewer connections shall be permitted. Permits issued prior
to the date of the moratorium may be completed. No new plumbing
permits shall be issued for new buildings in a moratorium area after the
effective date of the moratorium. A moratorium shall continue to be in
effect until capacity restriction has been corrected.
(2) Adequate and minimum fixtures. (a) Minimum number of
fixtures. A dwelling shall have at least one (1) commode, one (1) bathtub
or shower, one (1) lavatory, one (1) kitchen-type sink, and an adequate
source of hot water for each family unit to meet minimum basic
requirements for health, sanitation, and personal hygiene. All other
buildings, structures, or premises intended for human occupancy or use
shall be provided with adequate sanitary facilities as may be required by
any other law or regulation, but not less than one (1) commode and one
(1) hand washing lavatory.
(b) Adequate water for disposal of waste. It shall be unlawful
for any person in possession of premises into which a pipe or other
connection with the sanitary sewers and drains have been laid to permit
the building to remain without adequate fixtures attached to allow
sufficient quantity of water to be so applied as to properly carry off all
waste matter and keep the same unobstructed.
(3) Right to enter and inspect connection. The superintendent,
building inspector, or their representative shall have free and unobstructed
access to any part of the premises where house drains or other drains connected
with or draining into the sanitary sewer are laid for the purpose of examining
the construction, condition, and method of use of the same, upon cause of
reasonable suspicion that there may be inadequate facilities, the facilities
present may not be properly functioning, there is an improper discharge, or
upon a periodic systematic inspection of a particular drainage basin or other
large segment of the system through those facilities at any time of the day
between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. or at any other time in the event
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-18
of an emergency. If such entry is refused, the sewer service may be disconnected
upon reasonable notice and an opportunity for a hearing. The service may be
suspended immediately in the event of an emergency if there is reasonable cause
to suspect that the discharge will endanger the public health or the
environment, shall have the potential to disrupt the treatment process, or shall
damage the POTW's lines or facilities, and a hearing shall thereafter be afforded
the user as soon as possible.
(4) Demolished buildings. When a building is demolished, it shall be
the responsibility of the owner to have the sewer service line plugged securely
so that extraneous water will not enter the sewer. The owner of the premises or
his representative shall notify the superintendent of such a plug and allow same
to be inspected prior to covering any work. If such a line is to be reused, it must
first undergo inspection by the superintendent and be in conformity with the
existing standards.
(5) Temporary discharges. No person shall discharge any substance
directly into a manhole or other opening in a sanitary sewer other than through
an approved building sewer unless they have been issued a temporary permit
by the superintendent. A temporary permit may be issued at the discretion of
the superintendent to provide for discharges from portable facilities for festivals
or public shows or for other reasonable purposes. The superintendent shall
incorporate in such a temporary permit such conditions as he deems reasonably
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. The user
shall be required to pay reasonable charges and fees for the permit and service
in an amount not less than the charges and fees for normal discharges. Any
discharge other that though an approved building sewer or in accordance with
a permit issued by the superintendent shall be unlawful.
(6) Vehicle wash racks. All gasoline stations, garages, self-service
vehicle washers, and other public wash racks where vehicles are washed shall
install catch basins in conformity with the plumbing code in accordance with a
permit obtained from the building official. In the event any existing premises
does not have a catch basin and the sewer line servicing the facility stops up due
to grit or slime in the sewer lines, then the owner or operator of such premises
shall be required to modify these facilities to construct a catch basin as a
condition of continuing use of the system. If such users are industrial users as
defined in § 18-308 of this ordinance, a permit as specified therein will be
required.
(7) Grease, grit, oil, and lint traps. Restaurants, laundries, wash
racks, service stations, private multi-user systems, engine or machinery repair
shops, and other facilities that produce grease, grit, oil, lint, or other materials
which accumulate and cause or threaten to cause stoppages or impair the
efficiency of the POTW sewers or threaten the safety of its employees, shall
install and maintain a grease trap, grit trap, lint trap, oil interceptor, or other
appropriate device of standard design and construction to prevent excess
discharges of such materials. The design and construction of any such device
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-19
shall be subject to prior approval of the superintendent and constructed in
accordance with applicable building codes.
(8) Multi-use private sewer systems. Excluding those industrial waste
facilities with a permit issued pursuant to § 18-308, the owner or operator of a
private sewer system such as, but not limited to, multi-tenant buildings,
building complexes, and shopping centers shall be responsible for the quality of
wastewater discharged at the point of connection to the POTW's sanitary sewer
system and shall be responsible for any violations of the provisions of this
chapter, including liability for the damage or injury caused to the POTW as a
result of any discharge through the private system. (Ord. #EWJ-16, Dec. 1987,
as replaced by Ord. #AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-304. Building sewers, connections, and permits. (1) Installation,
maintenance, repair of sewer service lines. (a) Definition. A standard
sanitary sewer service line is a minimum four inch (4") pipe extending
from the sewer main or trunk location in a street, alley, or easement to
the property served by the main trunk.
(b) Installation of sewer service lines. Four inch (4") building
sewers shall be laid on a grade greater than one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot
(at least one percent (1%)). Larger building sewers shall be laid on a
grade that will produce a velocity when flowing full of at least two feet (2')
per second. The slope and alignment of all building sewers shall be neat
and regular.
Building sewers shall be constructed only of one (1) of the following
approved materials:
(i) Cast iron soil pipe using rubber compression joints of
approved type;
(ii) Polyvinyl chloride pipe with solvent welded or rubber
compression joints;
(iii) ABS composite sewer pipe with solvent welded or
rubber compression joints of approved type; or
(iv) Similar materials of equal or superior quality
following superintendent approval.
Under no circumstances will cement mortar joints be acceptable.
Each connection to the sewer system must be made at a wye, or service
line stubbed out, or in the absence of any other provision, by means of a
saddle of a type approved by the city, attached to the sewer. No
connection may be made by breaking into an existing sewer and inserting
the service line.
The building sewer may be brought into the building below the
basement floor when gravity flow from the building to the sewer is at a
grade of one percent (1%) or more. In cases where basement or floor levels
are lower than the ground levels at the point of connection to the sewer,
adequate precautions though the installation of check valves or other
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-20
backflow prevention devices to protect against flooding shall be provided
by the owner. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the sewer, wastes carried by such building drain
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged into the POTW
sewer.
(c) Cleanouts. A cleanout shall be located five feet (5') outside
of the building, one (1) as it taps on to the utility laterally and one (1) at
each change of direction of the building sewer greater than forty-five
degrees (45E). Additional cleanouts shall be placed not more than
seventy-five feet (75') apart in horizontal building sewers of four inch (4")
diameter and not more than one hundred feet (100') apart for larger
pipes. Cleanouts shall extend to or above the finished grade level directly
above the place where the cleanout is installed. A "Y" (wye) and
one-eighth (1/8) bend shall be used for the cleanout base. Cleanouts shall
not be smaller than four inches (4") on a four inch (4") pipe.
(d) Fees. All costs and expenses incident to the installation,
connection, and inspection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer. The city reserves the right to impose a sewer service line charge
for every sanitary sewer service line installed where a lateral sewer
connection has been provided for use by the applicant. The rate of charge
will be established by the superintendent.
(e) Title and maintenance. When a property owner ties into a
sanitary sewer service line and pays the appropriate sewer service line
fees, the city, by appropriate instrument, shall convey and release to the
property owner all its rights, title, and interest in the sanitary sewer
service line so installed by the property owner or developer. Thereafter,
all repairs and maintenance of the sanitary sewer service line shall be the
responsibility of the property owner or user of the sewer; provided, for all
sanitary sewer service lines hereafter installed by developers in
subdivisions and not by the utility, for which no sewer service line charge
is charged to the property owner, all repairs, and maintenance of such
sanitary sewer service lines shall be the responsibility of either the
property owner, user of the sewer, or the developer, as the owner, user,
and developer shall agree by separate contract between themselves.
(f) Location of sewer stub-out. The plumbing contractor is
responsible for locating the sewer stub-out. POTW personnel will provide
whatever information is available for this purpose. If no "Y" or tee exists
within three feet (3') of either side of the location shown on the sewer
plats, then a tap will be provided by the POTW when the sewer main is
exposed. If a manhole needed for locating a service line has been lost,
then the POTW shall be responsible for locating the manhole.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-21
(g) Taps on utility sewers. All taps made directly into the city's
sewer lines shall be made by the property owner or developer. The city
shall inspect the tap after installation is completed. Only one (1) service
line shall be allowed to be installed in a trench. New taps shall be made
using a "Y"-type connection.
(h) Manhole requirements. A new manhole will be required
whenever a sewer service line larger than six inches (6") is needed to tie
into the city's sewer. The city shall excavate to the sewer and sufficiently
expose the pipe for installation of the manhole. Sewer maintenance
personnel shall install the manhole. The cost of the manhole, including
labor and materials, shall be charged to the owner after construction is
completed.
(i) Maintenance of service lines. All repairs and maintenance
of the sewer service line to include correction of excessive inflow or
infiltration shall be the responsibility of the property owner or user of the
sewer. The city shall be responsible for the maintenance of collector lines
only up to the point where the owner's service line connects to the city's
lines.
(j) Methods of installation. The methods to be used in
excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling the trench, or
other activities in the construction or repair of a building sewer which
have not been described in this section shall conform to the requirements
of the building or plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations
of the city or to the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the ASTM and Water Pollution Control Federation manuals. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures must be approved by the
superintendent.
(k) Public safety. All excavations for building sewer installation
shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect
the public from potential hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a
manner acceptable to the city.
(l) Prohibitions. No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains, basement drains, or
other sources of surface run-off or groundwater to a building sewer or
drain which in turn is connected either directly or indirectly to the
sanitary sewer.
(2) Service line to enter sewer at junction; exceptions. No service lines
shall enter the sanitary sewer at any point except where a junction has been
made unless special permission has been given by the superintendent. In any
case where such permission has been given, the work shall be done under the
inspection of the superintendent or his representative and at the risk and
expense of the party making the connection.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-22
(3) Application for discharge of domestic wastewater. All users or
prospective users which generate domestic wastewater shall make application
to the superintendent for written authorization to discharge to the sanitary
sewer. Applications shall be required from all new dischargers as well as for
existing dischargers desiring additional service. Connection to the sanitary
sewer shall not be made until the application is received and approved by the
superintendent, the building sewer is installed in accordance with § 18-304 of
this ordinance and an inspection has been performed by the superintendent or
his representative.
Connections made without an approved application may be severed by
order of the superintendent. Such unapproved connection may be allowed to
remain active if inspected and accepted; however, the owner shall be required
to pay an alternative fee in lieu of the permit application fee in an amount
double the current fee.
The receipt by the city of a prospective customer's application for service
shall in no way obligate the city to render the service. If the service applied for
cannot be supplied in accordance with this ordinance and the city's rules and
regulations, the connection charge will be refunded in full, and there shall be no
liability of the city to the applicant for such service, except that conditional
waivers may be granted for additional services by the superintendent for interim
periods if compliance may be assured within a reasonable period of time.
(4) Acceptance of work. All sewer construction involving interceptor
lines, pump stations, metering stations, and appurtenances which shall become
part of the city's sewer system shall not be constructed until the plans are
approved and the construction inspected and approved by the superintendent.
Any construction work where sewers are opened, uncovered, or undercut must
also have the prior approval of the superintendent. (Ord. #EWJ-16, Dec. 1987,
as replaced by Ord. #AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-305. Private domestic wastewater disposal. (1) Availability.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 18-303(1) of this ordinance, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the requirements of this section.
Where a public sewer shall become available, the building sewer shall be
connected to the said sewer within ninety (90) days after official notification by
the superintendent or his representative to do so.
(2) Requirements. (a) A private domestic wastewater disposal system
may not be constructed within the service area or any newly annexed
areas unless and until a certificate is obtained from the superintendent
stating that a public sewer is not accessible to the property and no such
sewer is proposed for construction in the immediate future. No certificate
shall be issued for any private domestic wastewater disposal system
employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-23
is less than that specified by the City of Camden and the Benton County
Health Department.
(b) Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first obtain written permission from the
city and the Benton County Health Department. The owner shall supply
any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary
by the city and the Benton County Health Department.
(c) A private sewage disposal system shall not be placed in
operation until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city
and Benton County Health Department. They shall be allowed to inspect
the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the owner shall
notify the city and Benton County Health Department when the work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within a reasonable period of time
after the receipt of notice by the city and Benton County Health
Department.
(d) The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all the recommendations of the TDEC,
the Benton County Health Department, and the City of Camden. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet.
(e) The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
city.
(f) No statement contained in this section shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the
city and/or the Benton County Health Department. (Ord. #EWJ-16, Dec.
1987, and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-306. Prohibitions and limitations. (1) Purpose and policy. This
section establishes limitations and prohibitions on the quantity and quality of
wastewater which may be legally discharged to POTW. Pass through limitations
issued by the TDEC are calculated based on receiving stream background, flow
information, and water quality criteria at the WWTP effluent discharge location,
and are used to establish plant protection criteria and local limitations. The
plant protection criteria are listed in § 18-306(10) and local limits are applied
to the industrial discharge permits. Pretreatment of some wastewater
discharges will be required to achieve the goals established by this section and
the Clean Water Act. The specific limitations set forth in this section are subject
to change as necessary to enable the city to provide efficient wastewater
treatment, to protect the public health and environment, and to enable the city
to meet requirements contained in its NPDES permit. The superintendent shall
review said limitations from time to time to ensure that they are sufficient to
protect the health and safety of POTW personnel and the operation of the
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-24
treatment works to enable the facility to comply with its NPDES permit, provide
for a cost effective means of operating the treatment works, and protect the
public health and environment. The superintendent shall recommend changes
or modifications as necessary.
(2) Prohibited pollutants. No person shall introduce into the POTW
any pollutant(s) which cause pass through or interference. Additionally, the
following specific prohibitions apply:
(a) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the
POTW, including but not limited to, pollutants with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees (140E) Fahrenheit (sixty
degrees (60E) Centigrade), as determined by a Pensky-Martens closed-cup
tester, using the test method specified in the American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM) D-93-79 or D-93-80k, or a Setaflash
closed-cup tester, using the test method specified in ASTM D-3278-78, or
pollutants which cause an exceedance of ten percent (10%) of the Lower
Explosive Limit (LEL) at any point within the POTW.
(b) Pollutants which cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, but in no case discharge with a pH less than 5.0.
(c) Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which cause
obstruction to the flow of the sewers, or other interference with the
operation of or which may cause damage to the POTW, including waxy or
other materials which tend to clog or coat a sewer line or other related
appurtenances.
(d) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.), released in a discharge of such volume or strength (slug) so
as to cause interference in the POTW or individual unit operations or
cause adverse effects on its workers or the environment.
(e) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the
POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities
that the temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds one
hundred four degrees (104E) Fahrenheit (forty degrees (40E) Centigrade).
(f) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(g) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
specified by the POTW.
(h) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that cause interference or pass through.
(i) Any pollutant which causes a discoloration of the WWTP
effluent resulting in a degradation of receiving water quality or NPDES
permit violation.
(3) Affirmative defenses. A user shall have an affirmative defense in
any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-25
established in § 18-306(2) of this ordinance where the user can demonstrate
one (1) of the following:
(a) It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges form other sources,
would cause pass through or interference.
(b) A local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or
interference, as the case may be, was developed pursuant to § 18-306(10)
and (11) of this ordinance for each pollutant in the user's discharge that
caused pass through or interference and the user was in compliance with
each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass through or
interference.
(c) If a local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or
interference, as the case may be, has not been developed for the
pollutant(s) that caused the pass through or interference and the user's
discharge directly prior to and during the pass through or interference
did not change substantially in nature of constituents from the user's
prior discharge activity when the POTW was regularly in compliance
with its NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of interference,
applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal.
(4) Wastewater constituent evaluation. The wastewater of every
industrial user shall be evaluated using the following criteria:
(a) Wastewater containing any element or compound which is
known to be an environmental hazard and which is not adequately
removed by the treatment works.
(b) Wastewater causing a pass through, discoloration, foam,
floating oil and grease, or any other condition in the quality of the
treatment works effluent such that receiving water quality requirements
established by law cannot be met or the city's NPDES permit
requirements are violated.
(c) Wastewater causing conditions at or near the city's
treatment works which violate any statute, rule, or regulation of any
public agency of Tennessee or the United States.
(d) Wastewater containing any element or compound known to
act as a lacrimator, known to cause nausea, or known to cause odors
constituting a public nuisance.
(e) Wastewater causing interference with the effluent or any
other product of the treatment process, residues, sludge, or scum causing
them to be unsuitable for reclamation, reuse, causing interference with
the reclamation process, or causing them to be unsuitable for disposal.
(f) Wastewater discharged at a point in the collection system
that is upstream of any overflow, bypass, or combined sewer overflow and
which may thereby cause special environmental problems or specific
discharge limitations.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-26
(g) Wastewater having constituents and concentrations in
excess of those listed in § 18-306(10) or cause and exceedance of the limits
in § 18-306(11).
(h) The capacity of existing sewer lines to carry the anticipated
wastewater flow, particularly with respect to any problems, overflows, or
overloads caused by heavy rain infiltration.
(i) The toxicity of each wastewater shall be evaluated by an
appropriate biomonitoring technique to determine if a specific discharge
may significantly affect the overall toxic level of the POTW influent.
The superintendent shall establish reasonable limitations, prohibitions,
or monitoring requirements in addition to the limits established pursuant to
§§ 18-306(5) and (10) of this ordinance in the wastewater discharge permit of
any industrial user that discharges wastewater violating any of the above
criteria or that has processes that generate wastewater that could violate any
of the above criteria prior to pretreatment as shall be reasonably necessary to
achieve the purpose and policy of this section.
(5) National pretreatment standards. Certain industrial users are now
or hereafter shall become subject to national pretreatment standards
promulgated by the EPA specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants
or pollutant properties which may be discharged into the POTW. All industrial
users subject to such a standard shall comply with all requirements and with
any additional or more stringent limitations contained in this ordinance.
Compliance with current or newly promulgated national pretreatment
standards for existing sources shall be within three (3) years following
promulgation of the standards unless a shorter compliance time is specified.
Compliance for new sources shall be required upon promulgation of the
standard. New sources shall have in operating condition and shall start up all
pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards
before commencing discharge. New sources must meet applicable pretreatment
standard within ninety (90) days of commencement of discharge.
(6) Dilution. Except where expressly authorized by an applicable
national pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall increase the use of
process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitution for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with such
standard.
(7) Limitations on radioactive waste. No person shall discharge or
permit to be discharged any radioactive waste into a community sewer, except
as follows:
(a) When the person is authorized to use radioactive materials
by the TDEC or the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).
(b) When the waste is discharged in strict conformity with
applicable laws and regulations of the agencies having jurisdiction.
(c) When a copy of permits received from regulatory agencies
has been filed with the superintendent.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-27
(8) Septic tank hauling, pumping, and discharge. No person owning
vacuum or cesspool pump trucks or other liquid waste transport trucks shall
discharge sewage directly or indirectly into the POTW, unless that person
receives from the superintendent a septic tank discharge permit for each vehicle
used in this manner. All applicants for a septic tank discharge permit shall
complete the forms required by the superintendent, pay appropriate fees, and
agree in writing to abide by the provisions of this ordinance and any special
conditions or regulations established by the superintendent.
(a) The owners of such vehicles shall affix and display the
permit number in four inch (4") block figures on the side of each vehicle
used for such purposes.
(b) The permit shall be valid for a period of three (3) years from
date of issuance, provided that the permit shall be subject to suspension
or revocation by the superintendent for violation of any of the provisions
of the ordinance or other applicable laws or regulations. A revocation or
suspension of the permit shall be for a period not to exceed five (5) years.
Such revocation for suspension shall bind the permittee, any member of
the immediate family of the permittee, or any person who has purchased
the business or a substantial amount of the assets of the permittee. Users
found operating in violation of a permit issued under this section and
whose permit is therefore revoked by the superintendent, shall be notified
of the violation by certified mail or by notice personally delivered to the
user.
(c) Septic tank discharge permits are not automatically
renewed. Application for renewal must be made to the superintendent.
(d) Such permits shall be limited to the discharge of domestic
sewage waste containing no industrial waste. All other hauled wastes
shall be governed by § 18-306(9). Any user transporting, collecting, or
discharging non-domestic industrial process wastewaters or a mixture of
such wastewaters with domestic wastewaters shall obtain a holding tank
discharge permit in accordance with § 18-306(9).
(e) The superintendent shall designate the locations and times
where such trucks may be discharged and may refuse to accept any
truckload of waste at his absolute discretion where it appears that the
waste could interfere with the effective operation of the treatment works
or any sewer line or appurtenance, or where it appears that a truckload
of waste contains industrial process waste or a mixture of domestic
sewage and industrial process waste.
(f) The superintendent shall have the authority to investigate
the source of any hauled waste and to require testing the waste at the
expense of the discharger prior to discharge.
(9) Other holding tank wastes. No user shall discharge any other
holding tank wastes, including hauled industrial waste, into the POTW unless
he has been issued a holding tank discharge permit by the superintendent.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-28
Unless otherwise allowed under the terms and conditions of the permit, a
separate permit must be secured for each separate discharge. All applicants for
a holding tank discharge permit shall complete forms required by the
superintendent, pay appropriate fees, and agree in writing to abide by the
provisions of this ordinance and any special conditions or regulations
established by the superintendent. All such dischargers and transporters must
show that they have complied with federal manifests and other regulations of
the RCRA. The permit shall state the specific location of the discharge, the time
of the day the discharge is to occur, the volume of discharge, the source and
character of the waste, and shall limit the wastewater constituents of the
discharge. The user shall pay any applicable charges or fees and shall comply
with the conditions of the permit.
(10) Criteria to protect the treatment plant influent. The POTW shall
monitor the treatment plant influent for certain pollutants. Industrial users
shall be subject to reporting and monitoring requirements as set forth in this
ordinance. In the event that the influent at the POTW reaches or exceeds the
established protection criteria levels, the superintendent shall initiate technical
studies to determine the cause of the exceedance and shall recommend to the
city the necessary remedial measures. The superintendent may also recommend
changes to these criteria in the event that the POTW effluent standards are
changed, there are changes in applicable laws or regulations, or changes are
needed for more effective operation of the POTW.
Table 6.10
Plant Protection Criteria
Parameter Maximum Concentration m/l
Benzene 0.003
Cadmium 0.0032
Carbon tetrachloride 0.015
Chloroform 0.14655
Chromium, III Report
Chromium, VI Report
Copper 0.160
Cyanide 0.02768
Ethylbenzene 0.02353
Lead 0.0176
Mercury 0.00005
Methylene chloride 1.250
Naphthalene 0.001
Nickel 0.2093
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-29
Parameter Maximum Concentration m/l
Phenols (total) 0.100
Phthalates (total) 0.16974
Silver, daily max 0.00177
Tetrachloroethene 0.27778
Tolulene 0.02542
Trichloroethene 0.5
1,1,1 Trichloroethane 0.333
Trans 1,2 Dichloroethene 0.0125
Zinc 0.390
(11) Storm drainage, ground, unpolluted and contaminated storm
water. (a) No storm water, ground water, rain water, street drainage,
rooftop drainage, basement drainage, subsurface drainage, foundation
drainage, yard drainage, swimming pool drainage, process water
drainage, cooling water, or other unpolluted or minimally polluted water
shall be discharged into the city's sewer unless no other reasonable
alternative is available, except with permission from the superintendent.
Reasonable conditions shall be prescribed, and a sewer service charge will
be issued based upon the quantity of water discharged as measured by a
flow meter or a reasonable estimate accepted by the superintendent. All
users shall be required to maintain their private sewer lines so as to
prevent infiltration of ground or storm water as a condition of use of the
system and shall immediately replace or repair any leaking or damaged
lines.
(b) The POTW will accept discharge of contaminated storm
water if the following criteria are met:
(i) All known and available technology will not prevent
contamination or treat contaminated water to meet state
standards for discharge to receiving waters or will cause
unreasonable financial burden;
(ii) The contaminated storm water meets the POTW's
discharge limits and all state and federal pretreatment
requirements; and
(iii) The volume of discharge will not exceed the hydraulic
loading in the collection system or the treatment plant.
(12) Use of garbage disposals. No waste from garbage disposals shall
be discharged into the POTW's sewers except from private garbage disposals
used in an individual residence or upon permit issued by the superintendent for
preparation of food consumed on premises, and then only when applicable fees
are paid. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a garbage disposal grinder
connected to the sewer system for the purpose of grinding and discharging
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-30
plastic, paper products, inert materials, or anything other than the waste
products from normal food preparation and consumption.
(13) Hospital or medical waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to
dispose of medical waste, surgical operating room waste, or delivery room waste
into the sewer. Medical waste for the purpose of this ordinance means isolation
wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes,
sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
(14) Obstruction or damage to sewer. It shall be unlawful for any
person to deposit or cause to be deposited any waste which may obstruct or
damage storm or sanitary sewer lines or which may inhibit, disrupt, or damage
either system, including the sewage treatment process and operations. This
prohibition includes all substances, whether liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive
and whether associated with human habitation, of human or animal origin, or
from any producing, manufacturing, or processing. It shall be unlawful to block
or obstruct any catch basin, sewer line, or other appurtenance; or to break,
injure, or remove any portion from any part of a sewer, drain, or catch basin,
including plates covering manholes. (Ord. #EWJ-16, Dec. 1987, as amended by
Ord. #GWO-16, Sept. 1994, and replaced by Ord. #AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-307. Control of prohibited pollutants. (1) Pretreatment
requirements. Industrial users of the POTW shall design, construct, operate,
and maintain wastewater pretreatment facilities when necessary to reduce or
modify the user's wastewater composition to achieve compliance with the
limitations in wastewater strength set forth in § 18-306(10) and (11) of this
ordinance, to meet applicable national pretreatment standards, to prevent slug
discharges or to meet any other wastewater condition or limitation contained in
the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit.
(2) Plans and specifications. Plans and specifications for wastewater
monitoring and pretreatment facilities shall be prepared, signed, and dated by
a competent environmental professional, and be submitted to the
superintendent for review in accordance with accepted practices. The
superintendent shall review the plans within thirty (30) days of receipt and
recommend to the user any appropriate changes. Prior to beginning construction
of a monitoring or pretreatment facility, the user shall submit a set of
construction plans and specifications to be maintained by the superintendent.
Prior to beginning construction, the industrial user shall also secure all
necessary permits.
The user shall construct the pretreatment facility within the time frame
specified in the compliance schedule of the wastewater discharge permit.
Following completion of construction, the user shall provide the superintendent
with as-built drawings to be maintained by the superintendent. The review of
such plans and specifications will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facilities as necessary to produce effluent
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-31
complying with the provisions of this ordinance. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or methods of operations shall be reported to and
approved by the superintendent prior to implementation.
(3) Prevention of accidental discharges. All users shall provide such
facilities and institute such procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent
or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the POTW of waste
regulated by this ordinance from liquid or raw material storage areas, from
truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, from in-plant transfer or
processing and materials handling areas, and from diked areas or holding ponds
of any waste regulated by this ordinance. The wastewater discharge permit of
any user who has a history of significant leaks, spills, or other accidental
discharge of regulated waste shall be subject on a case by case basis to a special
permit condition or requirement for the construction of facilities or
establishment of procedures which will prevent or minimize the potential for
accidental discharge. Plans, specifications, and operating procedures shall be
developed by the user and submitted to the superintendent for review.
(4) Fat, Oil, and Grease (FOG) control program. (a) Purpose. The
purpose of this section is to control discharges into the public sewerage
collection system and treatment plant that interfere with the operations
of the system, cause blockage and plugging of pipelines, interfere with
normal operation of pumps and their controls and contribute waste of a
strength or form that is beyond the treatment capability of the treatment
plant.
(b) Fat, Oil, and Grease (FOG), waste food, and sand
interceptors. FOG, waste food, and sand interceptors shall be installed
when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing fats, oils, and grease, ground
food waste, sand, soil, and solids, or other harmful ingredients in
excessive amounts which impact the wastewater collection system. Such
interceptors shall not be required for single family residences, but may
be required for multiple family residences. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease
traps shall be cleaned on a quarterly basis to prevent discharge of grease
and impact upon the wastewater collection and treatment system.
Owners whose grease traps are deemed to be ineffective by the
superintendent shall be required to increase the cleaning frequency. The
superintendent may allow a less frequent cleaning schedule if it is
deemed to be adequate enough to prevent discharge of grease to the
collection and treatment system.
(c) Definitions. In the interpretation and application of this
section the following words and phrases shall have the indicated
meanings:
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-32
(i) "Grease interceptor." An interceptor whose rated flow
is fifty (50) gpm or less and is typically located inside the building.
(ii) "Grease trap." An interceptor whose rated flow
exceeds fifty (50) gpm and is located outside the building.
(iii) "Interceptor." A device designed and installed to
separate and retain for removal, by automatic or manual means,
deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from normal wastes,
while permitting normal sewage or waste to discharge into the
drainage system by gravity.
(d) New construction and renovation. Upon construction or
renovation, all restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing
homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches, camps, caterers,
manufacturing plants and any other sewer users who discharge
applicable waste shall submit a FOG and food waste control plan that
will effectively control discharge of FOG and food waste.
(e) Existing structures. All existing restaurants, cafeterias,
hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons,
jails, churches, caterers, manufacturing plants, and any other sewer
users who discharge applicable waste shall be required to submit a plan
for control of FOG and food waste, if and when the superintendent
determines that FOG and food waste are causing excessive loading,
plugging, damage or operational problems to structures or equipment in
the public sewer system.
(f) Implementation of plan. After approval of the FOG plan by
the superintendent the sewer users must: implement the plan within a
reasonable amount of time; service and maintain the equipment in order
to prevent adverse impact upon the sewer collection system and
treatment facility. If, in the opinion of the superintendent, the user
continues to impact the collection system and treatment plant, additional
pretreatment measures may be required.
(g) Sand, soil, and oil interceptors. All car washes, truck
washes, garages, service stations, and other sources of sand, soil, and oil
shall install effective sand, soil, and oil interceptors. These interceptors
will be sized to effectively remove sand, soil, and oil at the expected flow
rates. These interceptors will be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent
impact upon the wastewater collection and treatment system. Owners
whose interceptors are deemed to be ineffective by the superintendent
may be asked to change the cleaning frequency or to increase the size of
the interceptors. Owners or operators of washing facilities will prevent
the inflow of rainwater into the sanitary sewers.
(h) Laundries. Commercial laundries shall be equipped with an
interceptor with a wire basket or similar device, removable for cleaning,
that prevents passage into the sewer system of solids one-half inch (1/2")
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-33
or larger in size such as strings, rags, buttons, or other solids detrimental
to the system.
(i) Control equipment. The equipment or facilities installed to
control FOG, food waste, sand and soil, must be designed in accordance
with plumbing code and Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation engineering standards or applicable city guidelines.
Underground equipment shall be tightly sealed to prevent inflow of
rainwater and easily accessible to allow regular maintenance. Control
equipment shall be maintained by the owner or operator of the facility so
as to prevent a stoppage of the public sewer, and the accumulation of
FOG in the lines, pump stations, and treatment plant. If the city is
required to clean out the public sewer lines as a result of a stoppage
resulting from poorly maintained control equipment, or lack thereof, the
owner or operator shall be required to refund the labor, equipment,
materials, and overhead costs to the city. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit or restrict any other remedy the city has under this
ordinance, or state or federal law.
The city retains the right to inspect and approve installation of the
control equipment.
(j) Solvents prohibited. The use of degreasing or line cleaning
products containing petroleum based solvents is prohibited.
(k) Enforcement and penalties. Any person who violates this
ordinance shall be guilty of a civil violation punishable under and
according to the general penalty provision of the city's municipal code of
ordinances. Each day's violation of this ordinance shall be considered a
separate offense.
(l) Alteration of control methods. The city, through the
superintendent, reserves the right to request additional control measures
if measures taken are shown to be insufficient to protect sewer collection
system and treatment plant from interference due to the discharge of
fats, oils, and grease, sand and soil, or lint.
(5) Slug control program. (a) Each user shall provide protection from
slug discharges of restricted materials or other substances regulated by
this section. A slug is defined as any pollutants, including oxygen
demanding pollutants, released in a discharge of such volume or strength
as to cause interference in the POTW or individual unit operations or
cause adverse effects upon its employees or the environment. No user
shall be permitted to discharge into the system until the need for slug
control plans or procedures has been reviewed by the superintendent.
(b) Certain users will be required to prepare spill response
plans showing facilities and procedures for providing this protection.
These plans shall be submitted to the superintendent for review and
approval. All users required to have such a plan shall submit it within
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-34
thirty (30) days of notification by the superintendent and complete
implementation within ninety (90) days of notification.
(c) In the case of a slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the
user to immediately notify the POTW of the incident by telephone or in
person. Information concerning the location of the discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume, and corrective action shall be provided
by the user.
Within five (5) days following a slug discharge, the user shall
submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and
the measures being taken by the user to prevent future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property, nor shall
notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability
which may be imposed by this ordinance or other applicable law.
(d) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's premises
advising employees of a contact to call in the event of a slug discharge.
The user shall ensure that all employees who may cause or allow such
slug discharge to occur are advised of the proper emergency notification
procedure.
(6) Prohibition of bypass. (a) Except as allowed in subsection (c)
below, bypass is prohibited, and the superintendent may take
enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
(i) The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage.
(ii) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of
equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate
backup equipment should have been installed.
(iii) The user submitted notices as required in
§ 18-309(13).
(b) The superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass after
considering its adverse effect if the superintendent determines that it will
meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (a) of this section.
(c) An industrial user may allow a bypass to occur which does
not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the reporting provisions of § 18-309(13).
(7) Exceptions to wastewater limitations. (a) Applicability. This
section provides a method for industrial users subject to the limitation on
wastewater pollutants listed in § 18-306(10) and (11) to apply for and
receive a temporary exemption to the discharge level for one (1) or more
pollutants or parameters.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-35
(b) Time of application. Applicants shall apply for a temporary
exemption when they are required to apply for a wastewater discharge
permit or renewal provided that the superintendent allows applications
at any time unless the applicant has submitted the same or substantially
similar application within the preceding year that was denied by the
board.
(c) Written applications. All applications for an exception shall
be in writing and shall contain sufficient information for evaluation of
each of the factors to be considered by the superintendent pursuant to
subsection (d) of this section.
(d) Review by the superintendent. All applications for an
exception shall be reviewed by the superintendent. If the application does
not contain sufficient information for complete evaluation, the
superintendent shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies and request
additional information. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days
following notification by the superintendent to correct such deficiencies.
This thirty (30) day period may be extended by the superintendent upon
application and for just cause. Upon receipt of a complete application, the
superintendent shall evaluate it within thirty (30) days and approve or
deny the application.
(e) Review by board. The board shall review any appeal to a
denial by the superintendent of an application for an exception and shall
take into account the same factors considered by the superintendent. At
such a hearing, the applicant and the superintendent shall have the right
to present relevant proof by oral or documentary evidence. The procedure
set forth in § 18-310 shall be applicable to such a hearing. The applicant
shall bear the burden of proof in an appeal hearing.
(f) Best management practices. The superintendent or board
shall not grant an exception unless the applicant demonstrates to the
board that Best Management Practices (BMPs) are being employed to
reduce or prevent the contribution of pollutants to the POTW. BMPs
include, but are not limited to, preventive operating and maintenance
procedures, schedule of activities, process changes, prohibiting activities,
and other management practices to reduce the quantity or increase the
quality of effluent discharged and to control plant site runoff, spillage,
leaks, and drainage from raw material storage. (Ord. #EWJ-16, Dec.
1987, as replaced by Ord. #AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-308. Wastewater discharge permits. (1) Applicability. The
provisions of this ordinance are applicable to all industrial users of the POTW.
The city has an "approved POTW pretreatment program" as that term is defined
in 40 CFR, part 403.3(d) and any permits issued hereunder to industrial users
who are subject to or who become subject to a national categorical pretreatment
standard shall be conditioned upon the industrial user also complying with all
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-36
applicable substantive and procedural requirements promulgated by the EPA
or the State of Tennessee regarding such categorical standards unless an
exception for the city's program or for the specific industrial categories is
authorized.
(2) Application and permit requirements. Prior to discharging
non-domestic waste into the POTW, all significant industrial users of the POTW
shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit. The industrial user shall request
that the superintendent determine if the proposed discharge is significant as
defined in § 18-302. If the discharge is determined not to be significant, the
superintendent may still establish appropriate discharge conditions for the user.
Any noncategorical industrial user designated as significant may petition the
superintendent to be deleted from the list as significant on the grounds that
there exists no potential for adverse effect on the POTW's operation or violation
of any pretreatment standard or requirement.
All significant industrial users shall obtain an industrial wastewater
discharge permit and shall complete such forms as required by the
superintendent, pay appropriate fees, and agree to abide by the provisions of
this ordinance and any specific conditions or regulation established by the
superintendent. All original applications shall be accompanied by a report
containing the information specified in § 18-308(3). All original applications
shall also include a site plan, floor plan, and mechanical and plumbing plans
with sufficient detail to show all sewers and appurtenances in the user's
premises by size, location, and elevation. The industrial user shall also submit
revised plans to the superintendent when alterations or additions to the user's
premises affect said plans.
(3) Report requirements. The report required for all significant
industrial users by § 18-302(2) or other provisions of this ordinance shall contain
in units and terms appropriate for evaluation the information listed in
subsections (a) through (e) below. Industrial users subject to national
pretreatment standards shall submit to the superintendent a report which
contains the information listed in subsections (a) through (f) below within one
hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation by the EPA of a national
pretreatment standard under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act. This report is
called the Baseline Monitoring Report (BMR). Industrial users who are unable
to achieve a discharge limit set forth in § 18-306 without improved operation
and maintenance procedures or pretreatment shall submit a report which
contains the information listed in subsections (a) through (g) of this section.
As specified, the report shall contain the following:
(a) The name and address of the industrial user.
(b) The location of the industrial user.
(c) The nature, average rate of production, and standard
industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by the industrial
user.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-37
(d) The average and maximum flow in gallons per day of
discharge from the industrial user to the POTW.
(e) The nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process, the type(s) of sample(s) collected (grab
and/or composite), and identification of any applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. The concentration shall be reported as a
maximum or average level as provided for in the applicable pretreatment
standard and as approved by standard methods approved by the
superintendent. If an equivalent concentration limit has been calculated
in accordance with any pretreatment standard, this adjusted
concentration limit shall also be submitted to superintendent for
approval.
(f) A statement that has been reviewed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and certified by an environmental
professional indicating if pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance procedures or additional pretreatment is required for the
industrial user to achieve compliance.
(g) If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance
procedures will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the
report shall contain the shortest schedule by which the industrial user
will provide the additional pretreatment. The completion date in the
schedule shall be no later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard.
(h) The industrial user shall submit a list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.
For purposes of this section when the context so indicates, the phrase
"pretreatment standard" shall include either a national pretreatment standard
or a pretreatment standard imposed as a result of the industrial user's
discharging any incompatible pollutant regulated by § 18-306. For purposes of
this section, the term "pollutant" shall include any pollutant identified in a
national pretreatment standard or any incompatible pollutant identified in
§ 18-306.
(4) Incomplete applications. The superintendent will act only on
applications that are accompanied by a report which lists all the information
required in § 18-308(3). Industrial users who have filed incomplete applications
will be notified by the superintendent that the application is deficient and the
nature of the deficiency and will be given thirty (30) days to correct such. If the
deficiency is not corrected within that period or with such extended time as
allowed by the superintendent, the superintendent shall deny the application
and notify the applicant in writing of such action.
(5) Evaluation of application. Upon receipt of completed applications,
the superintendent shall review and evaluate the applications and shall propose
such special permit conditions as the superintendent deems advisable. All
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-38
wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the provisions of
this ordinance and all other applicable laws and regulations.
Per Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.08(6) the superintendent retains the legal
authority to deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or
changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such
contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements
or where such contributions would cause the WWTP to violate its NPDES
permit.
At a minimum, all industrial user permits must contain the following
requirements (40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(A-E)):
(a) Statement or duration (in no case more than five (5) years);
(b) Statement of non-transferability without, at a minimum,
prior notification to the POTW and provision of a copy of the existing
control mechanism to the new owner or operator;
(c) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based
on applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR part 403,
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law;
(d) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record
keeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be
monitored, sample location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based
on the applicable general pretreatment standards in part 403 of this
chapter, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and
local law;
(e) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the
compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines.
The superintendent may also propose that the wastewater discharge
permit be subject to one (1) or more special conditions in regard to any of the
following:
(a) Pretreatment requirements.
(b) The average and maximum wastewater constituents.
(c) Limits on rate and time of discharge for flow proportion.
(d) Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling
facilities.
(e) Specifications for self-monitoring procedures.
(f) Requirements for submission of technical and/or discharge
reports.
(g) Requirements for records maintenance.
(h) Average and maximum mass emission rates, or other
appropriate limits when toxic pollutants are proposed or present in the
industrial user's wastewater discharge.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-39
(i) Other conditions deemed appropriate by the superintendent
to ensure compliance with the ordinance or other applicable law or
regulation.
(j) A reasonable compliance schedule, as determined by the
superintendent, up to one (1) year in duration or such earlier date as may
be required by other applicable law or regulation, whichever is sooner, to
ensure the industrial user's compliance with pretreatment requirements
or improved methods of operation and maintenance.
(k) Requirements for a slug control plan to include the
installation of facilities to prevent and control accidental discharges, slug
discharges, or spills at the user's premises.
(l) The unit charge or schedule of charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
(6) Notification of proposed permit conditions. (a) Upon completion
of the evaluation, the superintendent shall notify the applicant of any
special permit conditions proposed for inclusion in the wastewater
discharge permit.
(b) The applicant shall have forty-five (45) days from and after
the date of superintendent's recommendations for special permit
conditions to review same and file written objections with the
superintendent in regard to any special permit conditions recommended.
The superintendent may, but is not required, to schedule a meeting with
applicant's authorized representative within fifteen (15) days following
receipt of the applicant's objections, to attempt to resolve disputed issues
concerning special permit conditions.
(c) If applicant files no objection to special permit conditions
proposed by the superintendent or a subsequent agreement is reached
concerning same, the superintendent shall issue a wastewater discharge
permit to applicant with such special conditions incorporated therein.
(7) Board to establish permit conditions. (a) In the event that the
superintendent cannot issue a permit pursuant to § 18-308(6) above, the
superintendent shall submit to the board the proposed permit conditions
and the applicant's written objections at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the board or at a specially convened meeting.
(b) The board shall schedule a hearing within thirty (30) days
following the meeting referred to above unless such time is extended for
just cause shown to resolve any disputed matters relevant to such permit.
(c) The superintendent shall notify the applicant of the date,
time, place, and purpose of the hearing scheduled by the board. The
applicant and the superintendent shall have the right to participate in
the hearing and present any relevant evidence to the board concerning
proposed special permit conditions or other matters being considered by
the board.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-40
(d) Following the hearing or additional hearings deemed
necessary and advisable by the board, the board shall establish special
permit conditions deemed advisable to ensure the applicant's compliance
with this ordinance or other applicable laws or regulations and direct the
superintendent to issue a wastewater discharge permit to the applicant
accordingly.
(8) Compliance schedule and reporting requirements. The following
conditions shall apply to the schedules required by § 18-308(5) of this ordinance:
(a) Schedule components. The schedule shall contain
increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment requirements for the industrial user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards.
(b) Schedule intervals. No such increment shall exceed nine (9)
months.
(9) Duration of permits. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued
for a time period not to exceed five (5) years. Permits issued to industrial users
pursuant to § 18-307(7) shall be issued for a period of one (1) year.
Industrial users subject to a national pretreatment standard shall apply
for new permits on the effective date of such standards. The superintendent
shall notify in writing any industrial user whom the superintendent has cause
to believe is subject to a national pretreatment standard of the promulgation of
such regulations, but any failure of the superintendent in this regard shall not
relieve the user of the duty of complying with such standards. An industrial user
must apply in writing for a renewal permit within a period of time not more
than ninety (90) days and not less than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the
current permit.
Limitations or conditions of a permit are subject to modification or change
as such changes become necessary due to changes in applicable water quality
standards, changes in the city's NPDES permit, changes in § 18-306(10) or (11),
changes in other applicable law or regulation, or for other just cause. Users will
be notified of any proposed changes in their permit by the superintendent at
least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the change. Any change or new
condition in the permit shall include a provision for a reasonable time schedule
for compliance. The user may appeal the decision of the superintendent in
regard to any changed permit conditions as otherwise provided for in this
ordinance.
(10) Transfer of permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation, unless as approved by the
superintendent.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-41
(11) Revocation of a permit. Any permit issued under the provisions of
this ordinance is subject to modification, suspension, or revocation in whole or
in part during its term for cause, including but not limited to, the following:
(a) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit or other applicable law or regulation.
(b) Obtaining of a permit by misrepresentation or failure to
disclose fully all relevant facts.
(c) A change in any condition that requires either a temporary
or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge.
(d) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premise for the
purpose of inspection and monitoring. (Ord. #EWJ-16, Dec. 1987, as
replaced by Ord. #AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-309. Inspections, monitoring, and entry. (1) Inspections,
monitoring, and entry. (a) When required to carry out the objective of
this ordinance, including but not limited to:
(i) Developing or assisting in the development of any
effluent limitation, or other limitation, prohibition, or effluent
standard, pretreatment standard, standard of performance, or
permit condition under this ordinance;
(ii) Determining whether any person is in violation of any
such effluent limitation, or other limitation, prohibition, or effluent
standard, pretreatment standard, standard of performance, or
permit condition;
(iii) Any requirement established under this section.
(b) The superintendent shall require any industrial user to:
(i) Establish and maintain records;
(ii) Make reports;
(iii) Install, use, and maintain monitoring equipment or
methods, including biological monitoring methods when
appropriate;
(iv) Sample effluent in accordance with these methods, at
such locations and intervals and in such a manner as the
superintendent shall prescribe;
(v) Provide such other information as the superintendent
may reasonably require.
(c) Specific requirements under the provisions of subsection (b)
of this section shall be established by the superintendent, or the board as
applicable, for each industrial user, and such requirements shall be
included as a condition of the industrial user's wastewater discharge
permit. The nature of any requirement under this provision shall depend
on the nature of the user's discharge, the impact of the discharge upon
the POTW, the volume of water discharged, and the technical feasibility
of an economic reasonableness of any such requirement.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-42
(d) The superintendent or his authorized representative,
employees of the State of Tennessee, and employees of the EPA shall,
upon presentation of credentials:
(i) Have a right of entry to, upon, or through any user's
premises in which an effluent source is located or in which any
records required to be maintained under this ordinance are
located.
(ii) Have access at reasonable times to and copy any
records, inspect any monitoring equipment or method required of
the user, and sample any discharge which the owner or operator
of such source is required to sample.
(e) In the event any user denies the right of entry for inspection,
sampling, inspecting and copying records, or verifying that a user is not
discharging industrial wastes or performing other duties as shall be
imposed upon the superintendent by this ordinance, the superintendent
shall seek a warrant or use such other legal procedures as advisable and
reasonably necessary to perform the duties of this ordinance.
(f) Any user failing or refusing to perform any duty imposed
upon the user under the provisions of this section, or who denies the right
to enter the user's premises for purposes of inspection, sampling,
inspecting and copying records, or other such duties as may be imposed
upon the user by this section, shall be deemed to have violated the
conditions of the wastewater discharge permit and such permit shall be
subject to modification, suspension, or revocation under the procedures
established in this ordinance. A user who does not have an industrial
waste discharge permit and denies the right to inspect as described
herein is subject to having the sewer service in question terminated.
(2) Reports. (a) Progress reports. No later than fourteen (14) days
following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the
industrial user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent,
including as a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of
progress to be met on such a date and, if not, the date on which it expects
to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and
steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between
such progress reports to the superintendent.
(b) Ninety (90) day compliance report. Within ninety (90) days
following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
superintendent a report containing the information described in
§ 18-308(3)(d) through (f).
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-43
(c) Self-monitoring reports. (i) All significant industrial users
shall submit to the superintendent during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment
standard or in the industrial user's permit, a report indicating the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are
limited by their permit. In addition, this report shall include a
record of average and maximum daily flows. At the discretion of
the superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local
high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the
superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the
above reports are submitted.
(ii) The superintendent, as applicable, may impose
limitations on industrial users combining waste streams to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other
cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In
such cases, the report required by subsection (a) of this section
shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment
standards in the effluent of the user.
(d) The reports required in this section shall contain the results
of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and nature
and concentration or production rates and mass limits where requested
by the superintendent, as applicable, of pollutants contained therein
which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards or industrial
permit. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the superintendent as alternative standards, the
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term
production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measured operation), the report
shall include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting
period. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable
treatment standard.
(3) Monitoring facilities. (a) All significant industrial users shall
install a monitoring station of a standard design or one satisfactory to the
superintendent.
All users who propose to discharge or who in the judgment of the
POTW could now or in the future discharge wastewater with constituents
and characteristics different from that produced by a domestic premise
may be required to install a monitoring facility.
(b) Installation. Required monitoring facilities shall be
constructed, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. The purpose
of the facility is to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of
wastewater. If sampling or metering equipment is also required by the
POTW, it shall be provided, installed, and operated at the user's expense.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-44
The monitoring facility will normally be required to be located on the
user's premises outside the building. The POTW may, however, when
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user,
allow the facility to be constructed in the public street right-of-way with
the approval of the public agency having jurisdiction of that right-of-way
and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
(c) Access. If the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence,
there shall be accommodations to allow safe and immediate access for
POTW, State of Tennessee, or EPA personnel. There shall be ample room
in or near such a facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of
samples for analysis. The entire facility and any sampling and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by and at the expense of the user.
(d) The industrial user shall be required to design any necessary
facility and to submit according to the permit compliance schedule an
engineering report, including detailed design plans and operating
procedures to the superintendent for review in accordance with accepted
engineering practices. The superintendent shall review the plans and
other documents within thirty (30) days and shall recommend any change
deemed appropriate.
(e) Upon approval of plans and other documents, the industrial
user shall secure all building, electrical, plumbing, and other permits
required and proceed to construct any necessary facility and establish
required operating procedures within the time provided in the industrial
user's wastewater discharge permit.
(4) Sampling and analysis. (a) All collected samples must be of such
nature that they provide a true and accurate representation of the
industry's normal workday effluent quality.
(b) Chain-of-custody procedures, sample preservation
techniques, and sample holding times recommended by the EPA shall be
followed in all self-monitoring activities. A minimum of four (4) grab
samples must be used for pH, cyanide, phenols, oil and grease, sulfide,
and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling
data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are
available, the control authority may authorize a lower minimum. For the
reports required by subsections (e) and (h) of this section, the control
authority shall require the number of grab samples necessary to assess
and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. All other samples shall be twenty-four (24)
hour flow proportional composite samples, unless otherwise specified.
(c) Monitoring shall be performed at the approved monitoring
station on the effluent sewer. Location and design of the monitoring
station shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-45
Any change in monitoring location will be subject to the approval of the
superintendent.
(d) All analyses shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA under the provisions of section 304(h)
of the Act and contained in 40 CFR part 136 and its amendments or with
any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques approved by EPA.
(5) Dangerous discharge notification. (a) Telephone notification. Any
person or user causing or suffering any discharge, whether accidental or
not, which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to human health and welfare or the environment, or which
is likely to cause interference with the POTW, shall notify the
superintendent immediately by telephone. In the absence of the
superintendent, notification shall be given to the POTW employee then
in charge of the treatment works. Such notification will not relieve the
user from any expense, loss, liability, fines, or penalty which may be
incurred as a consequence of the discharge.
(b) Written report. Within five (5) days following such an
occurrence, the user shall provide the superintendent with a detailed
written report describing the cause of the dangerous discharge and
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage,
or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this ordinance or other applicable law.
(c) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted
on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees
of a contact in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall
ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous
discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(6) Slug reporting. The industrial user shall notify the POTW
immediately by telephone of any slug loading, as defined by § 18-307(5), by the
industrial user.
(7) Notification of hazardous waste discharge. (a) The user shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which is a listed or characteristic waste under
section 3001 of RCRA. Such notification must include a description of any
such wastes discharged, specifying the volume and concentration of such
wastes and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other), identifying
the hazardous constituents contained in the listed wastes and estimating
the volume of hazardous wastes expected to be discharged during the
following twelve (12) months. The notification must take place within one
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-46
hundred eighty (180) days after the July 24, 1990 promulgation date of
the domestic sewage study amendments to the pretreatment regulations.
This requirement shall not apply to pollutants already reported under the
self-monitoring requirements of § 18-309(2).
(b) Discharges are exempt from the requirements of this
paragraph during a calendar month in which they generate no more than
fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.5(2), (f), (g), and (j).
Generation of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous waste do not
require additional notification, except for the acute hazardous wastes
specified in 40 CFR 261.5(3), (f), (g), and (j).
(c) In the case of new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
POTW of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the
effective date of such regulations, except for the exemption in
subsection (b) of this section.
(d) In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practicable and that it has selected the method of treatment,
storage, or disposal currently available which minimizes the present and
future threat to human health and the environment.
(8) Notification of changed discharge and potential slug discharge. All
industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the
listed or characteristic hazardous wastes, for which the user has submitted
initial notification under § 18-309(7).
Notice of potential problems, including slug loading. All categorical and
noncategorical industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all
discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings,
as defined by 1200-4-14-.05(2), by the industrial user.
(9) Provisions governing fraud and false statements. The reports
required to be submitted under this section shall be subject to the provisions of
18 USC 1001 relating to fraud and false statements and the provisions of
sections 309(c)(4) and (6) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements,
representation, or certifications in reports required by the Act.
(10) Signatory requirements for industrial user reports. The reports
required by this section shall include a certification statement as follows:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-47
system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware
that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations.
The reports shall be signed as follows:
(a) By a responsible corporate officer if the industrial user
submitting the reports required by this section is a corporation. For the
purpose of this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer is:
(i) A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of
the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making
functions for the corporation; or
(ii) The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is
authorized to make management decisions which govern the
operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or
implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary
systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and
accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and
where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(b) By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
submitting reports required by this section is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, respectively.
(c) By a duly authorized representation of the individual
designated in subsection (a) of this section if:
(i) The authorization is made in writing by the
responsible corporate officer.
(ii) The authorization specifies either an individual or a
position having responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, operator of a well, well field
superintendent, or a person in position of equivalent responsibility
or with overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company.
(iii) The written authorization is submitted to the control
authority.
(d) If an authorization under subsection (c) of this section is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-48
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
authorization satisfying the requirements of subsection (c) of this section
must be submitted to the superintendent prior to or in conjunction with
any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(11) Reporting of violation. If sampling performed by an industrial user
indicates a violation, the user shall notify the superintendent within twenty-four
(24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
superintendent within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation.
Where the control authority has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of
the industrial user, the control authority must perform the repeat sampling and
analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to
perform the repeat analysis. The industrial user is not required to resample if
one (1) of the following criteria is met:
(a) The POTW performs sampling at the industrial user at a
frequency of at least once per month.
(b) The POTW performs sampling at the user between the time
when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
(12) Reporting of all monitoring. If an industrial user subject to the
reporting requirements in § 18-308(3) of this ordinance monitors any pollutant
more frequently than required by the superintendent using approved procedures
prescribed in this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
(13) Notice of bypass. (a) If an industrial user knows in advance of the
need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the superintendent.
(b) An industrial user shall submit oral notice to the
superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five (5) days of the time the industrial user becomes
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description
of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact
dates and times; and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The
superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if
the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
(14) Maintenance of records. Any industrial user subject to the
reporting requirements established in this section shall maintain records of all
information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this section,
including documentation associated with best management practices. Such
records shall include for all samples:
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-49
(a) The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the
names of the persons taking the samples.
(b) The dates analyses were performed.
(c) Who performed the analyses.
(d) The analytical techniques/methods.
(e) The results of the analyses.
(15) Retention period. Any industrial user subject to the reporting
requirement established in this section shall be required to retain for a
minimum of three (3) years any records of monitoring activities and results
(whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this section),
including documentation associated with best management practices, and shall
make these records available for inspection and copying by the superintendent,
TDEC Director of the Division of Water Pollution Control, and EPA. The
retention period shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation
regarding the user or upon request from the superintendent, the director, or the
EPA.
(16) Confidential information. Any records, reports, or information
obtained under this section shall:
(a) In the case of effluent data, be related to any applicable
effluent limitations, toxic, pretreatment, or permit condition; and
(b) Be available to the public to the extent provided by 40 CFR,
part 232.
If, upon showing to the superintendent by any person that, if made public,
records, reports, information, or particular parts (other than effluent data) to
which the superintendent has access under this section, would divulge methods
or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets of such person, the
superintendent shall consider such record, report, or information, or particular
portion thereof, confidential in accordance with the purposes of this section.
Such record, report, or information may be disclosed to officers, employees, or
authorized representatives of the United States or the State of Tennessee
concerned with carrying out the provisions of the Act or when relevant in any
proceeding under this article or other applicable laws. (Ord. #EWJ-16,
Dec. 1987, as replaced by Ord. #AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-310. Enforcement. (1) Legal authority to enforce the enforcement
response plan. The City of Camden retains the legal authority to enforce the
provisions set forth in the enforcement response plan per Tennessee Rule
1200-4-14-.08(6)(e). The enforcement response plan contains detailed procedures
indicating how the City of Camden will investigate, respond, and issue
escalating levels of enforcement actions to instances of industrial user
noncompliance.
(2) Hearings. (a) Any hearing or re-hearing brought before the mayor
and board of aldermen shall be conducted in accordance with following:
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-50
(i) Upon receipt of a written petition from the alleged
violator pursuant to this section, the superintendent shall give the
petitioner ten (10) days written notice of the time and place of the
hearing.
(ii) The hearing provided may be conducted by the mayor
and board of alderman at a regular or special meeting. A quorum
of the board must be present at the regular or special meeting in
order to conduct the hearing.
(iii) A verbatim record of the proceedings of the hearings
shall be made and filed with the board in conjunction with the
findings of fact and conclusions of law made pursuant to
§ 18-310(a)(vi). The transcript shall be made available to the
petitioner or any party to a hearing upon payment of a charge set
by the superintendent to cover preparation fees.
(iv) In connection with the hearing, the chairperson of the
board shall issue subpoenas in response to any reasonable request
by any party to the hearing requiring the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to
any matter involved in the hearing. In the case of refusal to obey
a notice of hearing or subpoena issued under this section, the
Chancery Court of Benton County shall have the jurisdiction upon
the application of the superintendent to issue an order requiring
such person to appear and testify or produce evidence as the case
may require. Failure to obey such an order of the court is
punishable by the court as contempt.
(v) On the basis of the evidence produced at the hearing,
the board shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and
enter such decisions and orders as in its opinion will best further
the purposes of the pretreatment program and shall give written
notice of such decisions and orders to the alleged violator. The
order issued under this subsection shall be issued no later than
thirty (30) days following the close of the hearing by the person or
persons designated by the chairperson.
(vi) The decision of the board shall become final and
binding on all parties unless appealed to the courts as provided in
§ 18-310(2).
(vii) Any person to whom an emergency order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately, but on petition to the board
shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, but in no case shall
such a hearing be held later than three (3) days from the receipt of
such a petition by the board.
(viii) Upon agreement of all parties, the testimony of any
person may be taken by deposition or written interrogatories.
Unless otherwise agreed, the deposition shall be taken in a manner
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-51
consistent with rules 26 through 33 of the Tennessee Rules of Civil
Procedure, with the chairperson to rule on such manners as would
require a ruling by the court under said rules.
(ix) The superintendent shall first call witnesses, which
shall be followed by witnesses called by the other party. Rebuttal
witnesses shall be called in the same order. The chairperson shall
rule on any evidentiary questions arising during such hearing and
shall make other rulings necessary or advisable to facilitate an
orderly hearing subject to approval of the board. The board, the
superintendent, his representative, and all parties shall have the
right to examine any witness. The board shall not be bound by or
limited to rules of evidence applicable to legal proceedings.
(x) Any person aggrieved by an order or determination of
the superintendent where an appeal is not otherwise provided by
this section may appeal said order or determination to be reviewed
by the board under the provisions of this section. A written notice
of appeal shall be filed with the superintendent, and said notice
shall set forth with particularity the action or inaction of the
superintendent complained of and the relief being sought by the
person filing said appeal. A special meeting of the board may be
called by the chairperson upon the filing of such an appeal, and the
board may, at member's discretion, suspend the operation of the
order or determination of the superintendent on which is based the
appeal until such time as the board has acted upon the appeal.
(xi) The vice chairperson or the chairperson pro tem shall
possess all the authority delegated to the chairperson by this
section when acting in their absence or place.
(b) An appeal may be taken from any final order or other final
determination of the superintendent or board by any party who is or may
be adversely affected thereby to the chancery court pursuant to the
common law writ of certiorari set in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 27-8-101, within sixty (60) days from the date such order or
determination is made.
(3) Civil and criminal penalties. (a) Any person or user who does any
of the following acts or omissions shall be subject to a civil penalty of up
to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day for each day during which
the act or omission continues or occurs:
(i) Violates any effluent standard or limitation imposed
by a pretreatment program.
(ii) Violates the terms or conditions of a permit issued
pursuant to a pretreatment program.
(iii) Fails to complete a filing requirement of a
pretreatment program.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-52
(iv) Fails to allow or perform an entry, inspection,
monitoring, or reporting requirement of a pretreatment program.
(v) Fails to pay user or cost recovery charges imposed by
a pretreatment program.
(vi) Violates a final determination or order of the board.
(b) Any civil penalty shall be assessed in the following manner:
(i) The superintendent may issue an assessment against
any person or user responsible for the violation.
(ii) Any person or user against whom an assessment has
been issued may secure a review of such assessment by filing with
the superintendent a written petition setting forth the grounds and
reasons for his objections and asking for a hearing on the matter
involved before the mayor and board of aldermen. If a petition for
review of the assessment is not filed within thirty (30) days of the
date the assessment is served, the violator shall be deemed to have
consented to the assessment and it shall become final.
(iii) When any assessment becomes final because of a
person's failure to appeal the superintendent's assessment, the
superintendent may apply to the appropriate court for a judgment
and seek execution of such judgment and the court, in such
proceedings, shall treat a failure to appeal such assessment as a
confession of judgment in the amount of the assessment. Civil
penalties will be assessed based on the following criteria:
(A) Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a
substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity.
(B) Damages to the POTW, including
compensation for the damage or destruction of the facilities
of the POTW, which also includes any penalties, costs, and
attorney's fees incurred by the POTW as the result of the
illegal activity, as well as the expenses involved in enforcing
this section and the costs involved in rectifying any damage.
(C) Cause of the discharge or violation.
(D) The severity of the discharge and its effect
upon the facilities of the POTW and upon the quality and
quantity of the receiving waters.
(E) Effectiveness of action taken by the violator.
(F) The technical and economic feasibility of
reducing or eliminating the discharge.
(G) The economic benefit gained by the violator.
(iv) The superintendent may institute proceedings for
assessment in the name of the City of Camden in the chancery
court of the county in which all or part of the violation occurred.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-53
(c) The mayor and board may establish by regulation a schedule
of the amount of civil penalty which can be assessed by the
superintendent for certain specific violations or categories of violations.
(d) Any civil penalty assessed to a violator pursuant to this
section may be in addition to any civil penalty assessed by the
Commissioner of Environment and Conservation for violations of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-115(a)(1)(F). Provided, however, the
sum of the penalties imposed by this section and by § 69-3-115(a) shall
not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day for each day during
which the act or omission continues to occur.
(e) Criminal penalties. In addition to civil penalties imposed by
the local administrative officer and the State of Tennessee, any person
who willfully and negligently violates permit conditions is subject to
criminal penalties imposed by the State of Tennessee and the United
States.
(4) Assessment of noncompliance. (a) The superintendent may assess
the liability of any polluter or violator for damages to the pretreatment
agency resulting from any person(s) or user(s) pollution or violation,
failure, or neglect in complying with any permits or orders issued
pursuant to the provisions of the pretreatment program.
(b) If an appeal from such assessment is not made to the
superintendent by the polluter or violator within thirty (30) days of
notification of such assessment, he shall be deemed to have consented to
such assessment and it shall become final.
(c) Damages may include any expenses incurred in
investigating and enforcing the pretreatment program or any other
sections of the ordinance, in removing, correcting, and terminating any
pollution, and also compensation for actual damages caused by the
violation to the POTW. The superintendent shall assess the expenses and
damages incurred by the POTW to clear the obstruction, repair damage
to the POTW, and otherwise rectify any impairment caused by the
violation.
(d) Whenever any assessment has become final because of a
person's failure to appeal within thirty (30) days, the superintendent
shall bill the person responsible for the damage for reimbursement of all
expenses and damages suffered by the POTW. If the person responsible
refuses to pay, the superintendent may apply to the appropriate court for
a judgment and seek execution on such judgment. The court, in such
proceedings, shall treat the failure to appeal such assessment as a
confession of judgment in the amount of assessment.
(5) Judicial proceedings and relief. The superintendent may initiate
proceedings in the Chancery Court of Benton County against any person or user
who is alleged to have violated or is about to violate the pretreatment program,
its industrial user permit, any article of this ordinance, or any order of the
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-54
superintendent and/or board. In such action, the superintendent may seek, and
the court may grant, injunctive relief and any other relief available in law or
equity.
(6) Administrative enforcement remedies. (a) Notification of
violation. When the superintendent finds that any user has violated or
is violating this section, or a wastewater permit or order issued
hereunder, the superintendent or his agent may serve upon the user a
written Notice of Violation (NOV). Within ten (10) days of receipt of the
NOV, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions,
shall be submitted to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or
after receipt of the NOV.
(b) Consent orders. The superintendent is hereby empowered
to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible
for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken
by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time frame also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect
as administrative orders issued pursuant to subsection (d) below.
(c) Show-cause hearing. The superintendent may order any
user which causes or contributes to a violation of this ordinance, its
wastewater permit, or any order issued hereunder, to show cause why a
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the
user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any principle
executive, general partner, or corporate officer. Whether or not a duly
notified user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be
pursued.
(d) Compliance order. When the superintendent finds that a
user has violated or continues to violate this ordinance or a permit or
order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer
service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are
properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements
deemed reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology,
additional self-monitoring, and management practices.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-55
(e) Cease and desist orders. When the superintendent finds
that a user has violated or continues to violate this ordinance or any
permit or order issued hereunder, the superintendent may issue an order
to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in
noncompliance to do one (1) of the following:
(i) Comply with the order.
(ii) Take the appropriate remedial or preventive action
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and terminating the discharge.
(f) Emergency termination of service. When the superintendent
finds that an emergency exists in which immediate action is required to
protect public health, safety, or welfare, the health of animals, fish, or
aquatic life, a public water supply, or the facilities of the POTW, the
superintendent may, without prior notice, issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that certain action(s) be
taken as the superintendent deems necessary to meet the emergency.
If the violator fails to respond or is unable to respond to the
superintendent's order, the superintendent may take such emergency
action as deemed necessary or contract with a qualified person to carry
out the emergency measures. The superintendent may assess the
person(s) responsible for the emergency condition for actual costs
incurred by the superintendent in meeting the emergency.
If the emergency action adversely affects the user, the
superintendent shall provide the user an opportunity for a hearing as
soon as possible thereafter to consider restoration of service upon
abatement of the condition or other reasonable conditions. Following the
hearing, the superintendent may take any such authorized should the
proof warrant such action.
(7) Disposition of damage payments and penalties. All damages and/or
penalties assessed and collected under the provisions of this section shall be
placed in a special fund by the city and allocated and appropriated to the sewer
system for the administration of its pretreatment program.
(8) Vandalism. Any and all damages incurred by the POTW due to
acts of vandalism will be prosecuted to the full extent of the law.
(Ord. #EWJ-16, Dec. 1987, as replaced by Ord. #AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-311. Wastewater volume determination. (1) Metered water
supply. Charges and fees related to the volume of wastewater discharged to the
POTW shall be based upon the user's total water consumption from all water
supply sources. The total amount of water used shall be determined from public
meters installed and maintained by the city and/or private meters installed and
maintained at the expense of the user and approved by the city.
(2) Wastewater volume. When charges and fees based upon water
usage and/or discharge and where, in the opinion of the POTW, a significant
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-56
portion of the water received from any metered source does not flow into the
sewer because of the principle activity of the user or removal by other means,
the charges and fees will be applied only against the volume of water discharged
from such premises into the sanitary sewer. Written notification and proof of the
diversion of water must be provided by the user and approved by the city. The
users may install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the city to
measure either the amount of sewage discharged or the amount of water
diverted. Such meters shall be maintained at the expense of the user and be
tested for accuracy at the expense of the user when deemed necessary by the
superintendent.
(3) Estimated wastewater volume. For users where, in the opinion of
the city, it is unnecessary or impractical to install meters, charges and fees may
be based upon an estimate of the volume to be discharged. The estimate shall
be prepared by the user and approved by the superintendent or his
representative. The number of fixtures, seating capacity, population equivalent,
annual production of goods and services, and other such factors as deemed
rational by the POTW shall be used to estimate the wastewater discharge
volume.
(4) Domestic flows. For the separate determination of the volumes of
domestic and process flows from users for the purposes of calculating charges
based on process wastewater flows alone, users shall install a meter of a type
and at a location approved by the POTW. For users where, in the opinion of the
POTW, it is unnecessary or impractical to install such a meter, the volume of
the domestic and process wastewater shall be based upon an estimate prepared
by the user and approved by the POTW. (as added by AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-312. Wastewater charges and fees. (1) Purpose and types of
charges and fees. A schedule of charges and fees shall be adopted by the city
which will enable it to comply with the revenue requirements of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments. Charges and fees shall be determined
in a manner consistent with regulations of the federal grant program in order
that sufficient revenues are collected to defray the POTW's cost of operating and
maintaining adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems and to
provide sufficient funds for equipment replacement, capital outlay, bond service
costs, capital improvements, and depreciation.
(2) Types of charges and fees. The charges and fees established in the
city's schedule of charges and fees may include, but not limited to, the following:
(a) Sewer service line charges.
(b) Tap fees.
(c) Pretreatment program operating fees.
(d) User charges.
(e) Fees for monitoring requested by the user.
(f) Fees for permit applications.
(g) Fees based on wastewater characteristics and constituents.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-57
(h) Fees for discharge of holding tank wastes.
(i) Inspection fees.
(j) Industrial user permit fees.
(3) Determination of charges. Charges and fees shall be based upon
a minimum basic charge for each premise, computed on the basis of normal
wastewater from a domestic premise with the following characteristics:
BOD5 300 mg/l
COD 600 mg/l
Suspended solids 300 mg/l
Ammonia nitrogen 30 mg/l
Oil and grease 100 mg/l
The charges and fees for all users other than the basic domestic premise
shall be based upon the relative difference between the average wastewater
constituents and characteristics of that user as related to those of a domestic
premise.
The charges and fees established for permit users shall be based upon the
measured or estimated constituents and characteristics of the wastewater
discharge of the user which may include, but not be limited to, BOD, COD,
suspended solids, oil and grease, ammonia nitrogen, and flow volume.
(4) User charges. Each user of the POTW's sewer system will be levied
a charge for payment of indebtedness of the city and for the user's proportionate
share of the operation, maintenance, and replacement costs of the sewer system.
A surcharge may be levied against those users with wastewater that exceeds the
strength of normal wastewater as defined in this ordinance.
The user charge will be computed from a base charge plus applicable
surcharge. The base charge will be the user's proportionate share of the costs of
operation, maintenance, and replacement for handling its periodic volume of
normal wastewater plus the user's share of any bond amortization costs of the
city.
(a) Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement (OM&R) user
charges. Each user's share of OM&R costs will be computed by the
following formula:
Cu = (Ct / Vt) (Vu)
Where: Cu = User's charge for OM&R per unit time.
Ct = Total OM&R costs per unit of time, less costs
recovered from surcharges.
Vt = Total volume contribution from all users per unit
time.
Vu = Volume contribution from individual user per unit
time.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-58
(b) Bonded indebtedness charges. Each user's share of bonded
indebtedness costs will be based on a schedule which reflects the user's
volumetric and/or waste strength contribution to the system.
(c) User surcharges. The surcharge will be the user's
proportionate share of the OM&R costs for handling its periodic volume
of wastewater which exceeds the strength of BOD5, suspended solids,
and/or other pollutants in normal wastewater as listed in § 18-312(3) of
this ordinance. The amount of surcharge will be determined by the
following formula:
Cs = (Bc x B) + (Sc x S) + (Pc x P) x 8.34 x Vu
Where: Cs = Surcharge for wastewater exceeding the strength of
normal wastewater expressed in dollars per billing
period.
Bc = OM&R cost for treatment of a unit of BOD5 expressed
in dollars per pound.
B = Concentration of BOD5 from a user above the base
level of three hundred (300) mg/l, expressed in mg/l.
Sc = OM&R costs for treatment of a unit of suspended
solids expressed in dollars per pound.
S = Concentration of suspended solids from a user above
the base level of three hundred (300) mg/l, expressed
in mg/l.
Pc = OM&R costs for treatment of a unit of any pollutant
which the POTW is committed to treat by virtue of an
NPDES permit or other regulatory requirement,
expressed in dollars per pound.
P = Concentration of any pollutant from a user above a
base level. Base levels for pollutants subject to
surcharge will be established by the superintendent.
Vu = Volume of contribution of a user per billing period in
million gallons based on a twenty-four (24) hour
average for a billing period.
The value of parameters used to determine user charges may vary
from time to time. Therefore, the POTW is authorized to modify any
parameter or value as often as is necessary. Review of all parameters an
values shall be undertaken at least annually.
(d) Pretreatment program charges. Industrial users may be
required to pay a separate pretreatment program charge. This charge will
be based on the user's proportionate share of the costs of administering
the POTW pretreatment program, which includes costs incurred by the
POTW for verification monitoring, analysis, and reporting. Each user's
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-59
share of the pretreatment program costs will be computed by the
following formula:
Cu =(Ct x Vt) x Vu
Where: Cu = User's charge for POTW pretreatment program per
unit of time.
Ct = Total POTW pretreatment program costs per unit
time.
Vt = Total volume of contribution of permitted industrial
users per unit of time.
Vu = Volume contribution from permitted industrial user
per unit of time.
(5) Review of OM&R charges. The POTW shall review at least
annually the wastewater contribution by users, the treatment works, and its
approved user charge system. The POTW shall revise the user charges to
accomplish the following:
(a) Maintain the proportionate distribution of OM&R costs
among users or classes of users.
(b) Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total OM&R costs of
the treatment works.
(c) Apply any excess revenues collected to the costs of OM&R
for the next year and adjust rates accordingly.
(6) Charges for extraneous flows. The costs of operation and
maintenance for all flow not directly attributable to users, e.g.,
infiltration/inflow, will be distributed proportionately among all users of the
treatment works.
(7) Notification. Each user will be notified, at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill of the rate and that portion of the user charges
which are attributable to OM&R charges.
(8) Billing. Wastewater charges imposed by this ordinance shall be
added to, included in, and collected with monthly water service bills, and shall
be due and payable monthly. This shall not affect the right of the POTW to
collect wastewater charges from customers who utilized private or public water
supplies from other utilities and who discharge wastewater to the POTW.
(9) Collection. Wastewater charges and fees imposed by this ordinance
shall be collected by the city in a manner established by the superintendent.
(10) Delinquent accounts. The city may discontinue water service to
any customer who has a delinquent wastewater charge until such wastewater
charge has been paid, except as provided by state or local law.
(11) Adjustments. The city shall make appropriate adjustments in the
wastewater charge of sewer customers for over or under registration of utility
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-60
meters, leaks, or other recognized adjustments. (as added by AW2011-04, July
2011)
18-313. Administration. (1) Board of aldermen and mayor. In
addition to any other duty or responsibility otherwise conferred upon the board
by this ordinance, the mayor and board of aldermen shall have the duty and
power as follows:
(a) To recommend amendments or modifications to the
provisions of this ordinance.
(b) To grant exceptions pursuant to the provisions of §§ 18-307
and 18-308, and to determine such issues of law and fact as are necessary
to perform this duty.
(c) To hold hearings upon appeals from orders of actions of the
superintendent as may be provided under the provisions of this
ordinance.
(d) To hold hearings related to the suspension, revocation, or
modification of a wastewater discharge permit and issue appropriate
orders relating hereto.
(e) To hold other hearings that may be required in the
administration of this ordinance and to make determinations and issue
orders necessary to effectuate the purposes of this ordinance.
(f) To request assistance from any officer, agent, or employee
of the city and to obtain any necessary information or other assistance.
(g) The board, acting through its chairperson, shall have the
power to issue subpoenas requiring attendance, the testimony of
witnesses, and the production of documentary evidence relevant to any
matter properly heard by the board.
(h) The chairperson shall be authorized to administer oaths to
people giving testimony.
(2) Superintendent. (a) Superintendent and staff. The
superintendent and his/her staff shall be responsible for the
administration of all parts of this section.
(b) Authority of superintendent. The superintendent shall have
the authority to enforce all sections of this ordinance. The superintendent
shall be responsible and have the authority to maintain and operate the
various treatment works, sewer lines, pump stations, and other
appurtenances of the POTW. The superintendent shall be responsible for
preparation of operating budgets subject to the normal budgetary
processes of the city.
(c) Records. The superintendent shall keep in his office or at an
appropriate storage facility all applications required under this chapter
a complete record thereof, including a record of all wastewater discharge
permits.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-61
(d) Notice of national pretreatment standard. The
superintendent shall notify users identified in 40 CFR, part 403.8(f)(2) of
any applicable pretreatment standards or other applicable requirements
promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of section 204(b) of the Act
(33 USC 1284), section 405 of the Act (33 USC 1345), or under the
provisions of sections 3001, 3304, or 4004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
Failure of the superintendent to notify users shall not relieve the users
from the responsibility of complying with these regulations.
(e) Public participation notice. The superintendent shall comply
with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR, part 425 in the
enforcement of national pretreatment standards. The superintendent
shall at least annually provide public notification in the largest local
newspaper of all significant industrial users which, during the previous
twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. For the
purposes of this provision, a significant industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violations meet one (1) or more of the following
criteria:
(i) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of
the measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by
any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for
the same pollutant parameter.
(ii) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined
as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of the
measurements taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed
the product of the daily average maximum limit or average limit
times the applicable TRC (TRC =1.4 for BOD, TSS, and oil and
grease; and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
(iii) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit
(daily maximum or longer term average) that the superintendent
believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference, or pass through, including endangering the health of
the POTW personnel and the general public.
(iv) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health and welfare or to the
environment and has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
(v) Violation by ninety (90) days or more after the
schedule date of a compliance schedule milestone contained in a
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance.
(vi) Failure to provide required reports, such as baseline
monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic
Change 5, July 11, 2011 18-62
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules within thirty (30) days of the due date.
(vii) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(viii) Any other violation or group of violations which the
superintendent considers to be significant.
(f) Regulations and standards. The superintendent may
promulgate rules, regulations, and design criteria not inconsistent with
this ordinance and have them printed for distribution. These rules may
include requirements for performing wastewater characterizations,
analysis, and other measurements by standard methods approved by the
superintendent.
(g) Sewer credits. The superintendent shall approve secondary
meters and determine other kinds of sewer use charge credits.
(h) Approves new construction. The superintendent shall give
approval in acceptance of newly constructed sanitary sewer lines, pump
stations, and other appurtenances. (as added by AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-314. Validity. (1) Conflict. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent with any part of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency or conflict.
(2) Savings clause. If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or
subsection of this ordinance is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, works, sections, and
subsections shall not be affected and shall continue in full force. (as added by
AW2011-04, July 2011)
18-63
CHAPTER 4
CROSS CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES, ETC.1
SECTION
18-401. Definitions.
18-402. Standards.
18-403. Construction, operation, and supervision.
18-404. Statement required.
18-405. Inspections required.
18-406. Right of entry for inspections.
18-407. Correction of existing violations.
18-408. Use of protective devices.
18-409. Unpotable water to be labeled.
18-410. Violations.
18-401. Definitions. The following definitions and terms shall apply in
the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
(1) "Public water supply." The waterworks system furnishing water
to the City of Camden, Tennessee for general use and which supply is recognized
as the public water supply by the Tennessee Department of Health.
(2) "Cross connection." Any physical connection whereby the public
water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public
or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such manner
that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the
manipulation of valves or because of any other arrangement.
(3) "Auxiliary intake." Any piping connection or other device whereby
water may be secured from a source other than that normally used.
(4) "Bypass." Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the
water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant.
(5) "Interconnection." Any system of piping or other arrangement
whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain,
conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain
sewage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water supply.
(6) "Person." Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, or association, and any municipal or private corporation
1Municipal code references
Plumbing code: title 12.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
18-64
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. (Ord.
#EWJ-5, May 1985)
18-402. Standards. The City of Camden, Tennessee Public Water
Supply is to comply with Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 68-221-701 through
68-221-720 as well as the Rules and Regulations for Public Water Supplies,
legally adopted in accordance with this code, which pertain to cross connections,
auxiliary intakes, bypasses, and interconnections, and establish an effective
ongoing program to control these undesirable water uses. (Ord. #EWJ-5, May
1985)
18-403. Construction, operation, and supervision. It shall be
unlawful for any person to cause a cross connection to be made, or allow one to
exist for any purpose whatsoever, unless the construction and operation of same
have been approved by the Tennessee Department of Health and the operation
of such cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection is at all
times under the direct supervision of the superintendent of the City of Camden
Water Supply. (Ord. #EWJ-5, May 1985)
18-404. Statement required. Any person whose premises are supplied
with water from the public water supply and who also has on the same premises
a separate source of water supply, or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary
storage reservoir from which the water stored therein is circulated through a
piping system, shall file with the superintendent a statement of the
non-existence of unapproved or unauthorized cross connections, auxiliary
intakes, bypasses, or interconnections. Such statement shall also contain an
agreement that no cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass, or interconnection
will be permitted upon the premises. (Ord. #EWJ-5, May 1985)
18-405. Inspections required. It shall be the duty of the
superintendent of the public water supply to cause inspections to be made of all
properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the
public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and
reinspections, based on potential health hazards involved, shall be established
by the superintendent of the City of Camden, Tennessee Public Water Supply
and as approved by the Tennessee Department of Health. (Ord. #EWJ-5, May
1985)
18-406. Right of entry for inspections. The superintendent or his
authorized representative shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time,
any property served by a connection to the City of Camden Public Water Supply
for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems therein for cross
connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses, or interconnections. On request, the
owner, lessee, or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the
18-65
inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or
systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access,
when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections.
(Ord. #EWJ-5, May 1985)
18-407. Correction of existing violations. Any person who now has
cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses, or interconnections in violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be allowed a reasonable time within which
to comply with the provisions of this chapter. After a thorough investigation of
existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to complete the work,
the amount of time shall be designated by the Superintendent of the City of
Camden Public Water Supply.
The failure to correct conditions threatening the safety of the public water
system as prohibited by this chapter and the Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 68-221-711, within a reasonable time and within the time limits set by the
City of Camden Public Water Supply shall be grounds for denial of water
service. If proper protection has not been provided after a reasonable time, the
utility shall give the customer legal notification that water service is to be
discontinued and shall physically separate the public water supply from the
customer's on-site piping system in such a manner that the two systems cannot
again be connected by an unauthorized person.
Where cross connections, interconnections, auxiliary intakes, or bypasses
are found that constitute an extreme hazard of immediate concern of
contaminating the public water system, the management of the water supply
shall require that immediate corrective action be taken to eliminate the threat
to the public water system. Immediate steps shall be taken to disconnect the
public water supply from the on-site piping system unless the imminent
hazard(s) is corrected immediately. (Ord. #EWJ-5, May 1985)
18-408. Use of protective devices. Where the nature of use of the
water supplied a premises by the water department is such that it is deemed:
(1) Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation.
(2) That the owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot, or is not
willing, to demonstrate to the official in charge of the water supply, or his
designated representative, that the water use and protective features of the
plumbing are such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability of the water
supply.
(3) That the nature and mode of operation within a premises are such
that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing.
(4) There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted,
altered, or disconnected.
The Superintendent of the City of Camden Public Water Supply, or his
designated representative, shall require the use of an approved protective device
on the service line serving the premises to assure that any contamination that
18-66
may originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. The protective
device shall be a reduced pressure zone type backflow preventer approved by the
Tennessee Department of Health as to manufacture, model, and size. The
method of installation of backflow protective devices shall be approved by the
superintendent of the public water supply prior to installation and shall comply
with the criteria set forth by the Tennessee Department of Health. The
installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises.
Personnel of the City of Camden, Tennessee Public Water Supply shall
have the right to inspect and test the device or devices on an annual basis or
whenever deemed necessary by the superintendent or his designated
representative. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without
the knowledge of the occupant of the premises.
Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations
or protection of life, property, or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to
avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective
device or devices. Where it is found that only one unit has been installed and
the continuance of service is critical, the superintendent shall notify, in writing,
the occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange
for a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The water
supply shall require the occupant of the premises to make all repairs indicated
promptly, to keep the unit(s) working properly, and the expense of such repairs
shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the premises. Repairs shall be made
by qualified personnel acceptable to the Superintendent of the City of Camden,
Tennessee Public Water Supply.
The failure to maintain backflow prevention device(s) in proper working
order shall be grounds for discontinuing water service to a premises. Likewise,
the removal, bypassing, or altering of the protective device(s) or the installation
thereof so as to render the devices ineffective shall constitute grounds for
discontinuance of water service. Water service to such premises shall not be
restored until the customer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or
defects to the satisfaction of the City of Camden, Tennessee Public Water
Supply. (Ord. EWJ-5, May 1985)
18-409. Unpotable water to be labeled. The potable water supply
made available to premises served by the public water supply shall be protected
from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which could
be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the
potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
WATER UNSAFE
FOR DRINKING
18-67
The minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters at least one-inch high
located on a red background. (Ord. #EWJ-5, May 1985)
18-410. Violations. The requirements contained herein shall apply to
all premises served by the City of Camden, Tennessee Water System whether
located inside or outside the corporate limits and are hereby made a part of the
conditions required to be met for the city to provide water services to any
premises. Such action, being essential for the protection of the water
distribution system against the entrance of contamination which may render the
water unsafe healthwise, or otherwise undesirable, shall be enforced rigidly
without regard to location of the premises, whether inside or outside the City
of Camden, Tennessee corporate limits.
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
therefor, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), and each day of continued violation after conviction
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. #EWJ-5, May 1985)
Change 3, May 8, 2006 18-68
CHAPTER 5
FATS, OILS, AND GREASE
SECTION
18-501. Purpose.
18-502. Fat, oil, and grease (FOG), waste food, and sand interceptors.
18-503. Definitions.
18-504. Fat, oil, grease, and food waste.
18-505. Sand, soil, and oil interceptors.
18-506. Laundries.
18-507. Control equipment.
18-508. Solvents prohibited.
18-509. Enforcement and penalties.
18-510. Alterations of control methods.
18-501. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to control discharges
into the public sewerage collection system and treatment plant that interfere
with the operations or the system, cause blockage and plugging of pipelines,
interfere with normal operation of pumps and their controls and contribute
waste of a strength or form that is beyond the treatment capability of the
treatment plant. (as added by Ord. #JT2006-2, May 2006)
18-502. Fat, oil, and grease (FOG), waste food, and sand
interceptors. FOG, waste food and sand interceptors shall be installed when,
in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing fats, oils, and grease, ground food waste, sand, soil,
and solids, or other harmful ingredients in excessive amounts which impact the
wastewater collection system. Such interceptors shall not be required for single
family residences, but may be required on multiple family residences. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(as added by Ord. #JT2006-2, May 2006)
18-503. Definitions. In the interpretation and application of this
chapter the following words and phrases shall have the indicated meanings:
(6) "Interceptor." A devise designed and installed to separate and
retain for removal, by automatic or manual means, deleterious, hazardous or
undesirable matter from normal wastes, while permitting normal sewage or
waste to discharge into the drainage system by gravity.
(7) "Grease trap." An interceptor whose rated flow exceeds 50 g.p.m.
and is located outside the building.
Change 3, May 8, 2006 18-69
(8) "Grease interceptor." An interceptor whose rated flow is 50 g.p.m.
or less and is typically located inside the building. (as added by Ord. #JT2006-2,
May 2006)
18-504. Fat, oil, grease, and food waste. (1) New construction and
renovation. Upon construction or renovation, all restaurants, cafeterias, hotels,
motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails,
churches, camps, caterers, manufacturing plants and any other sewer users who
discharge applicable waste shall submit a FOG and food waste control plan that
will effectively control the discharge of FOG and food waste.
(2) Existing structures. All existing restaurants, cafeterias, hotels,
motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails,
churches, camps, caterers, manufacturing plants and any other sewer users who
discharge applicable waste shall be required to submit a plan for control of FOG
and food waste, if and when the superintendent determines that FOG and food
waste are causing excessive loading, plugging, damage or operational problems
to structures or equipment in the public sewer system.
(3) Implementation of plan. After approval of the FOG plan by the
superintendent the sewer user must: implement the plan within a reasonable
amount of time; service and maintain the equipment in order to prevent adverse
impact upon the sewer collection system and treatment facility. If in the opinion
of the superintendent the user continues to impact the collection system and
treatment plant, additional pretreatment may be required. (as added by
Ord. #JT2006-2, May 2006)
18-505. Sand, soil, and oil interceptors. All car washes, truck
washes, garages, service stations and other sources of sand, soil, and oil shall
install effective sand, soil, and oil interceptors. These interceptors will be sized
to effectively remove sand, soil, and oil at the expected flow rates. These
interceptors will be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent impact upon the
wastewater collection and treatment system. Owners whose interceptors are
deemed to be ineffective by the superintendent may be asked to change the
cleaning frequency or to increase the size or the interceptors. Owners or
operators of washing facilities will prevent the inflow of rainwater into the
sanitary sewers. (as added by Ord. #JT2006-2, May 2006)
18-506. Laundries. Commercial laundries shall be equipped with an
interceptor with a wire basket or similar device, removable for cleaning, that
prevents passage into the sewer system of solids ½ inch or larger in size such as
strings, rags, buttons, or other solids detrimental to the system. (as added by
Ord. #JT2006-2, May 2006)
18-507. Control equipment. The equipment or facilities installed to
control FOG, food waste, sand and soil, must be designed in accordance with
Change 3, May 8, 2006 18-70
southern plumbing code and Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation engineering standards or applicable city guidelines. Underground
equipment shall be tightly sealed to prevent inflow of rainwater and easily
accessible to allow regular maintenance. Control equipment shall be
maintained by the owner or operator of the facility so as to prevent a stoppage
of the public sewer, and the accumulation of FOG in the lines, pump stations
and treatment plant. If the city is required to clean out the public sewer lines
as a result of a stoppage resulting from poorly maintained control equipment,
or lack there of, the owner or operator shall be required to refund the labor,
equipment, materials and overhead costs to the city. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit or restrict any other remedy the city has under
this chapter, or state or federal law.
The city retains the right to inspect and approve installation of the control
equipment. (as added by Ord. #JT2006-2, May 2006)
18-508. Solvents prohibited. The use of degreasing or line cleaning
products containing petroleum based solvents is prohibited. (as added by
Ord. #JT2006-2, May 2006)
18-509. Enforcement and penalties. Any person who violates this
chapter shall be guilty of a civil violation punishable under and according to the
general penalty provision of the city's municipal code of ordinances. Each day's
violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense. (as added by
Ord. #JT2006-2, May 2006)
18-510. Alteration of control methods. The city through the
superintendent reserves the right to request additional control measures if
measures taken are shown to be insufficient to protect sewer collection system
and treatment plant from interference due to the discharge of fats, oils, and
grease, sand/soil, or lint. (as added by Ord. #JT2006-2, May 2006)
19-1
1Municipal code reference
Electrical code: title 12.
TITLE 19
ELECTRICITY AND GAS
CHAPTER
1. ELECTRICITY; STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS AND PLACES.
CHAPTER 1
ELECTRICITY; STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC
WAYS AND PLACES1
SECTION
19-101. Grant of franchise to Benton County to provide electricity and to use
streets and other public ways and places.
19-101. Grant of franchise to Benton County to provide electricity
and to use streets and other public ways and places.
(1) The mayor and alderman of the City of Camden, Tennessee
(hereinafter referred to as "the municipality"), hereby grants to Benton County,
Tennessee, its successors and assigns (hereinafter referred to as "the county"),
the right, privilege, authority, and franchise for the purpose of supplying electric
energy to the inhabitants of the municipality, to use the streets, avenue, alleys,
public ways, rights of way, easements, or other similar property rights in the
municipality necessary or convenient for such purposes.
(2) The county shall, by accepting this authority and franchise, agree
that it will, upon making any excavation in the streets, avenues, alleys, public
ways, and places of the municipality in the exercise of this franchise, restore the
surface and paving at the point of such excavation to substantially the same
condition as before the work was done within a reasonable time thereafter and
will save the municipality harmless from any liability arising out of any change
in the condition of any street, avenue, alley, public way, or place by the county.
(3) The rights, privileges, authorities, and franchise hereby granted
shall continue in force and effect for a period of twenty (20) years from the date
this chapter becomes effective.
(4) The municipality hereby covenants and agrees not to grant any
other authority or franchise for an electrical plant or system during the term of
the franchise hereby granted, insofar as an exclusive franchise now is or may
19-2
hereafter be authorized or permitted by law to a public entity such as the
county. (1972 Code, § 13-401)
20-1
TITLE 20
MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER
1. FIXED ASSETS, PROPERTY CONTROL AND INVENTORY.
2. TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
CHAPTER 1
FIXED ASSETS, PROPERTY CONTROL AND INVENTORY
SECTION
20-101. Purpose.
20-102. Definitions.
20-103. General provisions.
20-104. Fixed asset control.
20-105. Property control.
20-106. Inventory control.
20-107. Annual inventories.
20-108. Property disposal.
20-109. Penalties.
20-101. Purpose. To regulate administrative policy and procedure for
the accountability and control of the city's fixed assets, personal property, and
stored supplies and materials; for adequate inspection and inventory, and for
the proper disposal of surplus, obsolete or salvage supplies, materials and/or
equipment. (Ord. #JT-4, Sept. 1997)
20-102. Definitions. For the purpose of this regulation, the following
definitions shall apply:
(1) "Fixed assets." Any and all real property, i.e., land, buildings,
streets, roads and ways, sidewalks, storm drainage systems, water production,
storage and distribution systems, sewage collection and treatment systems, and
other such properties, the title to which is vested in the town.
(2) "Personal property." All other property, i.e., vehicles, construction
and maintenance equipment, tools, communications equipment, office
furnishings, machines and equipment, not classified as a fixed asset (real
property).
(3) "Accountability level." The monetary limit which is established
beyond which the item must be accounted for in the appropriate accounting
records.
(4) "Inventory." The total quantity of supplies and materials
maintained on hand for day-to-day operations, maintenance and repairs.
20-2
(5) "Obsolete assets." Assets which because of technical advances or
changes in local requirements are no longer adequate to perform the required
function, but which are otherwise in serviceable condition.
(6) "Property control officer." The individual designated by the mayor
to be responsible for the creation and maintenance of all necessary records to
provide for accurate control and accountability of all fixed assets, property and
inventory of the city, or, failing such designation, the mayor him/herself.
(7) "Surplus assets, property or inventory." Assets, property or
supplies and materials which are in good operating and functional condition, but
are obsolete or no longer needed to accomplish the appropriate mission of the
city government.
(8) "Salvage assets, property or inventory." Assets, property or
supplies and materials which through use have reached a point where it is no
longer economically feasible to repair and maintain them.
(9) "Disposal." The elimination of fixed assets, property or inventory
which have been classified as "surplus," "obsolete" or "salvage" by authorized
public sale or transfer to other governmental entities. (Ord. #JT-4, Sept. 1997)
20-103. General provisions. (1) The mayor, as the chief executive
officer of the city, has ultimate responsibility for accountability and maintenance
of all fixed assets, personal property and inventory owned by the city.
(2) The city recorder/director of finance shall be designated as the
property control officer, shall be under the supervision of the mayor, and shall
be assigned responsibility for the establishment and maintenance of all
necessary controls and records to adequately account for all fixed assets,
personal property and inventory of the city which are above the accountability
level as hereinbelow established.
(3) The supervisor of each department or activity of the city
government shall be responsible to the property control officer for the
accountability of all fixed assets, personal property and/or inventory assigned
to his or her respective department or activity.
(4) The property control officer shall provide the required control forms
and records to be used in the city's property control program. These forms and
records shall be standardized for all users. (Ord. #JT-4, Sept. 1997)
20-104. Fixed asset control. All fixed assets of the city, regardless of
the individual unit cost, shall be an accountable item.
(1) Each building shall be a separately accountable item, and shall be
identified on a "Land and Building Record" card. The property control officer
shall be responsible for the records of the municipal building.
(2) Each separate tract or parcel of land shall be identified on a "Land
and Building Record" card. The warranty deed, easement deed, etc., for each
such tract will be filed in the city recorder's office.
20-3
(3) All other improvements which are classified as a fixed asset shall
be identified on a "Fixed Asset Inventory Record" card by type of assets. For
example, sewage systems, listed by component, i.e., sewer mains, sewage
pumping station, etc.
(a) The initial classifications of such improvements will be
coordinated with the property control officer to insure proper
identification of each asset and subsequent changes to that asset.
(b) Fixed assets such as pipelines, streets, etc. will be listed by
linear footage.
(4) When the provisions of this regulation are initially implemented,
it will be necessary to make an estimate of the value of the item in those cases
where the original value or cost cannot be ascertained. Thereafter, the
acquisition price of fair market value shall be used to indicate the value.
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the supervisor of each department
or activity of the city to notify the property control officer, on the prescribed
asset change form, of all corrections, additions and/or deletions of accountable
fixed assets. (Ord. #JT-4, Sept. 1997)
20-105. Property control. The accountability level for each item of
non-expendable personal property, effective with the date of this regulation,
shall normally be five hundred dollars ($500); however, in those cases of small,
critical items which require closer control, such as office machines, weapons,
communications equipment, photographic equipment, laboratory equipment,
etc., these items will be accountable, regardless of initial cost or current value.
(1) Each item of accountable personal property shall be identified on
an individual "Property Control and Equipment Inventory Record" card;
however, multiples of the same item may be placed on the same card and
quantities, costs, serial numbers, item numbers, etc. listed thereon.
(2) The initial establishment of the property control procedures will
require complete inventory and identification of all items to be placed under
property control. Estimates as to value will be required where the original value
or cost is unknown. Adequate nomenclature shall be established by the property
control officer to insure that each item of equipment is adequately classified.
(3) Subsequent corrections, additions and/or deletions of items from
the property control records shall be the responsibility of the supervisor of the
department or activity to which the items are assigned. The property control
officer shall provide the necessary form to be used for each such change. (Ord.
#JT-4, Sept. 1997)
20-106. Inventory control. Each supervisor of a department or activity
of the city government which stores or maintains a stockage (inventory) of spare
parts and supplies or materials of significant value will be responsible for
maintaining a "running inventory" of all such materials. The property control
officer will provide the necessary inventory forms; however, these forms will be
20-4
maintained in the department or activity and available for review during audits.
(Ord. #JT-4, Sept. 1997)
20-107. Annual inventories. A one hundred percent (100%) physical
inventory of all fixed assets, personal property and inventory shall be conducted
a minimum of once each fiscal year, during the month of May. The property
control officer will provide each department or activity concerned the necessary
inventory forms. This annual inventory will insure that all property is
accounted, its serviceability noted, and the proper data posted to the appropriate
property records for the annual audit of the city's records. (Ord. #JT-4, Sept.
1997)
20-108. Property disposal. All items of fixed assets, personal property
and/or supplies and materials which have been determined to be surplus,
obsolete or salvage items will be disposed of in the following manner:
(1) The supervisor of each department or activity of the city
government which has such items to be disposed of will submit a "Request for
Disposal" to the property control officer, who will refer the request to the mayor
for approval.
(2) The mayor shall have the authority to authorize the disposal of
such items where the value (sale price) is not expected to exceed $500.00.
(3) The disposal of a surplus, obsolete or salvage item, the value of
which is in excess of $500.00, will require the approval of the board.
(4) The disposal of any real property of the city will require the
approval of the board.
(5) All surplus, obsolete or salvage items to be sold shall be sold by
either sealed bids or public auction, subsequent to the public advertisement of
the sale at least one time in the city's official newspaper at least 14 days prior
to the sale.
(a) With the authorization of the mayor, such items with a value
of $50.00 or less may be sold without bids or public auction; however,
each such sale shall be reported to the board at its next regular meeting.
(b) The transfer of surplus, obsolete, or salvage items to other
governmental entities may be accomplished on a negotiated basis, subject
to the approval of the board. (Ord. #JT-4, Sept. 1997)
20-109. Penalties. The disposal of any fixed asset, personal property
and/or inventory of supplies and materials owned by the city by any other
manner or means than those hereinabove prescribed, unless the board has
lawfully and specifically authorized an exception thereto, by any officer, official
or employee of the City of Camden, or other individual(s), is an unlawful action
and may subject the person or persons responsible to personal financial liability
for any loss to the city incurred thereby, and may also result in other legal
20-5
recourse, and possible termination with prejudice of the employment by the city
of such person or persons. (Ord. #JT-4, Sept. 1997)
20-6
CHAPTER 2
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SECTION
20-201. Purpose.
20-202. Applicable scope.
20-203. Definitions.
20-204. Municipal right-of-way use permit required.
20-205. Application to provide telecommunications services using the public
rights-of-way.
20-206. Municipal right-of-way use permit issuance.
20-207. Petition for reconsideration.
20-208. Administration and enforcement.
20-209. Applicability.
20-210. Compensation to city.
20-211. Remitting rental fees to the city.
20-212. Audits.
20-213. Transfers.
20-214. Notices to the city.
20-215. Construction obligations.
20-216. Conditions of rights-of-way occupancy.
20-217. Insurance requirements.
20-218. Indemnity.
20-219. Privacy of customer information.
20-220. Annexation; deannexation.
20-221. Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way.
20-201. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a
competitively neutral policy for usage of public rights-of-way for the provision
of telecommunications services and enable the city to:
(1) Permit non-discriminatory access to the public rights-of-way for
providers of telecommunications services; and
(2) Manage the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the impact
and cost to the citizens of the placement of telecommunications facilities within
the rights-of-way; and
(3) Obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the commercial use
of public rights-of-way through collection of rents; and
(4) Promote competition among telecommunications service providers
and encourage the universal availability of advanced telecommunications
services to all residents and businesses of the city; and
(5) Minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and other
adverse effects on the city's public rights-of-way. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-7
20-202. Applicable scope. This chapter applies to all
telecommunications service providers under Titles II ("Title II") and VI ("Title
VI") of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, (47 U.S.C. 201 et seq.)
excluding services provided solely by means of wireless transmission. This
chapter does not exempt providers of cable service or open video systems service
from the requirements of Title VI and applicable FCC rules and regulations.
Any requirements and obligations imposed by this chapter are in addition to any
requirements imposed by Title VI or state law and regulation on such providers.
(Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-203. Definitions. (1) "Applicant." Any person who files an
application with the city, under § 20-205 of this chapter, in order to obtain the
necessary permission to use the public rights-of-way to provide
telecommunications services within the city, whether by means of the person's
own facilities or by means of capacity obtained from another provider of
telecommunications services.
(2) "City." The City of Camden, the present municipal corporation of
Camden, together with any future annexation made pursuant to law.
(3) "Chief administrative officer." The Chief Administrative Officer of
the City of Camden, or the person designated by the city council to carry out the
duties and responsibilities of the chief administrative officer. Chief
administrative officer shall also mean the person under the chief administrative
officer's management and control designated by the chief administrative officer
to administer the provisions of this chapter.
(4) "City requirements." All laws, rules, regulations, policies and
directives of general application of the City of Camden, in effect at present or to
be adopted in the future by the city.
(5) "Gross revenue." All revenues received by a provider for
telecommunications services furnished within the city. However, revenues
received for use of network capacity, switched or unswitched access, and sale of
unbundled elements under 47 U.S.C. 251 (b) and (c) from resellers of
telecommunications services who are in compliance with this chapter are not
included. Gross revenue does not include revenue uncollectible from customers
("bad debt") and any end user taxes collected from customers.
(6) "Municipal right-of-way use permit or municipal permit." The right
granted by the city to use public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications
services within the city to the public or to other providers, as specified by the
terms of this chapter.
(7) "Person." Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
(8) "Provider." A person who has been granted a certificate of need by
the Tennessee Regulatory Authority and/or who operates or uses a
telecommunications network within the city to provide telecommunications
services, and who falls under the definition of § 20-202 of this chapter.
20-8
(9) "Public rights-of-way." The surface, the air space above the
surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path,
alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, easement or similar property
in which the city holds any property interest or exercises any rights of
management or control over and which, consistent with the purposes for which
it was acquired or dedicated, may be used for the installation and maintenance
of a telecommunications network.
(10) "Telecommunications network or network." All facilities placed in
the public rights-of-way and used to provide telecommunications services.
(11) "Telecommunications services." All transmissions between or
among points specified by the user, of information of the users choosing
(whether voice, video or data), without change in content of the information as
sent and received, where such transmissions are accomplished through a
telecommunications network. Telecommunications services include all ancillary
or adjunct switching services and signal conversions rendered as a function of
underlying transmission services, but excludes long distance transmissions
(inter-LATA and intra-LATA toll transmissions). Telecommunications services
include all services provided. Telecommunications services also include all
content or value-added services rendered in conjunction with transmission
services. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-204. Municipal right-of-way use permit required. (1) A person
may not deliver telecommunications services in the city by means of a network
unless the person obtains a municipal right-of-way use permit.
(2) The use of public rights-of-way for the delivery of any service not
covered by this chapter is subject to all other applicable city requirements. (Ord.
#JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-205. Application to provide telecommunications services using
the public rights-of-way. (1) Any person proposing to provide
telecommunications services by means of a telecommunications network located
within the public rights-of-way ("applicant") shall submit an application to the
chief administrative officer. The application, in a form to be prescribed by the
chief administrative officer, shall describe all services the applicant wishes to
provide, outline applicant's proposed network, and identify the uses of and
potential impact on the public rights-of-way.
(2) The chief administrative officer shall have the duty to review
applications submitted under this chapter and administer the provisions of this
chapter regarding the granting or denial of a municipal right-of-way use permit
to applicants. The chief administrative officer shall issue municipal right-of-way
use permits, and shall administer and enforce compliance with respect to all
municipal right-of-way use permits granted under this chapter. The chief
administrative officer shall submit a report annually to the city council
20-9
analyzing whether any requirements imposed by each section of this chapter
result in
(a) Anticompetitive effects in the market for
telecommunications services in the city, as defined by federal law, and/or
(b) Discrimination in favor of or against a holder of a certificate
of need under state law. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-206. Municipal right-of-way use permit issuance. (1) If the chief
administrative officer finds that the application meets the requirements of this
chapter, the chief administrative officer shall cause to be prepared a municipal
right-of-way use permit for issuance to the applicant.
(2) The chief administrative officer shall complete all deliberations
towards issuing a municipal right-of-way use permit, and shall issue the permit
or a written denial within 60 days of the receipt of an application. The applicant
shall respond to all reasonable information requests of the chief administrative
officer during this consideration period. Any delays in providing such
information shall be documented in writing by the chief administrative officer,
who may cite any delays or refusals in obtaining information from an applicant
as grounds for denial of a permit. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-207. Petition for reconsideration. The act of granting, denying or
terminating a municipal right-of-way use permit is an exercise of the police
power of the city. A person whose application for a municipal right-of-way use
permit is denied must petition the city council for reconsideration before seeking
judicial remedies, and must file such a petition within 45 days of the written
denial of such application by the chief administrative officer. A petition is
considered denied if the city council does not act within 45 days after the
petition is filed with the city clerk. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997).
20-208. Administration and enforcement. (1) The chief
administrative officer shall administer this chapter and enforce compliance with
a municipal right-of-way use permit granted under this chapter.
(2) A provider shall report information that the chief administrative
officer requires in the form and manner prescribed by the chief administrative
officer relating to the use of public rights-of-way for the right-of-way occupancy
authorized by a municipal right-of-way use permit granted under this chapter.
(3) The chief administrative officer shall report to the city council the
chief administrative officer's determination that a provider has failed to comply
with this chapter. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-209. Applicability. (1) Sections 20-215, 20-216, and 20-217 of this
chapter apply only to a provider that owns or controls physical facilities in the
rights-of-way.
20-10
(2) Section 20-218 of this chapter applies to a provider that has a
property interest in a network. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-210. Compensation to city. (1) To compensate the city for the use
and occupancy of the public rights-of-way, a provider shall pay a municipal
right-of-way rental fee calculated as follows:
(a) Rights-of-way rental fee: Each provider shall be subject to
a 5% annual fee based on gross revenue obtained from the provision of
telecommunications services within the city.
(b) Non-monetary consideration: To the extent allowed by state
and federal law, the city may include non-monetary consideration from
each provider. To the extent not expressly prohibited by applicable law,
a provider may agree to furnish to the city non-monetary consideration
in the form of telecommunications services, network capacity, conduit, or
other infrastructure, valued at the provider's direct cost. The chief
administrative officer shall apply a credit or an offset for any
non-monetary consideration received to the annual right-of-way rental
fee. The chief administrative officer shall publicly disclose the form of
non-monetary consideration and the credit amount.
(c) Credit for cable television franchise fees and other
contributions: Any telecommunications provider who is currently
franchised by the city under state and federal law and regulations to
provide cable television service shall receive a credit against the annual
rights-of-way rental fee for any cable television franchise fees paid to the
city, and any other monetary or non-monetary contributions to the city
under a cable franchise agreement.
(2) A provider may pass through to customers the municipal
right-of-way rental fee on a pro rata basis, at its discretion, as permitted by
state and federal law. The city does not require or recommend a pass-through
charge of the fee on a per line or per customer basis. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-211. Remitting rental fees to the city. A provider shall remit the
municipal right-of-way rental fee on a quarterly basis. Payment shall be made
on or before the 45th day following the close of each calendar quarter for which
the payment is calculated. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-212. Audits. (1) On 30 days notice to a provider, the city may audit
a provider at any time. The provider shall furnish information to demonstrate
its compliance with the municipal right-of-way use permit.
(2) A provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and
records of business and operations in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles for a period of five years. If the Federal Communications
Commission requires, a provider shall use the system of accounts and the forms
20-11
of books, accounts, records, and memoranda prescribed in 47 CFR Part 32 or its
successor. The city may examine the provider's books and records.
(3) A provider shall make available to the city, for the city to examine,
audit, review and copy, in the citys offices, upon the chief administrative
officer's reasonable written request, its books and records including papers,
books, accounts, documents, maps, plans and other provider records pertaining
to a municipal right-of-way use permit granted under this chapter. A provider
shall fully cooperate in making records available and otherwise assist the city
examiner. The city examiner shall not make copies of customer specific
information. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-213. Transfers. (1) A provider may not transfer a municipal
right-of-way use permit unless the chief administrative officer approves the
transfer in writing.
(2) A change in control of a provider is a transfer requiring chief
administrative officer approval. A change of 25 percent or greater in the
ownership of the provider establishes a rebuttable presumption of a change in
control.
(3) If a provider attempts to transfer or transfers the providers
municipal right-of-way use permit without approval of the chief administrative
officer, the chief administrative officer may revoke the municipal right-of-way
use permit. If a municipal right-of-way use permit is revoked, all rights of the
provider under the municipal right-of-way use permit end.
(4) A provider may transfer, without the chief administrative officer's
approval, the facilities in the rights-of-way under a municipal right-of-way use
permit to the provider's affiliate or to another provider who has a municipal
right-of-way use permit under this chapter. The provider transferring the
facilities remains subject to all applicable obligations and provisions of the
municipal right-of-way use permit unless the provider to which the facilities are
transferred is also subject to these applicable obligations and provisions.
(5) The chief administrative officer must act on a request for transfer
of a municipal permit within 90 days of receipt of the request from the provider.
Any request for a transfer of a municipal permit not acted upon within 90 days
shall be deemed to have been approved. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-214. Notices to the city. (1) A provider shall notify the chief
administrative officer in writing contemporaneously with the transmittal of all
petitions, applications, written communications and reports submitted by the
provider, to the Federal Communications Commission and the Tennessee
Regulatory Authority, or their successor agencies relating to matters affecting
both the use of public rights-of-way and the telecommunications services
authorized by a municipal permit granted under this chapter. A provider shall
furnish the chief administrative officer copies of the documents upon request.
20-12
(2) If a provider notifies the city of the confidential nature of
information, the chief administrative officer shall maintain the confidentiality
of the information to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt in the chief
administrative officer's office of requests for confidential information the city
shall notify the affected providers of the request by facsimile transmission.
(Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-215. Construction obligations. (1) A provider is subject to the
police powers of the city, other governmental powers, and the city' s rights as a
property owner under state and federal laws. A provider is subject to city
requirements and federal and state rules in connection with the construction,
expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public
rights-of-way.
(2) A provider shall place certain facilities underground according to
applicable city requirements.
(3) At the city's request, a provider shall furnish the city accurate and
complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, removal,
maintenance, operation and repair of facilities performed by the provider in the
public rights-of-way. If any information furnished is erroneous as to the location
of facilities, and reliance on this information results in construction delays or
additional expenses, the provider who furnished the erroneous information shall
be liable for the cost of delays and the additional expenses.
(4) The construction, expansion, reconstruction, excavation, use,
maintenance and operation of a providers facilities and property are subject to
applicable city requirements.
(a) A provider shall perform excavations and other construction
in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city
requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology
whenever possible. The director of public works shall waive the
requirement of trenchless technology if he determines that field
conditions warrant the waiver. A provider shall minimize interference
with the use of public and private property and shall follow the
construction directions given by the city.
(b) When a provider completes construction work, a provider
shall promptly restore the public rights-of-way in accordance with
applicable city requirements. A provider may excavate only for the
construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, and maintenance
of the provider's facilities.
(c) The city may require a provider to allow attachment of
another provider's facilities to its poles and conduits, in accordance with
the city charter, state and federal law.
(d) A provider shall furnish the director of public works and the
chief administrative officer with construction plans and maps showing
the routing of new construction at least 45 days before beginning
20-13
construction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the
public right-of-way. A provider may not begin construction until the
plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the director of
public works.
(e) If the chief administrative officer declares an emergency and
requests the removal or abatement of facilities, by written notice, a
provider shall remove or abate the provider's facilities by the deadline
provided in the chief administrative officer's request. A provider and the
city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service.
If a provider, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or
abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the provider, without
paying compensation to the provider and without the city incurring
liability for damages.
(f) Except in an emergency, a provider may not excavate the
pavement of a street or public right-of-way without first complying with
city requirements.
(g) Within 120 days of completion of each new segment of a
providers facilities, a provider shall supply the city with a complete set
of "as built" drawings for the segment in a format prescribed by the
director of public works. A provider must obtain the city's approval
before relocating the providers facilities in the public rights-of-way. The
city may not unreasonably withhold approval. A provider shall furnish
a revised map including additional facilities on June 30 of each year to
the director of public works showing how these facilities connect to
existing facilities. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-216. Conditions of rights-of-way occupancy. (1) In the exercise
of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the
public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, gas, water, and
other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead
work, and attachment, restructuring or changes in aerial facilities in, across,
along, over or under a public street, alley or right-of-way occupied by a provider,
and to change the curb, sidewalks or the grade of streets.
(2) In case of conflict or interference between the facilities of different
providers, the provider whose facilities were first permitted shall have priority
over a competing providers use of the public rights-of-way.
(3) If, during the term of a municipal permit, the city authorizes
abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street,
alley, or rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the
rights of the provider. If the city closes or abandons a public right-of-way that
contains a portion of a providers facilities, the city shall convey the land in the
closed or abandoned public rights-of-way subject to the rights granted in the
municipal permit.
20-14
(4) If the city gives written notice, a provider shall, at the provider's
expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of provider's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within 120
days. The city shall give notice whenever the city has determined that removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction,
operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city or other governmental
entity's public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This section shall not
be construed to prevent a providers recovery of the cost of relocation or removal
from private third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal.
(5) A provider who holds a municipal permit may trim trees in or over
the rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its
network. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards
promulgated by the city. When ordered by the director of public works, tree
trimming shall be done under the supervision of the city.
(6) Providers shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial
facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the city
gives written notice of no less than 48 hours. The expense of this temporary
rearrangement shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefitting
from the temporary rearrangement. Provider may require prepayment or prior
posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary move. (Ord. #JT-1,
Sept. 1997)
20-217. Insurance requirements. (1) A provider shall obtain and
maintain insurance in the amounts prescribed by the chief administrative officer
with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Tennessee
acceptable to the chief administrative officer throughout the term of a municipal
permit granted under this chapter. A provider shall furnish the city with proof
of insurance at the time of issuance of a municipal permit. The city reserves the
right to review the insurance requirements while a municipal permit is in effect,
and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the chief
administrative officer determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions,
or the claims history of the industry or the provider require adjustment of the
coverage. For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of
self-insurance issued by the State of Tennessee providing the same coverage.
(2) The chief administrative officer may, on request and at no cost to
the city, receive copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage
required by this section. The chief administrative officer may request the
deletion, revision or modification of particular policy terms, conditions,
limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law
or regulation binding the city, the provider, or the underwriter. If the chief
administrative officer requests a deletion, revision or modification, a provider
shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the change.
An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions:
20-15
(a) Name the city and its officers, employees, board members
and elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable
coverage;
(b) Provide for 30 days notice to the city for cancellation,
non-renewal, or material change;
(c) Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the chief
administrative officer by certified mail; and
(d) Provide that the terms of the municipal permit which impose
obligations on the provider concerning liability, duty, and standard of
care, including the indemnity section, are included in the policy and that
the risks are insured within the policy terms and conditions.
(3) A provider shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the chief
administrative officer during the term of a municipal permit. An insurance
certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval.
The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability
limits. A provider shall immediately advise the city of actual or potential
litigation that may develop that would affect insurance coverage related to a
municipal permit.
(4) An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required
insurance policies shall protect the provider and the city. The insurance shall
be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
(5) The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city
where the city is an insured under the policy.
(6) The provider shall pay premiums and assessments. A company
which issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment
of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a provider must
provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of
subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy.
(Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-218. Indemnity. (1) During the term of a municipal permit, a
provider is liable for the acts or omissions of an entity used by the provider,
including an affiliate, when the entity is involved directly or indirectly in the
construction and installation of the provider's facilities. The acts or omissions
of the entity shall be considered the acts or omissions of the provider.
(2) Each provider granted a municipal permit under this chapter shall
provide to the chief administrative officer, in writing, a statement that the
provider agrees to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless against all
damages, cost, loss or expense arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting
from the negligence or willful misconduct of the provider, its agents, employees,
or subcontractors, in the performance of activities under the municipal permit:
(a) For the repair, replacement, or restoration of city property,
equipment materials, structures and facilities which are damaged,
destroyed or found to be defective; and
20-16
(b) Against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action,
and judgments for:
(i) Damage to or loss of the property of any person
including, but not limited to the provider, its agents, officers,
employees and subcontractors, the city's agents, officers and
employees, and third parties; and
(ii) Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, worker's
compensation, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any
person including but not limited to the agents, officers and
employees of the provider, the providers subcontractors, the city,
and third parties, no matter how, or to whom the loss may occur.
(3) The chief administrative officer shall give prompt written notice to
a provider of any claim for which the city seeks indemnification. The provider
shall have the right to investigate, defend and compromise these claims subject
to the city's prior approval. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-219. Privacy of customer information. A provider shall comply
with state and federal law regarding privacy of customer information. (Ord.
#JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-220. Annexation; deannexation. Within thirty (30) days following
the date of passage of any action affecting any deannexation or annexation, the
chief administrative officer shall notify providers of this action by furnishing to
the providers maps of the affected area(s), showing the new boundaries of the
city. (Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
20-221. Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. (1) A person
commits an offense if a person uses the public rights-of-way to provide a
telecommunications service without first securing a municipal permit from the
city.
(2) Each unauthorized use of the public rights-of-way and each
unauthorized placement of facilities constitutes a separate offense. Each day a
violation of this chapter occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(3) An offense under this subsection is punishable by a fine of $500.
(Ord. #JT-1, Sept. 1997)
APP-A-1
1This appendix to the plan was deleted. The compiler has no record of the
date of deletion.
APPENDIX A
PLAN OF OPERATION FOR THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND
HEALTH PROGRAM FOR THE EMPLOYEES OF CITY OF CAMDEN
SECTION PAGE
I. PURPOSE AND COVERAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-2
II. DEFINITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-2
III. EMPLOYER'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-4
IV. EMPLOYEE'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-5
V. ADMINISTRATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-6
VI. STANDARDS AUTHORIZED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-8
VII. VARIANCE PROCEDURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-8
VIII. RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-10
IX. EMPLOYEE COMPLAINT PROCEDURE . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-10
X. EDUCATION AND TRAINING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-11
XI. GENERAL INSPECTION PROCEDURES . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-13
XII. IMMINENT DANGER PROCEDURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-14
XIII. ABATEMENT ORDERS AND HEARINGS . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-15
XIV. PENALTIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-16
XV. CONFIDENTIALITY OF PRIVILEGED
INFORMATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-16
XVI. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS NOT EXCUSED APP-A-17
APPENDICES
I. ORGANIZATIONAL CHART . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-18
II. SAFETY AND HEALTH ORGANIZATIONAL CHART1 APP-A-18
III. EMPLOYEE NOTIFICATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-19
IV. PROGRAM BUDGET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-21
V. ACCIDENT REPORTING PROCEDURES . . . . . . . . . . APP-A-22
APP-A-2
I. PURPOSE AND COVERAGE.
The purpose of this plan is to provide guidelines and procedures for
implementing the Occupational Safety and Health Program for the employees
of the City of Camden.
This plan is applicable to all employees, part-time or full-time, seasonal or
permanent.
The City of Camden in electing to establish and maintain an effective
occupational safety and health program for its employees,
a. Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of employment.
b. Require the use of safety equipment, personal protective
equipment, and other devices where reasonably necessary to
protect employees.
c. Make, keep, preserve, and make available to the Commissioner of
Labor, his designated representatives, or persons within the
Department of Labor to whom such responsibilities have been
delegated, including the Director of the Division of Occupational
Safety and Health, adequate records of all occupational accidents
and illnesses and personal injuries for proper evaluation and
necessary corrective action as required.
d. Consult with the Commissioner of Labor or his designated
representative with regard to the adequacy of the form and content
of such records.
e. Consult with the Commissioner of Labor regarding safety and
health problems which are considered to be unusual or peculiar
and are such that they cannot be resolved under an occupational
safety and health standard promulgated by the State.
f. Assist the Commissioner of Labor or his monitoring activities to
determine the program effectiveness and compliance with the
occupational safety and health standards.
g. Make a report to the Commissioner of Labor annually, or as may
otherwise be required, including information on occupational
accidents, injuries, and illnesses and accomplishments and
progress made toward achieving the goals of the occupational and
health program.
h. Provide reasonable opportunity for and encourage the participation
of employees in the effectuation of the objectives of this program,
including the opportunity to make anonymous complaints
concerning conditions or practices which may be injurious to
employees' safety and health.
APP-A-3
II. DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this program, the following definitions apply:
a. "Commissioner of Labor" means the chief executive officer of the
Tennessee Department of Labor. This includes any person
appointed, designated, or deputized to perform the duties or to
exercise the powers assigned to the Commissioner of Labor.
b. "Employer" means the City of Camden and includes each
administrative department, board, commission, division, or other
agency of the City of Camden.
c. "Director of occupational safety and health" or "Director" means
the person designated by the establishing Ordinance, or executive
order to perform duties or to exercise powers where assigned so as
to plan, develop, and administer the occupational safety and health
program for the employees of the City of Camden.
d. "Inspector(s)" means the individual(s) appointed or designated by
the Director of Occupational Safety and Health to conduct
inspections provided for herein. If no such compliance inspector(s)
is appointed, inspections shall be conducted by the Director of
Occupational Safety and Health.
e. "Appointing authority" means any official or group of officials of
the employer having legally designated powers of appointment,
employment, or removal therefrom for a specific department,
board, commission, division, or other agency of this employer.
f. "Employee" means any person performing services for this
employer and listed on the payroll of this employer, either as parttime,
full-time, seasonal, or permanent. It also includes any
persons normally classified as "volunteers" provided such persons
received remuneration of any kind for their services. This
definition shall not include independent contractors, their agents,
servants, and employees.
g. "Person" means one or more individuals, partnerships,
associations, corporations, business trusts, or legal representatives
of any organized group of persons.
h. "Standard" means an occupational safety and health standard
promulgated by the Commissioner of Labor in accordance with
Section VI (6) of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health
Act of 1972 which requires conditions or the adoption or the use of
one or more practices, means, methods, operations, or processes or
the use of equipment or personal protective equipment necessary
or appropriate to provide safe and healthful conditions and places
of employment.
APP-A-4
i. "Imminent danger" means any conditions or practices in any place
of employment which are such that a hazard exists which could
reasonably be expected to cause death or serious physical harm
immediately or before the imminence of such hazard can be
eliminated through normal compliance enforcement procedures.
j. "Establishment" or "worksite" means a single physical location
under the control of this employer where business is conducted,
services are rendered, or industrial type operations are performed.
k. "Serious injury or harm" means that type of harm that would
cause permanent or prolonged impairment of the body in that:
1. A part of the body would be permanently removed (e.g.,
amputation of an arm, leg, finger(s); loss of an eye) or
rendered functionally useless or substantially reduced in
efficiency on or off the job (e.g., leg shattered so severely
that mobility would be permanently reduced), or
2. A part of an internal body system would be inhabited in its
normal performance or function to such a degree as to
shorten life or cause reduction in physical or mental
efficiency (e.g., lung impairment causing shortness of
breath).
On the other hand, simple fractures, cuts, bruises, concussions, or similar
injuries would not fit either of these categories and would not constitute
serious physical harm.
l. "Act" or TOSHAct" shall mean the Tennessee Occupational Safety
and Health Act of 1972.
m. "Governing body" means the County Quarterly Court, Board of
Aldermen, Board of Commissioners, City or Town Council, Board
of Governors, etc., whichever may be applicable to the local
government, government agency, or utility to which this plan
applies.
n. "Chief executive officer" means the chief administrative official,
County Judge, County Chairman, Mayor, City Manager, General
Manager, etc., as may be applicable.
III. EMPLOYER'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Rights and duties of the employer shall include, but are not limited to, the
following provisions:
a. Employer shall furnish to each employee conditions of employment
and a place of employment free from recognized hazards that are
causing or are likely to cause death or serious injury or harm to
employees.
APP-A-5
b. Employer shall comply with occupational safety and health
standards and regulations promulgated pursuant to Section VI (6)
of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972.
c. Employer shall refrain from and unreasonable restraint on the
right of the Commissioner of Labor to inspect the employer's
place(s) of business. Employer shall assist the Commissioner of
Labor in the performance of their monitoring duties by supplying
or by making available information, personnel, or aids reasonably
necessary to the effective conduct of the monitoring activity.
d. Employer is entitled to participate in the development of standards
by submission of comments on proposed standards, participation
in hearing on proposed standards, or by requesting the
development of standards on a given issue under Section 6 of the
Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972.
e. Employer is entitled to request an order granting a variance from
an occupational safety and health standard.
f. Employer is entitled to protection of its legally privileged
communication.
g. Employer shall inspect all worksites to insure the provisions of this
program are complied with and carried out.
h. Employer shall notify and inform any employee who has been or is
being exposed in a biologically significant manner to harmful
agents or material in excess of the applicable standard and of
corrective action being taken.
i. Employer shall notify all employees of their rights and duties
under this program.
IV. EMPLOYEE'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Rights and duties of employees shall include, but are not limited to, the
following provisions:
a. Each employee shall comply with occupational safety and health
act standards and all rules, regulations, and orders issued
pursuant to this program and the Tennessee Occupational Safety
and Health Act of 1972 which are applicable to his or her own
actions and conduct.
b. Each employee shall be notified by the placing of a notice upon
bulletin boards, or other places of common passage, of any
application for a permanent or temporary order granting the
employer a variance from any provision of the TOSHAct or any
standard or regulation promulgated under the Act.
APP-A-6
c. Each employee shall be given the opportunity to participate in any
hearing which concerns an application by the employer for a
variance from a standard or regulation promulgated under the Act.
d. Any employee who may be adversely affected by a standard or
variance issued pursuant to the Act or this program may file a
petition with the Commissioner of Labor or whoever is responsible
for the promulgation of the standard or the granting of the
variance.
e. Any employee who has been exposed or is being exposed to toxic
materials or harmful physical agents in concentrations or at levels
in excess of that provided for by any applicable standard shall be
provided by the employer with information on any significant
hazards to which they are or have been exposed, relevant
symptoms, and proper conditions for safe use or exposure.
Employees shall also be informed of corrective action being taken.
f. Subject to regulations issued pursuant to this program, any
employee or authorized representative of employee shall be given
the right to request an inspection and to consult with the Director
or Inspector at the time of the physical inspection of the worksite.
g. Any employee may bring to the attention of the Director any
violation or suspected violations of the standards or any other
health or safety hazards.
h. No employee shall be discharged or discriminated against because
such employee has filed any complaint or instituted or caused to be
instituted any proceeding or inspection under or relating to this
program.
i. Any employee who believes that he or she has been discriminated
against or discharged in violation of subsection (h) of this section
may file a complaint alleging such discrimination with the
Director. Such employee may also, within thirty (30) days after
such violation occurs, file a complaint with the Commissioner of
Labor alleging such discrimination.
j. Nothing in this or any other provisions of this program shall be
deemed to authorize or require any employee to undergo medical
examination, immunization, or treatment for those who object
thereto on religious grounds, except where such is necessary for
the protection of the health or safety or others or when a medical
examination may be reasonably required for performance of a
specific job.
k. Employees shall report any accident, injury, or illness resulting
from their job, however minor it may seem to be, to their
supervisor or the Director within twenty-four (24) hours after the
occurrence.
APP-A-7
V. ADMINISTRATION
a. The Director of Occupational Safety and Health is designated to
perform duties or to exercise powers assigned so as to administer
this Occupational Safety and Health Program.
1. The Director may designate person or persons as he deems
necessary to carry out his powers, duties, responsibilities
under this program.
2. The Director may delegate the power to make inspections,
provided procedures employed are as effective as those
employed by the Director.
3. The Director shall employ measures to coordinate, to the
extent possible, activities of all departments to promote
efficiency and to minimize any inconvenience under this
program.
4. The Director may request qualified technical personnel from
any department or section of government to assist him in
making compliance inspections, accident investigations, or
as he may otherwise deem necessary and appropriate in
order to carry out his duties under this program.
5. The Director shall prepare the report to the Commissioner
of Labor required by subsection (g) of Section 1 of this plan.
6. The Director shall make or cause to be made periodic and
follow-up inspections of all facilities and worksites where
employees of this employer are employed. He shall make
recommendations to correct any hazards or exposures
observed. He shall make or cause to be made any
inspections required by complaints submitted by employees
or inspections requested by employees.
7. The Director shall assist any officials of the employer in the
investigation of occupational accidents or illnesses.
8. The Director shall maintain or cause to be maintained
records required under Section VIII of this plan.
9. The Director shall, in the eventuality that there is a fatality
or an accident resulting in the hospitalization of three or
more employees, insure that the Commissioner of Labor
receives notification of the occurrence within eight (8) hours.
b. The administrative or operational head of each department,
division, board, or other agency of this employer shall be
responsible for the implementation of this occupational safety and
health program within their respective areas.
1. The administrative or operational head shall follow the
directions of the Director on all issues involving
APP-A-8
occupational safety and health of employees as set forth in
this plan.
2. The administrative or operational head shall comply with
all abatement orders issued in accordance with the
provisions of this plan or request a review of the order with
the Director within the abatement period.
3. The administrative or operational head should make
periodic safety surveys of the establishment under his
jurisdiction to become aware of hazards or standards
violations that may exist and make an attempt to
immediately correct such hazards or violations.
4. The administrative or operational head shall investigate all
occupational accidents, injuries, or illnesses reported to him.
He shall report such accidents, injuries, or illnesses to the
Director along with his findings and/or recommendations in
accordance with APPENDIX V of this plan.
VI. STANDARDS AUTHORIZED
The standards adopted under this program are the applicable standards
developed and promulgated under Section VI (6) of the Tennessee
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 or which may, in the future,
be developed and promulgated. Additional standards may be
promulgated by the governing body of this employer as that body may
deem necessary for the safety and health of employees.
VII. VARIANCE PROCEDURE
The Director may apply for a variance as a result of a complaint from an
employee or of his knowledge of certain hazards or exposures. The
Director should definitely believe that a variance is needed before the
application for a variance is submitted to the Commissioner of Labor.
The procedure for applying for a variance to the adopted safety and
health standards is as follows:
a. The application for a variance shall be prepared in writing and
shall contain:
1. A specification of the standard or portion thereof from which
the variance is sought.
2. A detailed statement of the reason(s) why the employer is
unable to comply with the standard supported by
APP-A-9
representatives by qualified personnel having first-hand
knowledge of the facts represented.
3. A statement of the steps employer has taken and will take
(with specific date) to protect employees against the hazard
covered by the standard.
4. A statement of when the employer expects to comply and
what steps have or will be taken (with dates specified) to
come into compliance with the standard.
5. A certification that the employer has informed employees,
their authorized representative(s), and/or interested parties
by giving them a copy of the request, posting a statement
summarizing the application (to include the location of a
copy available for examination) at the places where
employee notices are normally posted and by other
appropriate means. The certification shall contain a
description of the means actually used to inform employees
and that employees have been informed of their right to
petition the Commissioner of Labor for a hearing.
b. The application for a variance should be sent to the Commissioner
of Labor by registered or certified mail.
c. The Commissioner of Labor will review the application for a
variance and may deny the request or issue an order granting the
variance. An order granting a variance shall be issued only if it
has been established that:
1. The employer
i. Is unable to comply with the standard by the effective
date because of unavailability of professional or
technical personnel or materials and equipment
required or necessary construction or alteration of
facilities or technology.
ii. Has taken all available steps to safeguard employees
against the hazard(s) covered by the standard.
iii. Has an effective program for coming into compliance
with the standard as quickly as possible.
2. The employee is engaged in an experimental program as
described in subsection (b), section 13 of the Act.
d. A variance may be granted for a period of no longer than is
required to achieve compliance or one (1) year, whichever is
shorter.
APP-A-10
e. Upon receipt of an application for an order granting a variance, the
Commissioner to whom such application is addressed may issue an
interim order granting such a variance for the purpose of
permitting time for an orderly consideration of such application.
No such interim order may be effective for longer than one
hundred eighty (180) days.
f. The order or interim order granting a variance shall be posted at
the worksite and employees notified of such order by the same
means used to inform them of the application for said variance (see
subsection (a) (5) of this section).
VIII. RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING
a. Recording and reporting of all occupational accident, injuries, and
illnesses shall be in accordance with instructions and on forms
prescribed in the booklet, RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS
UNDER THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT OF
1970 (Revised 1978) or as may be prescribed by the Tennessee
Department of Labor.
b. The position responsible for recordkeeping is shown on the
SAFETY AND HEALTH ORGANIZATIONAL CHART, Appendix
V to this plan.
c. Details of how reports of occupational accidents, injuries, and
illnesses will reach the recordkeeper are specified by ACCIDENT
REPORTING PROCEDURES, Appendix V to this plan.
IX. EMPLOYEE COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
If any employee feels that he is assigned to work in conditions which
might affect his health, safety, or general welfare at the present time or
at any time in the future, he should report the condition to the Director
of Occupational Safety and Health.
a. The complaint should be in the form of a letter and give details on
the condition(s) and how the employee believes it affects or will
affect his health, safety, or general welfare. The employee should
sign the letter but need not do so if he wishes to remain
anonymous (see subsection (h) of Section 1 of this plan).
b. Upon receipt of the complaint letter, the Director will evaluate the
condition(s) and institute any corrective action, if warranted.
Within ten (10) working days following the receipt of the
complaint, the Director will answer the complaint in writing
stating whether or not the complaint is deemed to be valid and if
no, why not, what action has been or will be taken to correct or
APP-A-11
abate the condition(s), and giving a designated time period for
correction or abatement. Answers to anonymous complaints will
be posted upon bulletin boards or other places of common passage
where the anonymous complaint may be reasonably expected to be
seen by the complainant for a period of three (3) working days.
c. If the complainant finds the reply not satisfactory because it was
held to be invalid, the corrective action is felt to be insufficient, or
the time period for correction is felt to be too long, he may forward
a letter to the Chief Executive Officer or to the governing body
explaining the condition(s) cited in his original complaint and why
he believes the answer to be inappropriate or insufficient.
d. The Chief Executive Officer or a representative of the governing
body will evaluate the complaint and will begin to take action to
correct or abate the condition(s) through arbitration or
administrative sanctions or may find the complaint to be invalid.
An answer will be sent to the complainant within ten (10) working
days following receipt of the complaint or the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the governing body following receipt of the
complaint explaining decisions made and action taken or to be
taken.
e. After the above steps have been followed and the complainant is
still not satisfied with the results, he may then file a complaint
with the Commissioner of Labor. Any complaint filed with the
Commissioner of Labor in such cases shall include copies of all
related correspondence with the Director and the Chief Executive
Officer or the representative or the governing body.
f. Copies of all complaint and answers thereto will be filed by the
Director who shall make them available to the Commissioner of
Labor or his designated representative upon request.
X. EDUCATION AND TRAINING
a. Director and/or Compliance Inspector(s):
1. Arrangements will be made for the Director and/or
Compliance Inspector(s) to attend seminars, workshops,
etc., conducted by the State of Tennessee or other agencies.
2. Reference materials, manuals, equipment, etc., deemed
necessary for use in conducting compliance inspections,
conducting local training, wiring technical reports, and
informing officials, supervisors, and employees of the
existence of safety and health hazards will be furnished.
b. All Employees (including supervisory personnel):
APP-A-12
A suitable safety and health training program for employees will
be established. This program will, as a minimum:
1. Instruct each employee in the recognition and avoidance of
hazards or unsafe conditions and of standards and
regulations applicable to the employee's work environment
to control or eliminate any hazards, unsafe conditions, or
other exposures to occupational illness or injury.
2. Instruct employees who are required to handle poisons,
acids, caustics, explosives, and other harmful or dangerous
substances in the safe handling and use of such items and
make them aware of the potential hazards, proper handling
procedures, personal protective measures, person hygiene,
etc., which may be required.
3. Instruct employees who may be exposed to environments
where harmful plants or animals are present of the hazards
of the environment, how to best avoid injury or exposure,
and the first aid procedures to be followed in the event of
injury or exposure.
4. Instruct employees required to handle or use flammable
liquids, gases, or toxic materials in their safe handling and
use and make employees aware of specific requirements
contained in Subparts H and M and other applicable
subparts of TOSHAct standards (1910 and/or 1926).
5. Instruct employees on hazards and dangers of confined or
enclosed spaces.
i. "Confined or enclosed space" means space having a
limited means of egress and which is subject to the
accumulation of toxic or flammable contaminants or
has an oxygen deficient atmosphere. Confined or
enclosed spaces include, but are not limited to,
storage tanks, boilers, ventilation or exhaust ducts,
sewers, underground utility accesses, tunnels,
pipelines, and open top spaces more than four feet (4')
in depth such as pits, tubs, vaults, and vessels.
ii. Employees will be given general instruction on
hazards involved, precautions to be taken, and on use
of personal protective and emergency equipment
required. They shall also be instructed on all specific
standards or regulations that apply to work in
dangerous or potentially dangerous areas.
iii. The immediate supervisor of any employee who must
perform work in a confined or enclosed space shall be
APP-A-13
responsible for instructing employees on danger of
hazards which may be present, precautions to be
taken, and use of personal protective and emergency
equipment, immediately prior to their entry into such
an area and shall require use of appropriate personal
protective equipment.
XI. GENERAL INSPECTION PROCEDURES
It is the intention of the governing body and responsible officials to have
an occupational safety and health program that will insure the welfare
of employees. In order to be aware of hazards, periodic inspections must
be performed. These inspections will enable the finding of hazards or
unsafe conditions or operations that will need correction in order to
maintain safe and healthful worksites. Inspections made on a
pre-designated basis and may not yield the desired results. Inspections
will be conducted, therefore, on a random basis at intervals not to exceed
thirty (30) calendar days.
a. In order to carry out the purposes of this program, the Director
and/or Compliance Inspector(s), if appointed, is authorized:
1. To enter at any reasonable time, any establishment, facility,
or worksite where work is being performed by an employee
when such establishment, facility, or worksite is under
jurisdiction of the employer and;
2. To inspect and investigate during regular working hours
and at other reasonable times, within reasonable limits, and
in a reasonable manner, any such place of employment and
all pertinent conditions, processes, structures, machines,
apparatus, devices, equipment, and materials therein, and
to question privately any supervisor, operator, agent, or
employee working therein.
b. If an imminent danger situation is found, alleged, or otherwise
brought to the attention of the Director or Inspector during a
routine inspection, he shall immediately inspect the imminent
danger situation in accordance with Section XII of this plan before
inspecting the remaining portions of the establishment, facility, or
worksite.
c. An administrative representative of the employer and a
representative authorized by the employees shall be given an
opportunity to consult with and/or to accompany the Director or
Inspector during the physical inspection of any worksite for the
purpose of aiding such inspection.
APP-A-14
d. The right of accompaniment may be denied any person whose
conduct interferes with a full and orderly inspection.
e. The conduct of the inspection shall be such as to preclude
unreasonable disruptions of the operation(s) of the workplace.
f. Interviews of employees during the course of the inspection may be
made when such interviews are considered essential to
investigative techniques.
g. Advance Notice of Inspections.
1. Generally, advance notice of inspections will not be given as
this precludes the opportunity to make minor or temporary
adjustments in an attempt to create misleading impression
of conditions in an establishment.
2. There may be occasions when advance notice of inspections
will be necessary in order to conduct an effective inspection
or investigation. When advance notice of inspection is
given, employees or their authorized representative(s) will
also be given notice of the inspection.
h. The Director need not personally make an inspection of each and
every worksite once every thirty (30) days. He may delegate the
responsibility for such inspections to supervisors or other
personnel provided:
1. Inspections conducted by supervisors or other personnel are
at least as effective as those made by the Director.
2. Records are made of the inspections and of any
discrepancies found and are forwarded to the Director.
i. The Director shall maintain records of inspections to include
identification of worksite inspected, date of inspection, description
of violations of standards or other unsafe conditions or practices
found, and corrective action taken toward abatement. Said
inspection records shall be subject to review by the Commissioner
of Labor or his authorized representative.
XII. IMMINENT DANGER PROCEDURES
a. Any discovery, any allegation, or any report of imminent danger
shall be handled in accordance with the following procedures:
1. The Director shall immediately be informed of the alleged
imminent danger situation and he shall immediately
APP-A-15
ascertain whether there is a reasonable basis for the
allegation.
2. If the alleged imminent danger situation is determined to
have merit by the Director, he shall make or cause to be
made an immediate inspection of the alleged imminent
danger location.
3. As soon as it is concluded from such inspection that
conditions or practices exist which constitutes as imminent
danger, the Director or Compliance Inspector shall attempt
to have the danger corrected. All employees at the location
shall be informed of the danger and the supervisor or person
in charge of the worksite shall be requested to remove
employees from the area, if deemed necessary.
4. The administrative or operational head of the workplace in
which the imminent danger exists, or his authorized
representative, shall be responsible for determining the
manner in which the imminent danger situation will be
abated. This shall be done in cooperation with the Director
or Compliance Inspector and to the mutual satisfaction of
all parties involved.
5. The imminent danger shall be deemed abated if:
i. The imminence of the danger has been eliminated by
removal of employees from the area of danger.
ii. Conditions or practices which resulted in the
imminent danger have been eliminated or corrected
to the point where an unsafe condition or practice no
longer exists.
6. A written report shall be made by or to the Director
describing in detail the imminent danger and its abatement.
This report will be maintained by the Director in accordance
with subsection (i) of Section XI of this plan.
b. Refusal to Abate.
1. Any refusal to abate an imminent danger situation shall be
reported to the Director and Chief Executive Officer
immediately.
2. The Director and/or Chief Executive Officer shall take
whatever action may be necessary to achieve abatement.
APP-A-16
XIII. ABATEMENT ORDERS AND HEARINGS
a. Whenever, as a result of an inspection or investigation, the
Director or Compliance Inspector(s) finds that a worksite is not in
compliance with the standards, rules or regulations pursuant to
this plan and is unable to negotiate abatement with the
administrative or operational head of the worksite within a
reasonable period of time, the Director shall:
1. Issue an abatement order to the head of the worksite.
2. Post, or cause to be posted, a copy of the abatement order at
or near each location referred to in the abatement order.
b. Abatement orders shall contain the following information:
1. The standard, rule, or regulation which was found to
violated.
2. A description of the nature and location of the violation.
3. A description of what is required to abate or correct the
violation.
4. A reasonable period of time during which the violation must
be abated or corrected.
c. At any time within ten (10) days after receipt of an abatement
order, anyone affected by the order may advise the Director in
writing of any objections to the terms and conditions of the order.
Upon receipt of such objections, the Director shall act promptly to
hold a hearing with all interested and/or responsible parties in an
effort to resolve any objections. Following such hearing, the
Director shall, within three (3) working days, issue an abatement
order and such subsequent order shall be binding on all parties
and shall be final.
XIV. PENALTIES
a. No civil or criminal penalties shall be issued against any official,
employee, or any other person for failure to comply with safety and
health standards or any rules or regulations issued pursuant to
this program.
b. Any employee, regardless of status, who willfully and/or repeatedly
violates, or causes to be violated, any safety and health standard,
rule, or regulation or any abatement order shall be subject to
disciplinary action by the appointing authority. It shall be the
APP-A-17
duty of the appointing authority to administer discipline by taking
action in one of the following ways as appropriate and warranted:
1. Oral reprimand.
2. Written reprimand.
3. Suspension for three (3) or more working days.
4. Termination of employment.
XV. CONFIDENTIALITY OF PRIVILEGED INFORMATION
All information obtained by or reported to the Director pursuant to this
plan of operation or the legislation (Ordinance, or executive order)
enabling this occupational safety and health program which contains or
might reveal information which is otherwise privileged shall be
considered confidential. Such information may be disclosed to other
officials or employees concerned with carrying out this program or when
relevant in any proceeding under this program. Such information may
also be disclosed to the Commissioner of Labor or their authorized
representatives in carrying out their duties under the Tennessee
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972.
XVI. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS NOT EXCUSED
a. Compliance with any other law, statute, Ordinance, or executive
order, as applicable, which regulates safety and health in
employment and places of employment shall not excuse the
employer, the employee, or any other person from compliance with
the provisions of this program.
b. Compliance with any provisions of this program or any standard,
rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant to this program shall not
excuse the employer, the employee, or any other person from
compliance with and law, statue, Ordinance, or executive order, as
applicable, regulating and promoting safety and health unless such
law, statute, Ordinance, or executive order, as applicable, is
specifically repealed.
GARY FARMER s/ Gary Farmer, Director
Director, Occupational Safety and Health
APP-A-18
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND
HEALTH PROGRAM PLAN
APPENDIX I
ORGANIZATIONAL CHART
Department,
Agency, Office,
Board, Etc. Number of Employees
Department,
Agency,
Office, Board,
Etc.
Number of
Employees
Administration . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Park . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Police . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Street . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Sanitation . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Water . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Wastewater . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Fire (Volunteers) . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
. . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
TOTAL NO. EMPLOYEES 75 TOTAL NO. EMPLOYEES
APP-A-19
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM PLAN APPENDIX III
NOTICE TO ALL EMPLOYEES OF CITY OF CAMDEN
The Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 provides job safety
and health protection for Tennessee workers through the promotion of safe and
healthful working conditions. Under a plan reviewed by the Tennessee
Department of Labor, this government, as an employer, is responsible for
administering the Act to its employees. Safety and health standards are the
same as State standards and jobsite inspections will be conducted to insure
compliance with the Act.
Employees shall be furnished conditions of employment and a place of
employment free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to cause
death or serious injury or harm to employees.
Each employee shall comply with occupational safety and health standards and
all rules, regulations, and orders issued pursuant to this program which are
applicable to his or her own actions and conduct.
Each employee shall be notified by the placing upon bulletin boards or other
places of common passage of any application for a temporary variance from any
standard or regulation.
Each employee shall be given the opportunity to participate in any hearing
which concerns an application for a variance from a standard.
Any employee who may be adversely affected by a standard or variance issued
pursuant to this program may file a petition with the Director or Mayor and
Board of Aldermen.
Any employee who has been exposed or is being exposed to toxic materials or
harmful physical agents in concentrations or at levels in excess of that provided
for by an applicable standard shall be notified by the employer and informed of
such exposure and corrective action being taken.
Subject to regulations issued pursuant to this program, any employee or
authorized representative(s) of employees shall be given the right to request an
inspection.
No employee shall be discharged or discriminated against because such
employee has filed any complaint or instituted or caused to be instituted any
proceedings of inspection under, or relating to, this program.
APP-A-20
Any employee who believes he or she has been discriminated against or
discharged in violation of these sections may, within thirty (30) days after such
violation occurs, have an opportunity to appear in a hearing before Mayor and
Board of Aldermen for assistance in obtaining relief or to file a complaint with
the Commissioner of Labor alleging such discrimination.
A copy of the Occupational Safety and Health Program for the Employees of City
of Camden available for inspection by any employee at Camden City Hall during
regular office hours.
s/ Jim Travis
Mayor
APP-A-21
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PLAN
APPENDIX IV
PROGRAM BUDGET
1. Prorated portion of wages, salaries, etc., for program
administration and support.
2. Office space and office supplies.
3. Safety and health educational materials and support for education
and training.
4. Safety devices for personnel safety and health.
5. Equipment modifications.
6. Equipment additions (facilities)
7. Protective clothing and equipment (personnel)
8. Safety and health instruments
9. Funding for projects to correct hazardous conditions.
10. Reserve fund for the program
11. Contingencies and miscellaneous, TOTAL ESTIMATED
PROGRAM FUNDING,
ESTIMATE OF TOTAL BUDGET FOR:
APP-A-22
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM PLAN
ACCIDENT REPORTING PROCEDURES
(1-15) Employees shall report all accidents, injuries, or illnesses
directly to the Director as soon as possible, but not later
than twenty-four (24) hours, of their occurrence. Such
reports may be verbal or in writing. All fatalities or
accidents involving the hospitalization of three (3) or more
employees shall be reported to the Director and/or
recordkeeper immediately, either by telephone or verbally,
and will be followed by a written report within four (4)
hours after their occurrence. The Director will insure
completion of required reports and records in accordance
with Section VIII of the basic plan.
(16-50) Employees shall report all accidents, injuries, or illnesses to
their supervisor as soon as possible, but not later than two
(2) hours after their occurrence. All fatalities or accidents
involving the hospitalization of three (3) or more employees
shall be reported to the Director and/or recordkeeper
immediately, either by telephone or verbally, and will be
followed by a written report within four (4) hours after their
occurrence. The supervisor will investigate the accident or
illness, complete an accident report, and forward the
accident report to the Director and/or recordkeeper within
twenty-four (24) hours of the time the accident or injury
occurred or the time of the first report of the illness.
(51-250) Employees shall report all accidents, injuries, or illnesses to
their supervisor as soon as possible, but not later than two
(2) hours, after their occurrence. The supervisor will
provide the Director and/or recordkeeper with the name of
the injured or ill employee and a brief description of the
accident or illness by telephone as soon as possible, but not
later than four (4) hours, after the accident or injury
occurred or the time of the first report of the illness. All
fatalities or accidents involving the hospitalization of three
(3) or more employees shall be reported to the Director
and/or recordkeeper immediately, either by telephone or
verbally, and will be followed by a written report within four
(4) hours after their occurrence. The supervisor will then
make a thorough investigation of the accident or illness
(with the assistance of the Director or Compliance
Inspector, if necessary) and will complete a written report
APP-A-23
on the accident or illness and forward it to the Director
within seventy-two (72) hours after the accident, injury, or
first report of illness and will provide one (1) copy of the
written report to the recordkeeper.
(51-Plus) Employees shall report all accidents, injuries, or illnesses to
their supervisors as soon as possible, but not later than two
(2) hours after their occurrence. The supervisor will provide
the administrative head of the department with a verbal or
telephone report of the accident as soon as possible, but not
later than four (4) hours, after the accident. If the accident
involves loss of consciousness, a fatality, broken bones,
severed body member, or third degree burns, the Director
will be notified by telephone immediately and will be given
the name of the injured, a description of the injury, and a
brief description of how the accident occurred. The
supervisor or the administrative head of the accident within
seventy-two (72) hours after the accident occurred (four (4)
hours in the event of accidents involving a fatality or the
hospitalization of three (3) or more employees).
Since a Workers' Compensation Form 6A or OSHA NO. 101 Form must be
completed, all reports submitted in writing to the person responsible for
recordkeeping shall include the following information as a minimum:
1. Accident location, if different from employer's mailing address and
state whether accident occurred on premises owned or operated by
employer.
2. Name, social security number, home address, age, sex, and
occupation (regular job title) of injured or ill employee.
3. Title of the department or division in which the injured or ill
employee is normally employed.
4. Specific description of what the employee was doing when injured.
5. Specific description of how the accident occurred.
6. A description of the injury or illness in detail and the part of the
body affected.
7. Name of the object or substance which directly injured the
employee.
8. Date and time of injury or diagnosis of illness.
9. Name and address of physician, if applicable.
10. If employee was hospitalized, name and address of hospital.
11. Date of report.
APP-A-24
NOTE: A procedure such as one of those listed above or similar information is
necessary to satisfy Item Number 6 listed under PROGRAM PLAN in Chapter
IV, Part IV of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Plan. This
information may be submitted in flow chart form instead of in narrative form if
desired. These procedures may be modified in any way to fit local situations as
they have been prepared as a guide only.
The four (4) procedures listed above are based upon the size of the work force
and relative complexity of the organization. The approximate size of the
organization for which each procedure is suggested is indicated in parentheses
in the left hand margin at the beginning, i.e., (1-15), (16-50), (51-250), and (251
Plus), and the figures relate to the total number of employees including the
Chief Executive Officer but excluding the governing body (County Court, City
Council, Board of Directors, etc.).
Generally, the more simple an accident reporting procedure is, the more
effective it is. Please select the one procedure listed above, or prepare a similar
procedure or flow chart, which most nearly fits what will be the most effective
for your local situation. Note also that the specific information listed for written
reports applies to all three of the procedures listed for those organizations with
sixteen (16) or more employees.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-1
APPENDIX B
(Ord. #AW2011-04, July 2011)
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN
- City of Camden Pretreatment Program -
Revision 0 - June 2001
Revision 2 - June 2008 (Proposed)
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-2
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-3
Pretreatment Coordinator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-3
Superintendent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-4
City Administrator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-4
Attorney . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-4
Consultant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-5
PROVISIONS FOR ENFORCEMENT IN SEWER USE
ORDINANCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-6
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE GUIDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-7
Table IV.1 - Enforcement Response Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-12
Unauthorized Discharges (no permit) . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-12
Discharge Permit Violation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-12
Monitoring and Reporting Violations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-13
Other Permit Violations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-15
Violations Detected During Site Visits . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-16
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-18
Notice of Violation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-18
Administrative Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-18
Consent Orders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-18
Show Cause Hearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-19
Cease and desist order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-19
Termination of service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . APP-B-20
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-3
I. INTRODUCTION
A. The Domestic Sewage Study (DSS) amendments to the General
Pretreatment Regulations (Federal Register, July 24, 1990) require all
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) with approved pretreatment
programs to develop and implement an Enforcement Response Plan. The
regulations require that the plan shall contain detailed procedures of how
the POTW will respond to instances of industrial user noncompliance. At
a minimum, the plan shall:
(1) Describe how the POTW will investigate instances of
noncompliance;
(2) Describe the types of escalating enforcement responses the POTW
will take in response to all anticipated types of industrial user
violations and the time periods within which responses will take
place;
(3) Identify by title the official(s) responsible for implementing each
type of enforcement response;
(4) Adequately reflect the POTW's primary responsibility to enforce all
applicable pretreatment requirements and standards as provided
in 40 CFR 403.8(1)(1) and (2).
When properly developed and implemented, the Enforcement Response
Plan will provide the POTW with an efficient and objective means of
responding to instances of industrial user noncompliance.
The following document details the steps to be taken by the City of
Camden to achieve compliance with all State and Federal regulations and
amendments. The primary document utilized in preparing this plan was
the EPA publication "Guidelines for Developing Control Authority
Enforcement Response Plans". Federal and State regulations (40 CFR
Part 403 and Tennessee Code Annotated 69-3-101 through 129,
respectively) were also used as reference documents.
B. The available personnel along with the minimum responsibilities that
will be required of each title needed to implement the Enforcement
Response Plan will consist of the following:
Pretreatment Coordinator - Person primarily responsible for day to
day monitoring of compliance status of
IUs. Will perform scheduled and
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-4
unscheduled sampling and field
inspection of IUs. Will schedule
sampling events for IUs and at WWTP.
Will implement demand monitoring
when deemed necessary. Primary
responsibility for tracking IU
information and for determining
necessary levels of enforcement.
Principle liaison between City and IUs.
Will keep the Superintendent apprised
of all developments regarding IU
compliance status and will be the
primary source of reference for higher
levels of enforcement. Can make phone
calls and/or issue notice of violation
(NOV) for minor and moderate levels of
n o n c o m p l i a n c e. Will issue
administrative orders (AO) and/or
penalties s after consultation with
Superintendent.
Superintendent - At the request of the Pretreatment
Coordinator, will institute higher
degrees of enforcement (i.e.,
termination, criminal prosecution). Will
inform upper level City officials of the
background and need for such actions.
Has authority to issue cease and desist
orders and/or emergency termination of
service when necessary. Has final
authority on all levels of enforcement
proceedings.
City Administrator - Will be consulted on all enforcement
proceedi ngs involving civi l
p e n a l t i e s / a c t i o n s , c r i m i nal
investigation, show cause orders, and
non-emergency termination of service.
Attorney - Will assist POTW personnel and
provide guidance on legality of chosen
enforcement procedures against IUs.
Reviews Sewer Use Ordinance (SUO)
other pertinent documents to assure
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-5
conformance to state and Federal law.
Represents City in any court action
resulting from enforcement actions.
Consultant - At the request of the POTW, will
provide guidance in all aspects of
compliance tracking and monitoring of
IUs. Will provide technical expertise
when necessary to assure that
enforcement actions follow generally
accepted protocol.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-6
II. PROVISIONS FOR ENFORCEMENT IN SEWER USE
ORDINANCE
The City of Camden Sewer Use Ordinance was revised and updated to include
pretreatment and enforcement issues in June of 2001. Items dealing specifically
with enforcement actions against violators can be found in Section 10.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-7
III. ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE GUIDE
The City of Camden Pretreatment Program was approved by the State of
Tennessee. However, the City is responsible for the enforcement of all Federal,
State, and Local wastewater discharge regulations and is required to develop
the ERP.
The primary purpose of the Enforcement Response Guide is to assure fair,
consistent, and impartial enforcement. This section describes each type of
violation and indicates a range of appropriate enforcement options.
For the purposes of this guide, insignificant non-compliance is considered a
relatively minor or infrequent violation of pretreatment standards or
requirements. These will usually be responded to with a Notice of Violation
(NOV). Examples of violations which may be considered insignificant
non-compliance are:
- Failure to file a permit renewal application but remaining in
compliance with the expired permit.
- A reported spill with no adverse effects.
- Isolated, minor exceedences of discharge limits.
- Failure to properly sign or certify reports (1st instance).
- Missed interim or final compliance deadline by 30 days or less
(good cause).
- Filing a late report (less than 5 days late).
Significant non-compliance has been defined by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) as violations which meet one or more of the following
criteria:
(1) Chronic violations. Sixty-six percent or more of the measurements exceed
the daily maximum limit or monthly average limit in a six month period
(any magnitude of exceedence). Any violation of a pH limit is considered
a significant violation.
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations. Thirty-three percent or more
of the measurements exceed the daily maximum limit or monthly average
limit by more than the applicable TRC in a six-month period. (TRC =1.4
for BOD, TSS, and oil and grease; 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-8
(3) Any other violation of effluent limits that is believed to have caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through or endangered the health of the sewage treatment
personnel or the public.
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused immanent endangerment to
human health/welfare or to the environment and has resulted in the
POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge.
(5) Violations of compliance schedule milestones contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing
construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the
schedule date.
(6) Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data,
or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, and periodic reports) within 30 days from the due date.
(7) Failure to accurately report non-compliance.
(8) Any other violation or group of violations considered to be significant.
In general, an isolated instance of non-compliance can be met with an informal
response or with a NOV. Any significant non-compliance should be responded
to with an enforceable order that requires a return to compliance by a specific
deadline along with the applicable monetary penalties.
In determining the proper response to a violation, whether significant or not, the
following criteria should be considered:
- Magnitude of the violation
- Duration of the violation
- Impact of the violation on the receiving waters
- Impact of the violation on the POTW
- Compliance history of the industrial user
- Good faith of the industrial user
Since pretreatment enforcement is a matter of strict liability, the knowledge,
intent, or negligence of the user should not be taken into consideration except
when deciding to pursue criminal prosecution.
An administrative penalty is a monetary penalty assessed by the City for
violations of pretreatment standards and requirements. Administrative
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-9
penalties should be used as an escalated enforcement action and are punitive in
nature and are not to be related to a specific cost born by the POTW. The
amount of the penalty assessed should recapture any economic benefit gained
by the non-compliance and/or act as a deterrent to future violations.
Determining the penalty amount which reflects the violation's significance is
very important. If the penalty is too small, its deterrent value is lost and the
violator may regard it as a tax or nominal charge to pollute. If the penalty is too
great, it could bankrupt the user, making necessary investments in
pretreatment equipment impossible and forcing unnecessary closure. In cases
of extreme hardship, the Superintendent or City Administrator may consider
reducing or suspending the penalty as part of a consent decree or show cause
hearing.
Each type of violation has been categorized and a range of penalties assigned to
each category, thereby allowing the responsible designated official to apply an
appropriate monetary assessment. All penalty assessments are to be
assessed per violation per day unless otherwise noted.
Category 0 = No penalty
Category 1 = $50.00 to $500.00
Category 2 = $500.00 to $1000.00
Category 3 = $1000.00 to $5,000.00
Category 4 = $5000.00 to $10,000.00 and/or
direct legal action
Enclosed as Table IV.1 is the enforcement response guide which will be utilized
by the City of Camden to determine appropriate and objective responses to
instances of noncompliance. This guide is basically identical to the one contained
in the previously cited guidance document. Minor changes have been made in
order to adapt it to conditions applicable to Camden. A column has been added
specifying the penalty category each violation falls under. Time frames for
enforcement responses are included on the final page of the enforcement
response guide.
The enforcement response guide is used as follows:
(1) Locate the type of non-compliance in the first column and identify the
most accurate description of the violation in column 2;
(2) Assess the appropriateness of the recommended response(s) in columns
3 and 4 using the criteria of magnitude, duration, effects,
compliance history, and good faith;
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-10
(3) Apply the enforcement response to the industrial user, specifying
corrective action(s) or other responses required of the IU. Column 5
indicates responsible POTW personnel;
(4) Track IU's response and follow-up with escalated enforcement action if
a response is not received within the specified time frame or the violation
continues.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-11
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE GUIDE
PC - Pretreatment Coordinator
S - Superintendent
NOV - Notice of violation
AO - Administrative order
IU - Industrial user
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-12
Table IV.1 - Enforcement Response Guide
City of Camden Pretreatment Program
Unauthorized Discharges (no permit)
Noncompliance Nature of
Violation
Category Enforcement
Response(s)
Personnel
Unpermitted
discharges
IU unaware of
requirement; no
harm to POTW or
environment
0 Phone call; NOV
with application
form
PC
IU unaware of
requirement; harm
to POTW or
environment
(significant
non-compliance)
3 - AO and penalty
- Civil action,
termination of
service
PC
S
Failure to apply
continues after
notification by
POTW
4 - Civil action
- Criminal
investigation
- Terminate
service
SSS
Failure to renew
permit
IU has not
submitted
application within
10 days of due date
0 Phone call; NOV PC
Discharge Permit Violation
Exceedance of
local, state, or
federal standard
Isolated, not
significant
0 Phone call; NOV PC
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-13
Noncompliance Nature of
Violation
Category Enforcement
Response(s)
Personnel
Isolated, significant
(no harm)
1 AO to develop spill
prevention plan (if
not previously
submitted) and
penalty
PC
Isolated, harmful to
POTW or
environment
3 - Show cause order
- Civil action
PC, S
S
Recurring, no harm
to POTW or
environment
2 AO and penalty PC
Recurring,
significant (harm to
POTW or
environment)
4 - AO with penalty
- Show cause order
- Civil action
- Terminate
service
PC
PC, S
SS
Monitoring and Reporting Violations
Reporting
violation
Report improperly
signed or certified
0 Phone call; NOV PC
Report improperly
signed or certified
after notification by
POTW
1 - AO
- Show cause order
PC
PC, S
Isolated, not
significant (5 days
late)
0 Phone call; NOV PC
Significant (> 5 days
late)
1 AO to submit with
penalty each
additional day
PC
Reports always late;
failure to submit
(significant
non-compliance)
4 - AO with penalty
- Show cause order
- Civil action
PC
PC, S
S
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-14
Noncompliance Nature of
Violation
Category Enforcement
Response(s)
Personnel
Failure to report
spill or discharge
changes (no harm)
0 NOV PC
Failure to report
spill or discharge
changes (harm)
2 - AO with penalty
- Civil action
PC
S
Repeated failure to
report spills
4 - Show cause order
- Terminate
service
PC, S
S
Falsification 4 - Criminal
investigation
- Terminate
service
SS
Failure to
monitor correctly
Failure to monitor
all permit required
pollutants
1 NOV or AO with
penalty
PC
Recurring failure to
monitor
2 - AO with penalty
- Civil action
PC
S
Improper
sampling
No evidence of
intent
0 NOV PC
Evidence of intent 4 - Criminal
investigation
- Terminate
service
SS
Failure to install
monitoring
equipment
Delay of less than 30
days
0 NOV PC
Delay of more than
30 days
1 AO to install with
penalty for each
additional day
PC
Recurring, violation
of AO
4 - Civil action
- Criminal
investigation
- Terminate
service
PC
SS
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-15
Noncompliance Nature of
Violation
Category Enforcement
Response(s)
Personnel
Permit
compliance
schedule
Missed milestone
less than 30 days,
will not affect final
milestone
0 NOV PC
Missed milestone
more than 30 days,
will affect final
milestone (good
cause)
1 AO and penalty PC
Missed milestone
more than 30 days,
will affect final
milestone (no good
cause)
3 - Show cause order
- Civil action
- Terminate
service
PC, S
SS
Recurring violation
or violation of AO
schedule
4 - Civil action
- Criminal
investigation
- Terminate
service
SSS
Other Permit Violations
Waste streams
diluted in lieu of
pretreatment
Initial violation 1 AO and penalty PC
Recurring 2 - Show cause order
- Terminate
service
- Criminal
investigation
PC, S
S
Failure to
mitigate
noncompliance or
halt production
Does not result in
harm
2 NOV PC
Does result in harm 4 - AO and penalty
- Civil action
PC
S
Failure to
properly operate
and maintain
facility
Does not result in
harm
1 NOV PC
Does result in harm 3 - AO and penalty
- Civil action
PC
S
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-16
Noncompliance Nature of
Violation
Category Enforcement
Response(s)
Personnel
Violations Detected During Site Visits
Entry denial Entry denied or
consent withdrawn;
copies of records
denied
1 Obtain warrant
and return to IU
PC
Illegal discharge
(violation of
general discharge
prohibitions)
No harm to POTW
or environment
2 AO with penalty PC
Causes harm or
evidence of intent
and/or negligence
3 - Civil action
- Criminal
investigation
SS
Recurring, violation
of AO
4 Terminate service S
Improper
sampling
Unintentional
sampling at
incorrect location
0 NOV PC
Unintentionally
using incorrect
sample type
0 NOV PC
Unintentionally
using incorrect
sampling techniques
0 NOV PC
Inadequate
record keeping
Failure to
mitigate
noncompliance
Files incomplete or
missing (no evidence
of intent)
0 NOV PC
Recurring 2 AO and penalty PC
Failure to report
additional
monitoring
Inspection finds
additional files
(unintentional)
1 NOV PC
Recurring
(considered
falsification)
3 AO and penalty PC
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-17
Time Frames for Enforcement Responses
A. All violations will be identified and documented within 5 days of receiving
compliance information.
B. Initial enforcement responses involving contact with the IU and
requesting information on corrective or preventative action(s) will occur
within 15 days of violation detected.
C. Follow up actions for continuing or recurring violations will be taken
within 60 days of initial enforcement response. For all continuing
violations, the response will include a compliance schedule.
D. Violations which threaten health, property or environmental quality are
considered emergencies will receive immediate responses such as halting
the discharge or terminating service.
E. All violations meeting the criteria for significant noncompliance will be
addressed with an enforceable order within 30 days of the identification
of the significant noncompliance.
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-18
V. ENFORCEMENT RESPONSES
The following paragraphs describe the various types of enforcement response,
procedures, and person(s) responsible for identifying and implementing each
level of response, and the time frames for determining that a violation has
occurred and for initiating the appropriate response action. Most of this
information has already been provided in Section IV, Table IV.1 (Enforcement
Response Guide) and the written formats to be used in preparing the various
responses will be taken from the previously cited guidance document.
Notice of Violation - NOVs will be sent to any user found to
be in violation of the SUO, IU permit, or
any other applicable document. As a
general rule, NOVs will be issued by the
Pretreatment Coordinator for instances
of minor noncompliance and will serve
as an official notification to the user
that a violation has occurred. Initial
enforcement responses involving NOVs
will occur within 15 days of violation
detection. IU response to the NOV will
commence within 10 days of receipt of
the NOV and will include an
explanation of the violation, a plan for
sat isfactory correction, and
contingencies for prevention of future
occurrences.
Administrative Order - AOs are enforcement documents which
direct industrial users to undertake or
to cease specific activities. The terms of
AOs may or may not be negotiated with
industrial users. AOs are recommended
as the first formal response to
significant noncompliance (unless
judicial proceedings are more
appropriate), and may incorporate
compliance schedules, administrative
penalties, and termination of service
orders. Consent orders, show cause
hearings, cease and desist orders, and
termination of service are types of
administrative orders.
Consent Orders - In certain ins tances, t h e
Superintendent or his designee will
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-19
enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar
documents establishing an agreement
with the IU responsible for the
noncompliance. Such orders will also
serve as compliance orders and/or
schedules for the IU and failure to
adhere to the conditions of the consent
order will constitute significant
noncompliance.
Show Cause Hearing - The Superintendent or his designee
may order any IU which violates
conditions of the SUO or its permit to
show cause why a proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall
be served on the user specifying the
time and place for the meeting, the
proposed enforcement action, the
reason(s) for such action, and a request
that the user show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. Notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by registered or
certified mail at least 10 days prior to
the hearing. If the IU fails to appear as
noticed, immediate enforcement action
will ensue.
Cease and desist order - If the POTW finds that an IU has
violated or continues to violate the
Sewer Use Ordinance or its permit, the
Superintendent may issue an order to
cease and desist all such violations and
direct the party in noncompliance to do
one of the following:
(1) Comply with the order
(2) Take appropriate remedial or
preventive action needed to
properly address a continued or
threatened violation, including
but not limited to halting
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-20
operations and terminating the
discharge.
Termination of service - The Superintendent may
suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or revoke
an industrial user permit when
necessary, if, in the opinion of
the POTW, the discharge
presents or may present
potential or actual danger to
persons, the environment, causes
interference to the POTW, or
causes the POTW to violate
conditions of its NPDES permit.
Civil penalties will be assessed based on the type and severity of violation
outlined in the enforcement response guide found in Section IV, Table IV.1.
Penalties will be assessed in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per day for each
violation. The amount of penalty will be determined using the following factors:
(1) Whether the penalty imposed will be a substantial economic
deterrent to the noncompliance;
(2) Any damages to the POTW due to the noncompliance, which also
includes any penalties, costs, and attorney's fees incurred by the
POTW as a result;
(3) Cause of the discharge or violation;
(4) The severity of the noncompliance and its effect on the POTW and
upon the quality of the receiving waters;
(5) Effectiveness of action taken by violator to rectify the problem;
(6) The economic benefit gained by the violator.
The Superintendent, at his discretion, may establish or adopt a schedule of the
amount of civil penalty which can be assessed for certain specific violations or
categories of violations. The methods used to determine penalty amounts are
summarized in the Enforcement Response Guide.
Tracking of enforcement related situations will primarily be the responsibility
of the Pretreatment Coordinator. Compliance status worksheets will be updated
Change 5, July 11, 2011 APP-B-21
on a weekly basis for each IU. These worksheets will provide instant updates of
the compliance status of the IUs and allow personnel to flag noncompliance
situations at a glance.
Currently, all permitted IUs are sampled semi-annually by the POTW and
submit discharge self-monitoring reports on a regular basis to the POTW.
Demand monitoring is instituted when warranted. A scheduled and an
unscheduled IU facility inspection are performed semi-annually by the
pretreatment coordinator. It is hoped that these actions will provide an effective
means of tracking compliance status of IUs quickly and instituting necessary
enforcement proceedings in a timely manner. The proposed time frames for
initiating enforcement proceedings can be found in the enforcement response
guide in Section IV.

Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
ZONING ORDINANCE
for
CAMDEN, TENNESSEE
FEBRUARY 1984
READOPTED
AUGUST 2009
1
CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ZONING
1.1. Authority
1.2. Title
1.3. Purpose
I-1
I-1
I-1
I-1
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS II-1
ARTICLE III GENERAL PROVISIONS
3.1. Zoning Affects Every Building and Use
3.2. Continuance of Non-conforming Uses and Structures
3.3. Accessory Structures
3.4 Temporary Structures
3.5. Required Yard Cannot Be Used by Another Building
3.6. Minimum Lot Width and Depth
3.7. Reduction in Lot Area Prohibited
3.8. Rear Yard Abuts a Public Street
3.9. Lot of Record
3.10. Off Street Parking Requirements
3.11. Off Street Loading and Unloading Requirements
3.12. Obstruction of Vision at Street Intersections
3.13. Access Control
3.14. Pedestrian Traffic
3.15. Waste Disposal Site
3.16. Placement of Manufactured Homes
3.17. Site Plan Review Requirements
3.18. Orientation of Residential Structures
III-1
III-1
III-1
III-2
III-2
III-3
III-3
III-3
III-3
III-3
III-3
III-13
III-13
III-13
III-14
III-14
III-15
III-16
III-20
ARTICLE IV ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
4.1. Classifications of Districts
4.2. Boundaries of Districts
IV-1
IV-1
IV-1
ARTICLE V PROVISIONS GOVERNING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
5.1. Regulations Governing R-1, Low Density Residential Districts
5.2. Regulations Governing, R-2, Medium Density Residential
Districts
V-1
V-1
V-4
2
5.3. Regulations Governing R-3, High Density Residential Districts
5.4. Regulations Governing R-4, Mobile Home Residential
Districts
V-8
V-12
ARTICLE VI PROVISIONS GOVERNING BUSINESS DISTRICTS
6.1. Regulations Governing B-1, Neighborhood Commercial
Districts
6.2. Regulations Governing B-2, General Commercial
Districts
6.3. Regulations Governing B-3, Central Business District
6.4. Regulations Governing H-M, Hospital Medical District
6.5. Regulations Governing O-S, Office Service
VI-1
VI-1
VI-4
VI-7
VI-10
VI-10
ARTICLE VII PROVISIONS GOVERNING INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
7.1. Regulations Governing M-1, Light Industrial Districts
7.2. Regulations Governing M-2, Heavy Industrial Districts
VII-1
VII-1
VII-5
ARTICLE VIII PROVISIONS GOVERNING FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICTS
8.1. Regulation Governing the FH, Flood Hazard Districts
VIII-1
ARTICLE IX SPECIAL PROVISIONS
9.1. Regulations Governing Signs
9.2. Regulations Governing Home Occupations
9.3. Regulations Governing Boarders, Tourist and Renting of
Rooms
9.4. Regulations Governing Erosion and Sediment Control
IX-1
IX-1
IX- 15
IX-17
IXARTICLE
X EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
10.1. Lot of Record
10.2. Setback Line
10.3. Exceptions and Height Limitations
X-1
X-1
X-1
X-1
ARTICLE XI ENFORCEMENT
11.1. Enforcing Officer
XI-1
XI-1
3
11.2. Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
11.3. Penalties
11.4. Remedies
XI-1
XI-1
XI-2
ARTICLE XII BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
12.1. Creation and Appointment
12.2. Procedure
12.3. Appeals
12.4. Powers
XII-1
XII-1
XII-1
XII-1
XII-1
ARTICLE XIII AMENDMENTS
13.1. Zoning Amendment Petition
13.2. Planning Commission Review
13.3. Public Hearing on Proposed Amendment
XIII-1
XIII-1
XIII-1
XIII-1
ARTICLE XIV LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
14.1. Conflict with other Ordinances
14.2. Validity
14.3. Effective Date
14.4. Readoption Date
XIV-1
XIV-1
XIV-1
XIV-1
XIV-2
APPENDICES A-1
APPENDIX A1 (Building Permit) A-2
APPENDIX A2 (Petition of Change or Relief) A-3
APPENDIX A3 (Site Plan Certificates) A-4
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
I 1
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ZONING
1.1. Authority - An ordinance, pursuant to the authority granted by Sections l3-7-20l through
l3-7-2l0, Tennessee Code Annotated, authorizing the Town of Camden, Tennessee, to
establish districts or zones within its corporate limits; to regulate, within such district, the
location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and structures, the
percentage of lot occupancy, the required open spaces, the density of population and the
uses of land, buildings, and structures, to provide methods of administration of this
ordinance and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Board of Alderman of the Town of Camden, Tennessee,
as follows:
1.2. Title - This ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of Camden, Tennessee."
The map herein referred to, which is identified by the title "Zoning Map of Camden,
Tennessee," and the signature of the Mayor attested by the Town Recorder, and all
explanatory matter thereon are hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance.
1.3. Purpose - The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth have been made for the
purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the
community. They have been designed to lessen congestion in the street, to secure safety
from fire, panic and other dangers, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the
overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things,
of the character of each district and its peculiar suitability of particular uses, and with a
view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of
land throughout the town.
- 1 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 1
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
2.1. Definitions - Except as specifically defined herein all words used in this Ordinance have
their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context of the
ordinance. The term "shall" is mandatory. Words used in the present tense shall include
the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the
word "building" shall include the word "structure". In case of conflict between building
code or dictionary definitions with the definitions contained in this Ordinance, the
definition herein shall prevail. The categories established herein to define the permitted
uses are derived from the Standard Land Use Coding Manual and adapted to the
particular needs of the Town of Camden.
Abandoned / Obsolete Sign: A sign which directs attention to a business or product
which is no longer in existence or available at the site to which the sign directs attention
or which advertises a product no longer available.
Accessory Building and Use: A detached building or use subordinate to the principal
building or use on the same lot and serving a purpose naturally and normally incidental to
the principal building or use, including swimming pools and satellite dishes.
Accessory Structure: A subordinate structure detached from to the principal structure
which shall not be used for human habitation and when located in a flood hazard district
shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; shall be
firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures; and
service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or
floodproofed.
Act: The statutes authorizing the National Flood Insurance Program that are incorporated
in 42 U.S.C. 4001-4128.
Addition (to an existing building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of
a building in which the addition is connected by a common load bearing wall other than a
fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is
separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction.
Agricultural Services: Establishments primarily engaged in supplying soil preparation
services, crop services, landscaping, horticultural services, veterinary and other animal
services, and farm labor and management services.
Agriculture: Land devoted to the production of crops and/or livestock for sale (see Code
81 of the Standard Land Use Coding Manual).
- 2 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 2
Alley: A thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting
properties.
Amusement: An establishment which provides arcade type entertainment including such
items as pinball machines, video games, pool tables, miniature golf, and other
amusements. (See Code 73 in the Standard Land Use Coding Manual)
Animated sign: A sign which uses movement or change of light to depict or to create a
special effect or scene (does not include time, temperature or message signs).
Apartment: One dwelling unit, including living, cooking and sanitary facilities in a
multi-family structure.
Appeal: A request for a review of the Building Inspector's interpretation of any provision
of this ordinance or a request for a variance or special exception.
Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated A0 or V0 Zone on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
Area of Special Flood Hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to
a one (1%) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Attached Business Sign: Any sign which is affixed directly to a wall or parapet wall of
any building or structure with the exposed face on a plane approximately parallel to the
plane of such wall.
Automobile Storage Yard: Any land use for the parking and/or storage of one or more
abandoned or impounded operable vehicles for which compensation is received.
Awning: See Canopy
Awning Sign: See Canopy Sign
Banner Sign: A sign made of fabric or other non-rigid materials with no enclosing
framework. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution
or business shall not be considered banners.
Base Flood: The flood level that has a one (1%) percent chance of being inundated in
any given year. (See one-hundred year flood)
Basement: A portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all
sides.
- 3 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 3
Boarding House or Rooming House: A building in which lodging and/or meals are
provided for compensation for two or more persons for a prearranged time period.
Breakaway Wall: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is
intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading
forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting
foundation system.
Building: A structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or
storage.
Development: A manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but
not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials.
Buffer Strip: A strip of land, established to protect one type of land use from another
with which it is incompatible, which is landscaped and kept in perpetual open space uses.
Building: Any structure designed or built for the support enclosure, shelter, or protection
of persons, animals, chattels, or property.
Building, Height of: The vertical distance as measured from the finished grade at the
front line of the building to the highest point of the structure.
Building Inspector: The city official or authorized representative charged with the
responsibilities of enforcing the ordinance.
Building Line - Front, Side, Rear: Lines which define the required area for the front, side
and rear yards, as set forth in this Ordinance. This line is usually fixed parallel to the lot
line and is equivalent to the required yard.
Building, Main or Principal: A building in which the primary use of the lot is conducted.
Bulletin Board Sign: A ground sign with changeable text normally allowed for churches
and schools.
Business Identification Sign: A freestanding sign identifying a recognized firm,
business, or service.
Business Service: Establishments which provide aid or merchandise to retail trade
establishments including, but not limited to: advertising firms; consumer and mercantile
credit reporting and collection firms; duplicating, mailing and stenographic services;
dwelling and building cleaning services; photo finishing; and trading stamp service (see
Code 63 in the Standard Land Use Coding Manual).
- 4 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 4
Canopy: An extension of the roof of a building or a freestanding structure that has a roof
with support, but no walls.
Canopy Sign: A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an
awning or canopy projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building.
Carport: A canopy attached to the main building, open and to remain open on two sides
providing a sheltered place for parking an automobile and for entering and alighting from
said automobile.
Certified Historic Structure: A building certified in writing by local state or federal
historic preservation organization, chartered by the State of Tennessee, as having historic
value and significance and also designated as such by the Camden Planning Commission.
Child Care: Refers to the various arrangements made by parents for the care outside their
home of children less than 17 years of age, for less than 24 hour periods as provided in
the Tennessee Code Annotated, as well as all pertinent rules, regulations, and standards
of the Tennessee Department of Human Services.
Child Care Facility: A building or structure used for the care of children as defined
herein. Such a facility normally includes one of the following types:
a. Family Day Care Home: A home operated by any person who receives pay for
providing less than 24 hour supervision and care, without transfer of custody, for
5, 6, and 7 children under 17 years of age who are not residents of the household.
A license is not required for a home providing care for fewer than 5 children.
b. Group Day Care Home: Any place operated by a person, social agency,
corporation, institution, or other group which receives 8 or more children under
17 years of age less than 24 hours per day for care outside their own homes,
without transfer of custody. A group day care home may care for no more than
12 children.
c. Day Care Center: A place operated by a person, social agency, corporation,
institution, or other group that receives pay for the care of 13 or more children
under 17 years of age for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of custody.
Clinic: Any establishment housing facilities for medical or dental diagnosis and
treatment exclusive of major surgical procedures for patients who are not kept overnight
on the premises (see codes 6511, 6512 and 6517 in the Standard Land Use Coding
Manual).
Commercial: Activities related to the provision of products and services. See retail and
wholesale trade; financial, business, personal and professional services. (Codes 51-68 in
the Standard Land Use Coding Manual)
- 5 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 5
Communication: Radio, telegraph, and television broadcast receiving and relay facilities
(See Code 47 in the Standard Land Use Coding Manual).
Community Facility - A building or structure owned and operated by a governmental
agency which provides a governmental service to the public.
Condominium: An ownership arrangement in which the buyer purchases only a dwelling
unit and does not receive the title to any real property. This term may apply to either
apartments or townhouses. Also, a building, or group of buildings, in which units are
owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the
owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
Construction Sign: A temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor,
and/or material supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is
located.
Cultural Activity: Any institution concerned with the appreciation of nature and the
humanities such as but not limited to museums, art galleries, historic sites, and aquariums
(see Code 71 in the Standard Land Use Coding Manual).
Density: Maximum number of units per acre allowed by this Zoning Ordinance.
Directional/Informational Sign: Any on-premise sign giving directions, instructions, or
facility information, e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs, and which may contain the
name or logo of an establishment but no other advertising copy.
District: Any section or sections of the Town of Camden for which the regulations
governing the use of land and use, density, bulk, height, and coverage of buildings and
other structures are uniform.
Driveway: A paved or gravel way, on private property, providing access from a public
way, street or alley, to the main buildings, carport, garage, parking space or other portion
of the premises.
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for human
residential habitation. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the term "dwelling" shall not
include boarding or rooming houses, motels, hotels, or other structures designed for
transient residence.
Dwelling, Attached: A one-family dwelling attached to two or more one-family
dwellings by a common vertical fire wall with each dwelling being located on a separate
lot. This shall include zero lot line development.
Dwelling, Single-family - Detached: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by
one (1) family which has no connection by a common wall to another building or
structure similarly designed.
- 6 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 6
Dwelling, Multi-family: A building designed for occupancy by three (3) or more
families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, Patio Home: A one-family dwelling on a separate lot with open space setbacks
on three (3) sides.
Dwelling, Semi-Attached: A one-family dwelling attached to another one-family
dwelling by a common vertical fire wall or walls with each dwelling being located on a
separate lot. This shall include two-family townhouses and zero lot line developments.
Dwelling, Townhouse: An attached residential dwelling unit for occupancy by one (1)
family constructed in a row with each unit consisting at least two (2) stories and each
dwelling unit located on a single lot. Each dwelling unit is separated from the adjoining
unit in each story by an adjoining fire resistant wall which has no opening in it and
extends from the lowest floor through the roof with each dwelling unit having
independent access to the exterior in the ground floor. For the purpose of this ordinance
a townhouse designation shall apply to three (3) or more units built contiguous to each
other. This definition does not preclude condominium standards as set forth in the
Southern Standard Building Code.
Dwelling, Two-family (duplex): A building designed to be occupied by two families,
living independently of each other having one wall common to both dwelling units, and
located on one lot.
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms designed as a unit for occupancy by one (1) family
for cooking, living, and sleeping purposes, which is part of a two-family duplex,
townhouse, or multi-family structures.
Dwelling-Mobile Home: See Mobile Home
Education Services: Established schools including primary, secondary, universities,
colleges, junior colleges and various private facilities such as correspondence schools
and art, dance and music schools (see Code 68 in the Standard Land Use Coding
Manual).
Elevated Building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated
above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings,
columns (posts and piers), sheer walls, or breakaway walls.
Emergency Flood Insurance Program or Emergency Program: The program as
implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with section 1336 of the Act. It is
intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of insurance on all insurable
structures before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
Erosion: The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
- 7 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 7
Essential Services: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public
utilities or municipal departments, or commissions, of underground or overhead gas,
electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution system, collection,
communications supply or disposal systems, including poles, wire, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, traffic signals, in connection therewith, but not including
buildings or substations reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by
such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions, or for the public health or
safety or general welfare.
Exception: A waiver from the provisions of this Ordinance which relieves the applicant
from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order or other determination made or issued
pursuant to this Ordinance.
Existing Construction: Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced
before the effective date of this ordinance.
Existing Manufactured Home or Mobile Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this floodplain management
ordinance.
Existing Structures: See Existing Construction
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home or Mobile Home Park or Subdivision:
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities,
the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Exterior Boundary: See Exterior Yard.
Exterior Yard: A yard adjacent to the side or exterior boundaries of a mobile home park,
a multi-family development or planned commercial development which are clear of any
structures.
Factory Built Housing: A factory built structure designed for long term residential use.
For the purposes of these regulations, factory built housing consist of three (3) types:
modular homes, mobile homes, and manufactured homes.
Family: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or other legal arrangement, or a
group of unrelated individuals, not to exceed two persons per bedroom of the house
occupied, living as a single non-profit housekeeping unit.
- 8 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 8
Finance, Insurance and Real Estate Services: Those establishments which provide
banking or bank related functions and insurance and real estate brokers. (See Code 61 in
the Standard Land Use Coding Manual).
Flashing Sign: Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign which contains an intermittent
flashing light source. (This does not include message center or time/temperature signs.)
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Elevation Determination: A determination by the Administrator of the water
surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or
greater chance of occurrence in any given year.
Flood Elevation Study: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards
and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation
and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles as well as the Flood Boundary
Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see definition of "flooding").
Floodplain Management: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
Flood Protection System: Physical structural works for which funds have been
authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to
modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a
"special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system
typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
- 9 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 9
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Flood-related Erosion: The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level
in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force
of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
Flood-related Erosion Area or Flood-related Erosion Prone Area: A land area adjoining
the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline
or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related
erosion damage.
Flood-related Erosion Area Management: The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and
flood plain management regulations.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of
slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction.
The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
Freeboard: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes
of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown
factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a
selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings and
the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
Freestanding Sign: Any sign supported by uprights or braces placed on or in the ground
and not attached to any building.
Functionally Dependent Facility: A facility which cannot be used for its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking
or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include
long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
Game Room: An establishment which provides arcade type entertainment including such
items as pinball machines, video games, and pool tables.
- 10 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 10
Garage, Private: A building or portion thereof for the storage of motor vehicles owned or
used by the residents.
Governmental Agency: An agency of the Federal, State, or the Local Government or any
combination thereof.
Governmental Services: Fire, Police, Judicial and other services provided by the
government (See Code 67 of the Standard Land Use Coding Manual).
Grade: The ground elevation used for the purpose of regulating the height of building.
The ground elevation used for this purpose shall be the average of the finished ground
elevations at the front line of the building.
Gross Floor Area: The total floor area, including basements, mezzanines and upper
floors, if any, expressed in square feet measured from center lines of joint partitions and
exteriors of outside walls.
Ground Sign: A sign mounted at ground level, the height of which is no more than six
(6) feet from the surrounding ground level and the face of which begins no more than
thirty-six (36) inches above the surrounding grade.
Grouping Signs: Signs identifying a group of stores, businesses, or professional offices
located in one development. These include office center signs and shopping center signs.
Habitable Space: Areas within the building designed and/or used as living quarters for
human beings.
Height: See Building, height of.
Height, Sign: See Sign Height.
Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to
construction, next to the proposed walls of a building.
Historic Area: A district or zone designated by a local authority, state or federal
government within which the buildings, structures, appurtenances and places are of basic
and vital importance because of their association with history, or because of their unique
architectural style and scale, including color, proportion, form and architectural detail, or
because of their being a part or related to a square, park, or area the design or general
arrangement of which should be preserved and/or developed according to a fixed plan
based on cultural, historical or architectural motives or purposes.
Historic Structure: Any structure that is;
A. listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by
- 11 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 11
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
B. certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
a district preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
C. individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
D. individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
2. directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
Hospital: An establishment which provides out-patient, inpatient, and emergency
services of a medical, surgical and obstetrical nature to ill or injured human patients.
Illegal Sign: Any sign and/or advertising structure erected or altered after the effective
date of this Ordinance not complying with the provisions thereof unless said provision
was expressly waived or granted a variance.
Incidental Home Occupation: A venture for profit which is incidentally conducted in a
dwelling unit as an accessory to the residential use.
Institution: A building occupied or operated by a non-profit society, corporation,
individual foundation or governmental agency for the purpose of providing charitable,
social educational or similar services of a charitable character to the public.
Interstate Sign: A sign mounted as a pole sign erected within 660 feet of the nearest edge
of the right-of-way of Interstate 40. The distance of six-hundred sixty (660) feet is based
on The Rules and Regulations of the Control of Outdoor Advertising, Section 1680-2-
3.03, published by the Tennessee Department of Transportation.
Junk or Salvage Yard: Any land or building used for the abandonment, storage, keeping,
collecting or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metals or other scrap or discarded materials.
Any land or building used for the storage, demolition, dismantling or salvaging of
inoperable vehicles, machinery or parts thereof.
Kindergartens: See Nursery School
- 12 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 12
Land Development or Land Use Plan: A general plan for the physical development of a
particular area, which can be either a municipality, region or both. The plan will
formulate a coordinated, long term development pattern for the identified area the
creation of a future land development or land use map, a major road plan and the
identification of goals, objectives and policies.
Levee: A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed
in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of
water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee System: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and
operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Loading Space: An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings
for temporary parking of a vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot: A legally recorded parcel of land.
Lot Area: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
Lot, Corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot having a frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets as
distinguished from a corner lot.
Lot of Record: A parcel legally recorded in the Office of the Benton County Register of
Deeds prior to the date of the adoption of this Ordinance.
Lot Coverage: The lot area covered by all buildings located therein.
Lot Width: The horizontal measurement at the building line.
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's
lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Ordinance.
Manufacturing: Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformations
of materials or substances into new products including the assembling of component
parts, the manufacturing of products, and the blending of materials such as lubricating
oils, plastics, resins or liquors.
- 13 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 13
Comment: The term manufacturing covers all mechanical or chemical transformations,
whether the new product is finished or semi-finished as raw material in some other
process. Manufacturing production usually is carried on for the wholesale market rather
than for direct sales. Processing on farms is not classified as manufacturing if the raw
material is grown on the farm. The manufacturing is accessory to the major use of
farming.
Manufactured Home: A residential dwelling, transportable in two or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. A
manufactured home having the same general appearance as a site built home shall be
allowed on individual lots in any residential district provided the following conditions are
met:
a. The unit must be installed on a permanent foundation system in compliance with
all applicable requirements of the Southern Standard Building Code.
b. The home must be covered with an exterior material customarily used on
conventional dwellings. The exterior covering material shall extend to the ground
except that, when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the
exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation.
Suitable exterior materials include but shall not be limited to clapboards,
simulated clapboards, such as, conventional or metal material, but excluding
smooth, ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic panels.
c. The hitches or towing apparatus, axles and wheels must be removed.
d. The roof must be pitched so there is at least a two-inch vertical rise for each
twelve (12) inches of horizontal run. The roof must consist of material that is
customarily used for conventional dwellings including, but not limited to
approved wood, asphalt composition shingles or fiberglass shingles, but
excluding corrugated aluminum, corrugated fiberglass or metal roof.
e. The unit must be oriented on the lot so that its long axis is parallel with the street.
f. All such units shall be required to connect to a public utility system which
includes gas, electric, water, and sewer in compliance with the Southern Standard
Building Code and National Electrical Code.
Manufactured Home, Flood Hazard District: For the purpose of interpreting the term
"Manufactured Home" as used with the Flood Hazard District Section Manufactured
Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purpose the term
manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles
- 14 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 14
placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term
manufactured home does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar
vehicles.
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home or mobile home lots for
rent or sale.
Maintenance (Sign): For the purposes of this Ordinance, the cleaning, painting, repair, or
replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy,
design, or structure of the sign.
Map: The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for a community issued by the Agency.
Mean Sea Level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a
reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this
ordinance, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).
Medical Services: Those establishments which provide aid or merchandise relating to or
concerned with the practice of medicine; excluding sanitariums, convalescent and rest
home services. (See Code 651 in the Standard Land Use Coding Manual)
Message Board: A sign with changeable, removable letters to allow the user to replace or
update the copy on the sign.
Mixed Use Development: The development of a tract of land or building or structure
with two or more different uses such as, but not limited to, residential, office,
manufacturing, retail, public, or entertainment, in a compact urban form.
Mini-Warehouse: A building or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced
compound that contains various sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled
access stalls or lockers for the storage of customers goods or wares.
Mobile Home: A factory-assembled, movable dwelling unit designed and constructed to
be towed on its own permanent chassis, comprised of frame and wheels, to be used with
or without a permanent foundation for permanent occupancy, but with the necessary
service connections for required utilities, and distinguishable from other types of
permanent dwellings in that the standards to which it is built include provisions for its
mobility on that chassis as a vehicle. The character of a mobile home as a non-permanent
dwelling shall not be changed in the view of this Ordinance by removal of the wheels
and/or carriage or placement on a permanent foundation. A travel trailer is not to be
considered as a mobile home.
Mobile Home Park: Any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes are
parked for occupancy as dwelling units.
- 15 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 15
Mobile Home Space: An area of ground within a mobile home park designed for the
accommodation of one (1) mobile home.
Model Home: A residential structure that may or may not be furnished that may display
a plan of the subdivision in which the structure is located, plans of different homes or
structures available for construction within the subdivision and alternative materials of
which the structures may be constructed. The home may not display any materials used
in the decorating or finishing of the interior of a structure and may not be staffed by more
than two (2) agents.
Model Home Sign: A ground sign identifying a model residential structure or example
home within a recognized subdivision or residential development.
Modular Home: A residential dwelling which is a structural unit or pre-assembled
component unit including the necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and
other service systems manufactured off-site and transported to the point of use for
installation or erection, with or without other specified components, is a finished building
and not designed for ready removal to another site.
Motor Vehicle Transportation: Transportation services including bus, taxi and motor
freight transportation. (See code 42 of the Standard Land Use Coding Manual)
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control
used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
New Construction: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after
June 1, 1981.
New Manufactured Home or Mobile Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home
or mobile home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of this ordinance.
Non-conforming Lot: A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior
to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance, but which fails by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements
of the zoning district.
Non-conforming Structure or Building: A structure or building the size, dimensions or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment to a zoning
ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to
conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
- 16 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 16
Non-conforming Use: Any use of building or premises which lawfully existed prior to
the adoption of, or amendment of this Ordinance, but which no longer comply with the
use regulations of the district in which it is located.
Noxious Matter: Material (in gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate, or any other form) which
is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of
causing detrimental effects upon the social, economic , or psychological well-being of
individuals (also see toxic materials).
Nursery: Refers to the various arrangements made by parents for the care outside their
home of children less than seventeen (17) years of age, for less than 24-hour periods as
provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 14-10-101 through 14-10-105 as well as
all pertinent rules, regulations, and standards of the Tennessee Department of Human
Services.
Nursery School: A building or structure used for the care of children as defined herein.
Such a facility normally includes one of the following types.
(a) Family Day Care Home: A home operated by any person who receives pay for
providing less than 24-hour supervision and care, without transfer of custody, for
5, 6, or 7 children under 17 years of age, who are not residents of the household.
A license is not required for a house providing care for fewer than 5 children.
(b) Group Day Care Home: Any place operated by a person, social agency,
corporation, institution, or other group which receives 8 or more children under
17 years of age, for less than 24 hours per day, for care outside their home,
without transfer of custody. A group day care home may care for no more than
12 children.
(c) Day Care Center: A place operated by a person, social agency, corporation,
institution, or other group that receives pay for the care of 13 or more children
under 17 years of age for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of custody.
Office Center: Two or more offices having a common parking lot.
One-hundred Year Flood: A flood which has, on the average a 1-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. It is sometimes referred to as the "1-percent
chance flood".
Owner: The fee owner of a sign, the lessee of the sign, the fee holder of the property
upon which the sign is located, the lease holder of such property or the individual, person
or business who has purchased the copy on a sign.
Pads: The surface on which a trailer is located consisting of concrete footings and a
support of the trailer.
- 17 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 17
Painted Business Sign - Any sign which is painted or inscribed directly to a wall or
parapet wall of any building or structure.
Parks: An open area set aside for leisure activities which is not used for the operation of
a profit making venture, such as but not limited to playgrounds, athletic or playfields and
picnic areas.
Parking Space-Required: A paved and properly drained area enclosed or unclosed
required by this Ordinance to be permanently reserved for parking one (1) motor vehicle.
Each required parking space shall have a minimum area of one hundred sixty-two (162)
square feet and not less than nine (9) feet wide, exclusive of driveways and shall be
connected with a public street, alley or by a paved driveway affording safe and
convenient ingress and egress. Except on lots occupied by single-family and two-family
dwellings, parking spaces and driveways shall be arranged as to provide for both ingress
and egress by forward motion of the parked or parking vehicle.
Perimeter Landscaped: A landscaped area intended to enhance the appearance of parking
lots and other outdoor auto related uses or to screen incompatible uses from each other
along their boundaries.
Periphery Boundary: (See Exterior Yard)
Permitted Use: Any use specifically identified as being allowed in a zoning district and
subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
Person: includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other entity, including State and local governments and agencies.
Personal Services: Establishments which provide services which include laundry,
beauty, funeral, and other services to individuals. (see Code 62 in the Standard Land Use
Coding Manual).
Planned Commercial Development: An area of a minimum contiguous size to be
planned, developed, operated and maintained as a single entity containing one or more
structures to accommodate commercial or office uses, or both and appurtenant common
areas and other uses incidental to the predominant uses.
Planned Development: An area of a minimum contiguous size developed according to
plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures with appurtenant common
areas.
Planned Unit Development (PUD): An area of a minimum contiguous size to be planned
and developed as a single entity containing one or more residential clusters or planned
unit residential developments and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial or
industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential uses as shall
be specified.
- 18 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 18
Planting Screen: A strip of land containing trees, bushes or shrubbery which serves as a
buffer between lots and/or land uses.
Plat: A map, plan or layout indicating the location and boundaries of individual
properties and which may indicate structure location and horizontal measurements.
Plot: A parcel of land set aside for an individual mobile home in a mobile home park.
This is often synonymous with lot.
Pole Sign: A free-standing sign supported from the ground by a pole or similar support
structure of narrow width which by reason of height does not qualify as a ground sign.
Political Sign: A sign displaying the name and/or picture of an individual seeking
election to a public office or a sign otherwise relating to a forthcoming public election or
referendum.
Portable Accessory Storage Structure: A movable accessory structure which is not
permanently attached to a permanent foundation, does not necessitate any grading or
excavation, is not intended for habitation and which is subordinate to a nonresidential use
and which is used exclusively for storage purposes.
Portable Sign: A sign which is not attached by way of a rigid, non-flexible connection to
a building or the ground. Any sign which by its construction or nature may be or is
intended to be freely moved from one location to another. When on a trailer, the removal
of the wheels or undercarriage does not place the sign in another category; neither does
the anchoring of the sign by means of concrete blocks, sandbags or other types of
temporary anchors. Portable signs include, but are not limited to, signs designed to be
transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-Frames; menu and sandwich
board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising.
Principal Building: A building in which is conducted the primary use of the lot on which
it is located.
Principal Use: The specific primary purpose for which land or a building is used.
Professional Services: Those services normally provided by the established professions
such as, but not limited to, physician services, dental services, legal services, engineering
services architectural services and accounting services, not to include sanitariums,
convalescent and rest home services. (See Code 65 in the Standard Land Use Coding
Manual).
Projecting Sign: Any sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects
more than 12" from a building wall or other structure not specifically designed to support
the sign.
- 19 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 19
Public Assembly Facility: Any of the following types of institutions or installations
where community activities are typically performed such as: parochial and private clubs,
lodges, meeting halls, recreation centers and areas; temporary festivals; theaters; public,
parochial and private museums and art galleries; places of worship, including any
structure or site such as a church, synagogue, chapel, sanctuary or cathedral, used for
collective or individual involvement with a religious activity, such as rites, rituals,
ceremonies, prayer and discussion; public community centers and recreational areas such
as playgrounds, playfields and parks.
Public Uses: Facilities such as, but not limited to parks, schools, and offices owned and
operated by governmental bodies.
Public Sign: Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the City,
County, State or Federal Government for traffic direction or for the designation of or
direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public service, property or facility.
Public Utility: Any plant or equipment for the conveyance, production, transmission,
delivery of or furnishing of heat, chilled air, water, light, power or water, or sewage
facilities, either directly or indirectly to or for the public (see Codes 47 and 48 except
Code 4823 and 485).
Real Estate Sign: Any temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is
located as being for rent, lease sale or sold.
Recreational Activities: Sports activity, playground and athletic areas, swimming areas,
marinas and other similar activities. (See Code 74 of the Standard Land Use Coding
Manual).
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, has 400 square feet or
less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled
or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is not designed primarily for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping travel, or
seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Repair Services: Those establishments which fix, mend or overhaul merchandise for
households or businesses, not to include automobile body shops (see Code 64 in the
Standard Land Use Coding Manual).
Residential Identification Sign: A ground, freestanding or wall sign identifying a
recognized subdivision, condominium complex, apartment complex or residential
development.
- 20 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 20
Retail Services: Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to
products, to the general public, including eating and drinking places hotels and motels,
finance, real estate and insurance, personal services, motion pictures, amusement and
recreation services, health, educational and social services, museums and galleries.
Retail Trade: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general
public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the
sale of such goods. (See Code 52 through 59 in the Standard Land Use Coding Manual).
Right-of-Way (ROW): A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road,
crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil of gas pipeline, water line, sanitary
storm sewer and similar uses.
Riverine: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream,
brook, etc.
Roof Sign: any sign erected, constructed or maintained wholly or partially upon or over
the roof line of any building with the principal structural support on the roof or building
structure.
Schools, Parochial: An institution of learning owned and/or operated by a recognized
church or religious institution.
School, Private: An institution of learning that is not parochial or public in nature.
School, Public: An institution of learning owned and/or operated by a governmental
body.
Services: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services for individuals,
business and government establishments and other organizations: including hotels and
other lodging places; establishments providing personal, business, repair and amusement
services; health, legal, engineering, and other professional services; educational
institutions; membership organizations, and other miscellaneous services.
Service Station: Any facility used for dispensing or sale at retail of any motor vehicle
fuels.
Setback: The minimum distance required between the lot boundary and the building line
as stipulated by the front, side and rear yard provisions of this Ordinance.
Shopping Center: Two or more businesses sharing a common parking lot which shall
include indoor and outdoor malls.
Sign: Any object, device, graphic design or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors and
which object, device, graphic design or the effect produced is used to advertise,
announce, identify, declare, demonstrate, display, instruct, direct or attract attention by
- 21 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 21
any means including words, letters, figures, designs, fixtures, colors, motion,
illumination, sound and projecting images. Any sign requiring a permit is considered to
be a structure.
Sign Area - Freestanding, Roof and Projecting Signs: The area enclosed by one
continuous line, connecting the extreme points or edges of the sign. The area shall be
determined using the largest sign area or silhouette, but excluding the necessary supports
or uprights. Two-sided signs constructed back to back shall use the square footage of one
side only for compliance. Three sided signs with no more than 60 degrees between the
faces shall be figured using one face only.
Sign Area - Attached Business, Awning and Canopy Signs: The area including all
lettering, wording, and accompanying design or symbols together with any background.
For a sign composed of individual letters or figures, the area is that of the smallest
rectangle or other geometric shape that encompasses all the letters or symbols.
Sign Height: The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, excluding
decorative embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade
beneath the sign, whichever is less.
Sign Permit: A written permit granted by the Building Inspector for the erection,
construction, enlargement, relocation or conversion of any sign for which a permit is
required.
Site Plan, Sketch Plan, General Plan: A plan delineating the overall scheme of the
development of a tract including all items as specified in this Ordinance.
Special Exception: A use allowed on appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Special Hazard Area: An area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazard, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30,
AE, A99, or AH.
Start of Construction: The actual start means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring
of slabs or footing, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory building, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. For other than new
construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, [P.O.
97-3411], including substantial improvement means the date the building permit was
- 22 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 22
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
State Coordinating Agency: (Tennessee Department of Economic and Community
Development, Local Planning Assistance Office) means the agency of the state
government, or other office designated by the Governor of the State or by state statute at
the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
Story: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the
upper surface of the floor next above; or any portion of a building used for human
occupancy, between the top most floor and the roof. A basement not used for human
occupancy shall not be counted as a story.
Story, Half: A story under a slopping roof, the finished floor area which does not exceed
one half the floor area of the floor immediately below it, or a basement used for human
occupancy, the floor area of the part of the basement thus used not to exceed fifty (50)
percent of the floor area of the floor immediately above.
Street or Road: A way for vehicular traffic, whether the road is designated as an avenue,
arterial, collector, boulevard, road, highway, street, expressway, lane, alley or other way,
and for the purpose of these regulations roads are divided into the following categories.
(a) Arterial: A major highway used primarily for heavy through traffic which will be
so designated on the Camden Major Road Plan.
(b) Collector Street: A street designed to carry traffic from minor streets to the major
road system including the principal entrance streets to a residential development
and the streets for major circulation within such a development.
(c) Cul-de-sac or Dead-end Street: A local street with only one outlet for which there
are no plans for extension and no need for extension.
(d) Marginal Access Street: A minor street which is constructed parallel and adjacent
to an arterial street for the purpose of providing access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
(e) Minor Residential or Local Streets: A neighborhood or commercial area street
used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
Street Line: The property line which bonds the rights-of-way set aside for use as a street.
Where sidewalks exist and the location of the property line is questioned the side of the
sidewalk farthest from the traveled street shall be considered as the street line.
Street Center Lines: The center of the surface roadway or the surveyed center line of the
street
- 23 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 23
Structure: A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured
home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures.
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites, or other
divisions requiring new street or utility construction, or any division of land less than five
(5) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development,
and includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of
re-subdividing.
Subdivision Development Sign: A ground sign identifying the construction or
development of a recognized residential subdivision or condominium complex.
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50%)
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home or Mobile Home Parks, or
Subdivisions: Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the
streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the value of the streets,
utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
Substantially Improvement, Flood Hazard District: Any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during one (1)
year, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the market
value of the building. The market value of the building should be (1) the appraised value
of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of
damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered
to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building
required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
Temporary Structure: A factory assembled, movable building not designed or used as a
dwelling unit which is towed on its own chassis composed of a frame and wheels. The
structure is to be used without a permanent foundation
Temporary Sign: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display or sign
constructed of light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, plywood, paper or other light materials,
with or without frames, where either by reason of construction or purpose the sign is
intended to be displayed for a short period of time only (31 days or less). Temporary
signs shall include but not be limited to street banners, posters, construction signs, real
- 24 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 24
estate signs model signs, special event signs and the permanent attachment of portable
signs to a site shall not change the signs to permanent signs.
Telecommunications Structure: A building, tower or other structure and equipment used
for the transmission, retransmission, broadcast or promulgations of telephone, telegraph,
radio, television or other communications signals (See Code 47 under Standard Land Use
Coding Manual)
Time and Temperature Sign: Electrically controlled public service time, temperature and
date signs displayed on a lamp, bank or other electronic display.
Total Floor Area: The area of all floors of a building including finished attics, finished
basements, covered porches, and carports.
Toxic Materials: Material (gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate, or any other form) which is
capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction even when present in
relatively small amounts.
Transient Lodging: Temporary lodging as set forth in Code 15 of the Standard Land Use
Coding Manual.
Total Floor Area: The area of all floors of a building including finished attics, finished
basements, covered porches, and carports.
Usable Floor Area: Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of
the exterior walls. Floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the
storage or processing of merchandise or for utilities shall be excluded from this
computation.
(a) For the purposes of computing parking, usable floor area shall be that area used or
intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve
patrons, clients, or customers.
(b) Where detailed floor plans are not available, the following shall apply:
(1) Commercial Building - usable floor area shall equal 75% of the gross floor
area.
(2) Office buildings other than medical office - usable floor area shall equal
80% of the gross floor area.
(3) Medical Office Buildings - usable floor area shall equal 85% of the gross
floor area.
- 25 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 25
Use: The special purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended, or
for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its
equivalent shall not be deemed to include any non-conforming use.
Utilities: Gas, water, electricity, sewer and telephone services provided by government
agencies or private companies (see code 48 in the Standard Land Use Coding Manual).
Utility Services: Establishments engaged in the generation, transmission and/or
distribution of electricity, gas or steam, including water and irrigation systems and
sanitary systems used for the collection and disposal of garbage. sewage and other wastes
by means of destroying or processing materials.
Variance: A modification of the strict application of the area (lot, yard and open space)
regulations and development standards of this Ordinance due to exceptionally irregular,
narrow, shallow, or steep lots, whereby such strict application would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship which would deprive an owner of reasonable use of
the property. The salient points of a variance are (1) undue hardship caused by
exceptional physical irregularities of the property; and (2) unique circumstances due to
the exceptional physical irregularities; and, (3) strict application of the area regulations
and development standards which would deprive an owner of reasonable use of the
property. A variance is not justified unless all three elements are present.
Vehicle Mounted Sign: Any sign painted on or attached to a vehicle relating to the
business, activity, use, service or product of the owner of the vehicle, or to the sale of the
vehicle and which sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle.
Veterinary Hospital or Clinic: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for the surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases or injuries of animals.
Such an establishment may include accessory boarding facilities provided they are
located within the building. (see Code 8221 and 8222 Standard Land Use Coding
Manual).
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community's zoning ordinance and or building code. Also a structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of
compliance required in this Ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
Warehouse: A structure used exclusively for the storage of merchandise or commodities.
Wholesale Distribution of Paper Scrap and Paper Waste Materials: Establishments
primarily engaged in assembly, breaking up, sorting, and wholesale distribution of paper
scrap and paper waste materials.
Wholesale Trade: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling
merchandise to retailer, to industrial, commercial, farm, or professional business users, or
- 26 -Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
II 26
to other wholesalers, or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for, or selling
merchandise to such persons or companies. (See Code 51 in the Standard Land Use
Coding Manual).
Window Sign: Any on-premise business sign installed in or on a window and intended to
be viewed from the outside.
Yards: Any open space on the same lot with a principal building open, unoccupied and
unobstructed by building from the ground to the sky except as otherwise provided in this
Ordinance. The measure of a yard shall be the minimum horizontal distance between any
part of the principal building and lot or street right-of-way lines.
(a) Front Yard: The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the
front lot line, and the nearest part of the principal building. On corner lots, the
yards adjacent to both streets shall be front yards.
(b) "Side Yard": The yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and
extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the
minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side building line.
(c) "Rear Yard": A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines
and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the rear building line. On all lots except corner lots, the rear yard shall be defined
at the time the building permit is issued.
Zero Lot Line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of
the building's sides rest directly on a lot line.
Zoning Districts: Any section of the City for which the zoning regulations, governing the
use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of the yards and the
intensity of use are uniform.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-1
ARTICLE III
GENERAL PROVISIONS
For the purpose of this ordinance there shall be certain general provisions which shall apply to
the town as a whole.
3.1. Zoning Affects Every Building and Use - No building or land shall hereafter be used
and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered unless for a use
expressly permitted by and in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
district in which it is located, whether operated for or without compensation. However,
this shall be construed as authorizing the requirement of building permits or any
regulation of any building, other than setback requirements from the right-of-way of a
street or alley, on lands devoted to agricultural uses. Nor shall it be construed as limiting
or affecting in any way or controlling the agricultural uses of land.
3.2. Continuance of Non-conforming Uses and Structures - It is the intent of this
ordinance to recognize that the elimination, as expeditiously as is reasonable, of the
existing buildings and structures or uses that are not in conformity with the provisions of
this ordinance is as much a subject of health, safety, and welfare as is the prevention of
the establishment of new uses that would violate the provisions of this ordinance. It is
also the intent of this ordinance to administer the elimination of non conforming uses,
buildings and structures so as to avoid an unreasonable invasion of established private
property rights. Lawful non-conforming uses, buildings and structures existing at the
time of the passage of this ordinance or any amendment thereto shall be allowed to
remain subject to the following provisions:
3.2.1. An existing non-conforming use of a building may be changed to a conforming
use or to another non-conforming use of the same classification; provided,
however, that establishment of another non-conforming use of the same
classification shall be subject to the written approval of the Board of Zoning
Appeals and subject to such conditions as the Board of Zoning Appeals may
require in order to protect the area.
3.2.2. No existing non-conforming use or structure shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except as herein
provided.
3.2.3. Non-conforming commercial, business, or industrial uses shall be allowed to
expand operations and reconstruct facilities which involve an actual continuance
and expansion of activities of the business which were permitted and being
conducted prior to the change in zoning, provided that there is a reasonable
amount of space for such expansion on the property owned by such business and
that any construction, improvements or reconstruction shall be in conformance
with the district requirements in which it is located.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-2
3.2.4. A non-conforming use of a building or buildings shall not be enlarged to either
additional land or buildings after the effective date of this ordinance.
3.2.5. When a non-conforming use of any building or land has ceased for a period of six
(6) months, it shall not be re-established or changed to any other non-conforming
use.
3.2.6. Any non-conforming building or non-conforming use, which is damaged by fire,
flood, wind or other act of God or man, may be reconstructed and used as before,
if it occurs within twelve months of such damage, unless such damage is to the
extent of more than seventy-five (75%) percent of the fair sales value
immediately prior to the damage, in which case any repair or reconstruction shall
be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
3.2.7. A non-conforming building or building housing a non-conforming use shall not
be structurally altered except in conformance with the provisions of this
ordinance. This provision shall not be construed to prevent normal maintenance
and repairs or alterations required for structural safety.
3.2.8. A non-conforming residential structure cannot be replaced with a structure that is
not permitted in the Zoning District in which the property is situated.
3.2.9. All additions or improvements to an existing non-conforming mobile home park
shall be in conformance with these regulations.
3.3. Accessory Structures - No accessory structures shall be utilized for human occupation,
shall extend beyond the required front yard or the front line of the principal building and
shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the required rear yard. Accessory
structures shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from side and/or rear property lines.
3.4. Temporary Structures -A temporary structure for construction and/or real estates sales
purposes shall be permitted in any district provided that any building permit issued for
such a building shall be valid for not more than six (6) months and may be extended no
more than three (3) consecutive times and further provided the following provisions are
adhered to:
3.4.1. Residential Districts - One (1) temporary structure for construction materials
and/or equipment and one (1) temporary office for the sale or rental of real
property, if in connection with and incidental to the development, shall be
permitted in any residential district.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-3
3.4.2. Commercial and Industrial Districts. - Two (2) temporary structures for
construction materials and/or equipment, if in connection with and incidental to
the development, shall be permitted in any commercial district.
3.5. Required Yard Cannot Be Used By Another Building - No part of a yard or open
space required by this ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space
required in this ordinance for another building.
3.6. Minimum Lot Width and Depth - No building shall be erected on a lot which does not
abut a public street or permanent access easement for at least thirty-five (35) feet.
3.7. Reduction in Lot Area Prohibited - No lot, even though it may consist of one or more
adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per family, lot
width, building area, or other requirements of this ordinance are not maintained. This
section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is required for a public purpose.
3.8. Rear Yard Abuts a Public Street - When a rear yard abuts a public street, all structures
built in that rear yard shall observe the same setback from the street line, centerline of the
street or property line as required for adjacent properties which front on that street. In
addition, any structure located within twenty-five (25) feet of that setback line shall be no
closer to any side property line than the distance required for side yards on adjoining
properties fronting on that street.
3.9. Lot of Record - Where the owner of a lot of record at the time of the adoption of this
Ordinance does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the yard or other
requirements of this Ordinance, an application may be submitted to the Board of Zoning
Appeals for a variance from the terms of this Ordinance. Permission to use such lot as a
building site may be granted, however, providing that the yards and other requirements of
the district are complied with as closely as is possible in the opinion of the Board of
Zoning Appeals. Where two or more substandard lots of record with continuous frontage
are under the same ownership, such lots shall be combined to form one or more building
sites meeting the minimum requirements of the district in which they are located.
3.10. Off-Street Parking Requirements - Except in the B-3 (Central Business District), there
shall be provided, at the time of erection of any building, or at the time any principal
building is enlarged or increased in capacity by or before conversion from one zone, use,
or occupancy to another, permanent off-street parking as specified in this resolution.
Parking lots for commercial, industrial, or multi-family uses shall be provided with an
asphalt or concrete surface with specifications approved by the Building Inspector within
one (1) year of the date of the building permit for the original project. Parking space
maintained in connection with an existing and continuing principal building on the
effective date of this resolution shall not be counted as serving a new building or
addition; nor shall any parking space be substituted for loading space, nor any loading
space substituted for a parking space.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-4
3.10.1. Location - Off-street parking shall be located on the same lot which it serves. If
the parking cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may permit parking space to be provided on other off-street property
provided such space lies within three hundred (300) feet of the main entrance to
such principal use.
3.10.2. Size and Maneuvering Room - Each parking space shall have a minimum area of
one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet and shall be a definitely designated stall
adequate for one motor vehicle. The boundaries of each individual parking space
shall be clearly marked by painted stripes on the parking lot surface. The width
shall not be less than nine (9) feet and the length shall not be less than eighteen
(l8) feet. A minimum of three hundred twenty-four (324) square feet per parking
space shall be used when computing parking area to include maneuvering space.
All maneuvering lanes shall be clearly marked with painted arrows, stripes, or
other approved measures that provide direction for interior circulation in the
parking lot. Except for dwellings with one or two dwelling units, all off-street
parking facilities shall be so arranged that no automobile shall back into any
street.
3.10.3. Access - Each parking space shall be directly accessible from a street or alley or
from an adequate access aisle or driveway leading to or from a street or alley, and
shall make use of clearly limited and defined drives providing ingress and egress.
3.10.4. May Serve as Yard Space - Parking space may be included as part of the required
yard space associated with the permitted use.
3.10.5. Number of Spaces for Specific Uses
a. Residential
Dwelling, one and two
family, townhouses,
multi-family and mobile
homes
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Fraternities and
Sororities
2 spaces per bedroom plus
1 space for each 300 sq. ft.
of common space
Retirement home or
assisted living home
1 space per dwelling unit
Hotels, motels, tourist
courts and similar
transient lodging
1 space per unit plus 1
space for each 400 sq. ft.
of public mtg. area or
restaurant space
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-5
All other residential uses
not listed
As determined by the
planning commission or
the board of zoning
appeals
b. Retail
Lumber and Building
Materials
1 space per 500 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Plumbing and Heating
Supply
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Hardware and Paint 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Greenhouse, nursery
products, agricultural
equipment and
lawnmower sales and
service
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of
total floor area plus 1
space for each 5,000 sq. ft.
of floor area
Shopping Centers and
Malls
1 space per 200 sq. Ft of
total floor area
General Merchandise,
Clothing, Variety and
Department Stores
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Furniture, Home
Furnishings, Art,
Antiques and Books and
Stationary
1 space per 400 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Grocery Stores and
Supermarkets
1 space per 150 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Delicatessens and
Bakeries
1 space per 150 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Package Liquor Store
and Beverage Store
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Auto Sales and Service,
Auto Parts, Boat Sales
1 space per 500 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-6
and Service, Boat Parts
and Motorcycle Sales
and Service
Mobile Home, Semi-
Truck and Heavy
Equipment Sales.
1 space per 500 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Restaurants, Cafes and
Cafeteria
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of
total floor area.
Restaurants, Fast Food 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Taverns, Bars and Drive-
In Restaurants
1 space per 150 sq. ft. of
total floor area.
Fuel or Gas Stations 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of
total floor area with a
minimum of 5 parking
spaces
Convenience Store 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Pawn Shop 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of
total floor area
All other retail trade not
listed
As determined by the
planning commission or
the board of zoning
appeals
c. Finance Insurance and
Real Estate
Banks, Savings and
Loans Real Estate
Offices, and Insurance
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of
total floor area.
All other finance
insurance and real estate
not listed
As determined by the
planning commission or
the board of zoning
appeals.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-7
d. Personal Services
Laundering, dry
cleaning, apparel repair
and cleaning services
1 space per 350 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Beauty, Barber and
Photographic Services
1 space per 300 sq. ft of
total floor area and 1 space
per employee
Kennels 1 space per 1000 sq. ft of
total floor area
All other personal
services not listed
As determined by the
planning commission or
the board of zoning
appeals
e. Business Services
Advertising, Consumer
Credit Reporting and
Collections
1 space per 400 sq. ft of
total floor area
Printing and Publishing 1 space per 400 sq. ft of
total floor area
Photocopying, Mailing,
Exterminating and
Employment
1 space per 400 sq. ft of
total floor area
Freight Forwarding and
Trucking Terminals
1 space per 5000 sq. ft of
total floor area
Warehousing and storage 3 spaces plus 1 space per
100 units
Clerical Services,
Monument Sales
1 space per 500 sq. ft of
total floor area
Car Wash, Full Service 1 space per 1000 sq. ft. of
floor area
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-8
Car Wash, Self Service 2 spaces plus 1 space per
wash bay
All other business
services not listed
As determined by the
planning commission or the
board of zoning appeals
f. Repair Services
Automobile Repair, Oil
and Fluid Changing
Services, Electrical
Repair and Radio and
Television Repair
1 space per 500 sq. ft of
total floor area with a
minimum of 2 spaces
Watch Repair,
Reupholstery, and other
repair services not listed
1 space per 300 sq. ft of
total floor area with a
minimum of 2 spaces
All other repair services
not listed
As determined by the
planning commission or the
board of zoning appeals
g. Professional Services
Physicians and Dentist
Offices and Clinics
1 space per 150 sq. ft of
total floor area.
Veterinarians and
Animal Hospitals
1 space per 300 sq. ft of
total floor area.
Hospitals and
Sanitariums,
1 space for each employee,
two 2 spaces for each bed
plus 1 space for each
emergency vehicle
Convalescent Homes and
Rest Homes
1 space for each employee
plus 1 space for each 4 beds
with a minimum of 4 spaces
Day Care and Child Care
Centers
1.5 spaces/care room (min. 5
spaces) plus a paved
unobstructed pick-up area
with adequate stacking area.
Attorneys, Accountants, 1 space per 300 sq. ft of
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-9
Engineers and other
services not listed
total floor area.
All other professional
services not listed
As determined by the
planning commission or the
board of zoning appeals
h. Contract Construction
Services
All Contract
Construction Services
1 space per 1000 sq. ft of
total floor area.
i. Governmental Services
All governmental
services
As determined by the
planning commission or the
board of zoning appeals
j. Educational Services
Elementary school or
junior high school
one (1) space for each
classroom, plus one (1)
space for each staff member
and employee other than
teachers, plus ten (10)
additional spaces. This
provision is not applicable
where parking space
required for an auditorium
is provided.
Senior high school one (1) space for each
classroom plus one (1)
space for each staff member
and employee other than
teachers, plus one (1) space
for each fifteen (15)
students based on the
capacity for which the
building was designed.
This provision is not
applicable where parking
space required for an
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-10
auditorium is provided.
Other Education Services 1 space per 300 sq. ft of
total floor area
k. Miscellaneous Services
Labor Unions, Clubs
Lodges and Civic, Social
or Fraternal Associations
1 space per 100 sq. ft of
total floor area
Funeral Home or
Mortuary
1 space per 100 sq. ft. of
useable floor area
Other miscellaneous
services not listed
As determined by the
planning commission or the
board of zoning appeals
l. Cultural Activities
Libraries, Museums and
Art Galleries
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of
useable floor area
All other cultural
activities not listed
As determined by the
planning commission or the
board of zoning appeals
m. Public Assembly
Motion Picture Theaters,
Amphitheaters and
Stadiums
1 space per 3 seats or 6 feet
of bench space
All other public
assembly uses not listed
As determined by the
planning commission or the
board of zoning appeals
n. Amusements
Fairgrounds and
amusement parks
1 sq. ft of parking area for
each sq. ft. of activity area
Golf Driving Ranges and
Miniature Golf
2 spaces per hole or tee
Arcades and Pool Halls 1 space per 200 sq. ft of
total floor area
All other amusements As determined by the
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-11
not listed planning commission or the
board of zoning appeals
o. Recreational Activities
Roller Skating Rinks,
Gymnasiums and athletic
clubs
1 space per 250 sq. ft of
total floor area
Playgrounds and athletic
fields
All other recreation
activities not listed
As determined by the
planning commission or the
board of zoning appeals
p. Communications and
Utilities
All communications and
utilities services
as determined by the
planning commission and
Board of Zoning Appeals
q. Institutional
Churches, Synagogues
and other Places of
Worship
1 space per 3 seats in the
sanctuary
Nursing 1 space for per 4 beds with
a minimum of 4 spaces
All other institutional
uses
as determined by the
planning commission and
Board of Zoning Appeals
r. Wholesale Trade
Drugs, Chemicals and
Allied Products
1 space per 1000 sq. ft of
total floor area.
Groceries, Electrical
Goods, Hardware and
other items not listed
1 space per 1000 sq. ft of
total floor area.
All other institutional As determined by the
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-12
uses Planning Commission and
Board of Zoning Appeals
s. Industrial
All Industrial Uses 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of
floor area or 1.5 spaces for
each 2 persons employed on
the largest shift, which ever
is greater.
3.10.5.1 In all developments, handicapped parking spaces shall be provided which
have a minimum width of sixteen (16) feet [or one van accessible space as
required below with a 96 inch space and adjacent 96 inch access aisle] unless a 60
inch (5 feet) middle aisle is used in conjunction with two adjacent eleven (11) feet
wide parking spaces designed as a van and non-van accessible space (referred to
as the universal design standard).
One in every eight accessible parking spaces shall be van accessible with an
acceptable overhead clearance of a minimum of 108 inches (9 feet). Two
adjacent van accessible spaces shall have a minimum of two 96 inch (8 feet) aisle.
The number of handicapped parking spaces in relation to the total number of
spaces is listed below (unless dictated for multi-family or automobile showrooms
or specified medical uses as dictated by the North Carolina Handicapped Code):
Total Spaces in Lot Required number of
Handicapped spaces
Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1000 2% of Total
Over 1000 20 plus 1 for each 100
over 1000
3.10.5.2 Ramp slopes for wheelchair accessibility shall be between 1:12 and 1:20.
3.10.5.3 The travel distance along accessible routes from accessible parking spaces to
accessible entrances shall not exceed 200 feet.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-13
3.10.5.4 The number and location of handicapped parking spaces shall be dictated the
North Carolina Handicapped Code, the Americans with Disabilities Act, or other
applicable code. If there is a conflict, the strictest standard shall apply.
3.11. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements - On the same premises with every
building, structure or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or
materials or merchandise, there shall be provided, and maintained on the lot, adequate
space for standing, loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with
public use of dedicated rights-of-way.
3.11.1. All spaces shall be laid out in the dimension of at least ten feet by fifty feet (l0 x
50) or five hundred (500) square feet in area, with a clearance of at least fourteen
(l4) feet in height.
3.11.2. Where trailer trucks are involved, such loading and unloading space shall be an
area twelve (l2) feet by fifty (50) feet with a fourteen (l4) foot height clearance
and shall be designed with appropriate means of truck access to a street or alley as
well as adequate maneuvering area.
3.11.3. The following ratio of spaces to floor area applies to all districts.
Gross Floor Area Space Required
0 - 20,000 sq. ft. One (l) space
20,000 sq. ft. and over One space plus one (l) additional space
for each 20,000 sq. ft. in excess of
20,000 sq. ft.
3.12. Obstruction of Vision at Street Intersections - In all districts on a corner lot, except the
B-3 (Central Business District), within the area of streets or street and railroad at a
distance of thirty (30) feet from their intersections, there shall be no obstruction to vision
for a distance of 100 feet between a height of two and one-half (2 l/2) feet and a height of
ten (l0) feet above the average grade of each street or railroad at the centerline thereof.
The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining
wall. The Board of Zoning Appeals may reduce this requirement where safety conditions
will not be impaired.
3.13. Access Control - In order to promote the safety of the motorist and pedestrian and to
minimize traffic congestion and conflict by reducing contact, the following regulations
shall apply:
3.13.1. Plan Submission - In order to obtain access to a street, a workable plan relative to
openings for ingress and egress, maneuvering, parking, and loading spaces shall
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-14
be submitted in accordance with the Site Plan Review requirements in 3.17 of this
Article.
3.13.2. Number Of Access Points - There shall be no more than two (2) points of access
to any one (1) public street on a lot of less than three hundred (300) feet, but not
more than one hundred (100) feet in width. Lots in excess of three hundred (300)
feet may have two (2) points of access to any one (1) public street for each three
hundred (300) feet of frontage. Lots less than one hundred (100) feet in width
shall have no more than one (1) point of access to any one (1) public street.
3.13.3. Distance Of Intersections - All vehicular access points shall be located at least
thirty (30) feet from the intersection of any right-of-way lines of street or a street
and a railroad.
3.13.4. Width - A point of access, i.e., a driveway or other opening for vehicles onto a
public street, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width for one-way (one
lane) ingress or egress and shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width for twoway
ingress and/or egress. Points of access up to fifty (50) feet in width for
businesses engaged primarily in the servicing of automobile vehicles may be
granted on a case by case basis.
3.13.5. Effect On Curbs, Drainage Ditches, and Sidewalks - No curbs shall be cut or
altered or drainage ditches covered for the purpose of access without written
approval by the Building Inspector. Where sidewalks exist, the area existing
between the street and an interior parking space or driveway parallel to the street
shall have an effective barrier to prevent harm to pedestrians or sidewalk by
encroachment of vehicles onto the sidewalk area.
3.13.6. Relation To State Highway Regulations - Access control of property abutting
state or federal highways shall be governed by official regulations of the
Tennessee Department of Transportation.
3.13.7. Variances - Causes requiring variance relative to this Section, and hardship not
caused by the property owner, shall be heard and acted upon by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
3.14. Pedestrian Traffic - In all multifamily residential, commercial and industrial
developments due considerations shall be given to pedestrian traffic circulation. In
developments adjacent to existing sidewalks, the extension of the sidewalks shall be
required. In all new developments the planning commission shall evaluate the density of
the development or the location of the development to determine if a need exists for
sidewalks in the area.
3.15. Waste Disposal Sites - Off street refuse collection sites shall be required in all multifamily
residential developments, office developments, commercial developments and
industrial developments. A refuse collection site shall not be located within any required
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-15
front yard and shall be screened and maintained using suitable materials, as determined
by the Planning Commission during site plan review. Each refuse collection receptacle
shall be placed upon a cement pad of sufficient size to accommodate the desired number
of receptacles.
3.16. Placement of Manufactured Homes
3.16.1. The unit must be installed on a permanent foundation system in compliance with
all applicable requirements of the Southern Standard Building Code.
3.16.2. The home must be covered with an exterior material customarily used on
conventional dwellings. The exterior covering material shall extend to the ground
except that, when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used and
the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation.
Suitable exterior materials include, but shall not be limited to, clapboards,
simulated clapboards, such as, conventional or metal material, but excluding
smooth, ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic panels.
3.16.3. The hitches or towing apparatus, axles and wheels must be removed.
3.16.4. The roof must be pitched so there is at least a two inch vertical rise for each
twelve (12) inches of horizontal run. The roof must consist of material that is
customarily used for conventional dwellings including, but not limited to,
approved wood, asphalt composition shingles or fiberglass.
3.16.5. The unit must be oriented on the lot so that its long axis is parallel with the street.
3.16.6. All such units shall be required to connect to a public utility system which
includes electric, water and sewer in compliance with the Southern Standard
Building Code and National Electrical Code.
3.17. Site Plan Review Requirements - The following procedures and standards are
established for those sections of this ordinance which require the submission and
approval of a site plan prior the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy
for any affected lands, structures, or buildings. Site plans shall be reviewed and
approved or disapproved under the following procedures and standards as specified by
this ordinance.
3.17.1. Site Plan Submission and Review - Site plan review is required under three (3)
separate instances by the Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance. These instances
include:
a. The review and approval of a site plan by the Camden Building Inspector
for any addition under two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or
any single-family residential structure. The building inspector reserves
the right to refer any site plan to the appropriate body for additional
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-16
review. This power of review may include, but not be limited to setbacks,
screening, lighting, parking location, layouts, access and general
landscaping requirements. This power shall not include the authority to
specify or alter the architectural style of proposed or existing buildings.
b. The review and approval of a site plan for any Permitted Use by the
Camden Municipal Planning Commission as required by this ordinance,
provided that the total square footage for any and all buildings proposed
for construction for commercial or industrial use on a single lot is 2,500
square feet or greater. Site plans for construction of commercial or
industrial-use structures totaling less than 2,500 square feet will be
reviewed by the Building Inspector, although the Inspector reserves the
right to refer any site plan to the Planning Commission for additional
review. Site plans for construction of any multi-family, townhouse, or
attached dwelling development, as those structures are defined in Article
II of this Ordinance, will be presented to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission or Building Inspector, whichever is the approving
authority, may require such changes in the presented site plan as may be
necessary to minimize the impact of the requested use upon the city. This
power of review may include, but not be limited to setbacks, screening,
lighting, parking location, layouts, access and general landscaping
requirements. This power of review shall not include the authority to
specify or alter the architectural style of proposed or existing buildings.
c. The review and approval of a site plan for any Use Permitted on Approval
of the Board of Zoning Appeals as required by this ordinance. The Board
of Zoning Appeals may require such changes in the presented site plan as
may be necessary to minimize the impact of the requested use upon the
city. This power of review may include but not be limited to setbacks,
screening, lighting, parking location, layouts, access and general
landscaping requirements. This power shall not include the authority to
specify or alter the architectural style of proposed or existing buildings.
3.17.2. Review Procedure - In instances of review of a site plan by either the Camden
Building Inspector, the Camden Municipal Planning Commission or the Camden
Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals the following procedures shall apply.
a. Building Inspector Review - In instances of review by the Camden
Building Inspector, the site plan shall be reviewed in light of the
provisions of this ordinance and approved or disapproved. The plans shall
then be returned to the owner or agent with the date of such approval or
disapproval noted thereon. In instances of disapproval, the applicant shall
be notified in writing as to the reason(s) the site plan was disapproved.
b. Planning Commission Review
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-17
(1) The owner or developer shall submit ten (10) copies of the
proposed site plan (15) days prior to the regular meeting date of
the Planning Commission. The site plan shall be reviewed in light
of the provisions of this ordinance and approved or disapproved.
The plans shall then be returned to the owner or agent with the
date of such approval or disapproval noted thereon. When
approval has been granted, the site plan shall be signed and dated
by the Secretary of the Planning Commission. In instances of
disapproval, the applicant shall be notified in writing as to the
reasons(s) the site plan was disapproved.
(2) Prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting, copies of the
proposed site plan shall be distributed to affected city departments
for review of areas under their concern. Once city staff has
reviewed the proposed development and has submitted a written
review, a copy of these reviews shall be distributed to members of
the Planning Commission and to the applicant prior to the
scheduled meeting. To assist in resolving any potential problems,
the owner, developer, or agent shall be required to attend the
meeting at which the item is to be heard.
c. Board of Zoning Appeals Review
(1) The owner or developer shall submit ten (10) copies of the
proposed site plan (15) days prior to the scheduled meeting date of
the Board of Zoning Appeals. The site plan shall be reviewed in
light of the provisions of this ordinance and approved or
disapproved. The plans shall then be returned to the owner or
agent with the date of such approval or disapproval noted thereon.
When approval has been granted, the site plan shall be signed and
dated by the Chairman of the Board of Zoning Appeals. In
instances of disapproval, the applicant shall be notified in writing
as to the reason(s) the site plan was disapproved.
(2) Prior to the scheduled meeting, copies of the proposed site plan
shall be distributed to affected city departments to review areas
under their responsibility. Once city staff has reviewed the
proposed development and has submitted a written review, a copy
of these reviews shall be distributed to members of the Board of
Zoning Appeals and to the applicant at least 24 hours prior to the
meeting date. To assist in resolving any potential problems, the
owner, developer, or agent shall be required to attend the meeting
at which the item is to be heard.
3.17.3. Contents of the Site Plan
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-18
a. Building Inspector: - In instances where site plan review is required by the
Building Inspector, the site plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than
1" = 50' and shall include, as a minimum, the following:
(1) All property lines and their surveyed distances and courses.
(2) All building restricting lines, setback lines, easements, covenants,
reservations and rights-of-way.
(3) Total land area.
(4) Present zoning of site and abutting properties.
(5) Name, address of owner of record and applicant.
(6) Provisions for utilities (water, sewer, etc.)
(7) Location and dimensions of the proposed structures.
b. Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals: - In instances where
site plan review is required by either the Planning Commission or the
Board of Zoning Appeals, the site plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less
than 1" = 50' and shall include, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Name and address of development.
(2) Name and address of the applicant and owner of record.
(3) Present zoning of the site and abutting properties.
(4) Date, graphic scale, and north point with reference to source of
meridian.
(5) Courses and distances of center of all streets and all property lines,
highway setback lines, property restricting lines, easements,
covenants reservations and rights-of -way.
(6) The total land area.
(7) Topography of the existing ground and paved areas and elevations
in relation to mean sea level of streets, alleys, utilities, sanitary and
storm sewers, and buildings and structures. Topography to be
shown by dashed line illustrating two (2)-foot contours and by spot
elevation where necessary to indicate flat areas.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-19
(8) Certification as to the accuracy of the plan by a licensed architect
or engineer.
(9) A certificate, with a space for a signature and date, which states
that the site plan has been approved by either the Camden
Municipal Planning Commission or the Camden Municipal Board
of Zoning Appeals, which ever is applicable to the type of use that
is requested.
(10) The location, dimensions, site and height of the following when
existing:
(a) Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and utilities.
(b) Buildings and structures.
(c) Public waste water systems.
(d) Slopes, terraces and retaining walls.
(e) Driveways, entrances, exits, parking areas and sidewalks.
(f) Water mains and fire hydrants.
(g) Trees and shrubs.
(h) Recreational areas and swimming pools.
(i) Natural and artificial water courses.
(j) Limits of flood plains.
(11) The location, dimensions, site and height of the following when
proposed:
(a) Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and utilities.
(b) Buildings and structures including the front (street)
elevation of proposed buildings.
(c) Public waste water systems.
(d) Slopes and terraces, and retaining walls.
(e) Driveways, entrances, exits, parking areas and sidewalks.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-20
(f) Water mains and fire hydrants.
(g) Trees and shrubs.
(h) Recreational areas.
(i) Distances between buildings.
(j) Estimates of the following when applicable:
(i) Number of dwelling units.
(ii) Number of parking spaces.
(iii) Number of loading spaces.
(iv) Number of commercial or industrial tenants and
employees.
(v) Plans for collecting storm water and methods of
treatment of natural and artificial water courses
including a delineation of limits or flood plains, if
any.
(vi) Proposed grading, surface drainage terraces,
retaining wall heights, grades on paving area, and
ground floor elevations of proposed building and
structures. Proposed topography of the site shall be
shown by two (2) foot contours.
3.17.4. Expiration of Approval and Renewal - A site plan approved by the Planning
Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals shall lapse unless a building permit,
based thereon, is issued within one (1) year from the date of such approval unless
an extension of time is applied for and granted by the appropriate approving body.
3.18. Orientation of Residential Structures - From and after the time of adoption of this
Ordinance, any building constructed for residential purposes shall be arranged so that the
front of the structure is oriented toward the street providing access to the structure.
3.19 Fences and Walls  Notwithstanding other provisions of this Ordinance, fences and wall
may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided that
fences or walls along the sides or front edge of any yard be limited to a height of no more
than 42 inches (3 ½ feet) with a setback minimum of 15 feet from the curb or the right of
way whichever is greater. Buffers may be exempt from these provisions if required by
the reviewing authority. No proposed fence, wall or fence shall be permitted, which
violates Section 3.12 and any other provision of this ordinance or other City Codes.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
III-21
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-1
ARTICLE IV
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
4.1. Classification of Districts - In order to regulate and restrict the location and use of
buildings and land for commerce, residence and other purposes and to regulate and
restrict the height and size of yards and open spaces and the density of habitation, the
Town of Camden is hereby divided into districts as set forth below:
R-1 (Low Density Residential)
R-2 (Medium Density Residential)
R-3 (High Density Residential)
R-4 (Mobile Home/High Density Residential)
B-1 (Neighborhood Business)
B-2 (General Business)
B-3 (Central Business District)
H-M (Hospital - Medical)
O-S (Office  Service)
M-1 (Light Industrial District)
M-2 (Heavy Industrial District)
FH (Flood Hazard District)
4.2. Boundaries of Districts - The boundaries of districts are hereby established as shown on
the map entitled, "Zoning Map of Camden, Tennessee," which is a part of this ordinance
and which is on file in the Town Hall of the Town of Camden.
4.2.1. Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning map, the boundaries are lot lines, the
center lines of streets or alleys, railroad rights-of-way, or the corporate limit lines
as they existed at the time of enactment of this ordinance. Questions concerning
the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-2
4.2.2. Where a district boundary divides a lot, as existing at the time this ordinance
takes effect, and the major portion of said lot is in the less restrictive district, the
regulations relative to that district may extend as well to such portion of said lot
which is not more than twenty (20) feet within the more restricted district.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-1
ARTICLE V
PROVISIONS GOVERNING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
5.1. R-1 Low Density Residential District.
5.1.1 Intent - The intent of the R-1 (Low Density Residential) District is to provide
for an area for single family residential free from conflicting residential uses.
These areas should be served by all municipal services.
5.1.2 Uses Permitted
a. Single-family detached dwellings, not to include mobile homes.
b. Accessory buildings customarily incidental to the permitted use.
c. Signs as permitted in Article VIII, Section 8.1
5.1.3. Uses Permitted on Appeal - Following public notice and hearing and subject
to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
permit the following uses:
a. Public uses, including but not limited to Municipal, State or Federal
uses.
b. Churches and cemeteries.
c. Private or parochial schools.
d. Philanthropic or religious institutions other than churches.
e. In Home Occupations as identified in Article VIII Section 8.2.
f. Boarders, Tourists and the Leasing of Rooms.
5.1.4. Uses Prohibited - Any other use not specifically permitted in Section 5.1.2 or
permitted on appeal in Section 5.1.3.
5.1.5. Minimum Lot Area
a. Single-family dwellings Twelve-thousand (12,000) sq. ft.
b. Churches and/or cemeteries Two (2) acres
c. Schools, including parochial Five (5) acres plus one (1) acre for
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-2
or private schools each one hundred (100) students or
fraction of one hundred (100)
students over one hundred (100).
d. Philanthropic or religious
institutions other than
churches.
e. All other uses One (1) acre or more as required by
the Board of Zoning Appeals
5.1.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
a. Single-family dwellings Seventy (70) feet.
b. Churches and/or cemeteries Two-hundred (200) feet
c. Schools, including parochial
or private schools
Three-hundred (300) feet
d. All other uses One-hundred (100) feet
5.1.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
a. All lots Forty (40) feet
5.1.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a. Single-family dwellings Fifteen (15) feet
b. All other uses Twenty-five (25) feet or more as
required by the Board of Zoning
Appeals
5.1.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
a. Single-family dwellings Thirty (30) feet
b. All other uses Forty (40) feet or more as
required by the Board of
Zoning Appeals
5.1.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-3
a. Single family residential uses shall be limited to one (1) principal
building per lot.
b. Uses other than residential shall have no limitations on the number of
buildings provided however, that the aggregate of all buildings shall
not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the entire lot area.
5.1.11. Height Regulations - The maximum height of all structures shall be as
follows:
a. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
b. No accessory building shall exceed two stories in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar structures not
designed for, or suitable to human occupancy, may exceed the height
provisions of this ordinance provided that they comply with all other
codes and ordinances, and provided that they are located a distance
equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property
line.
5.1.12. Parking Requirements - Off-street parking space shall be provided on the
same lot as the principal building in accordance with Article III, Section 3.10.
5.1.13. Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings shall be located on the
lot in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
5.1.14. Site Plan Review - Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan review
is required in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17. of this ordinance for
all permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal, except for single (1) family or
two (2) family residential structures. Once a site plan has been approved and
all modifications, if any, have been made a building permit may be issued.
The Building Inspector shall maintain a copy of the site plan in the permanent
files of the town.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-4
5.2. R-2, Medium Density Residential District.
5.2.1 Intent - The intent of the R-2 (Medium Density Residential) is to provide for
an area that allows for single family and two family residential development
free from conflicting residential land uses. These areas should be served by
all municipal services.
5.2.2 Uses Permitted
a. Single-family detached dwellings, not to include mobile homes.
b. Two-family dwellings, not to include mobile homes.
c. Accessory buildings and accessory uses customarily incidental to the
above permitted uses
d. Signs as permitted in Article VIII, Section 8.1
5.2.3. Uses Permitted on Appeal - Following public notice and hearing and subject
to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
permit the following uses:
a. Public uses, including but not limited to municipal, state or federal
uses such as schools, museums, office buildings, utilities.
b. Churches and cemeteries.
c. Private or parochial schools.
d. Philanthropic or religious institutions other than churches.
e. In Home Occupations identified in Article VIII Section 8.2.
f. Boarders, Tourists and the Leasing of Rooms.
5.2.4. Uses Prohibited - Any other use not specifically permitted in Section 5.2.2 or
permitted on appeal in Section 5.2.3.
5.2.5. Minimum Lot Area
a. Single-family dwellings Seven thousand five-hundred
(7,500) sq. ft.
b. Two family dwellings Ten-thousand (10,000) sq. ft.
c. Churches and/or cemeteries Two (2) acres
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-5
d. Schools, including parochial or
private schools
Five (5) acres plus one (1)
acre for each one hundred
(100) students or fraction of
one hundred (100) students
over one hundred (100).
e. Golf courses or country clubs,
including publicly owned
Ten (10) acres
f. All other uses One (1) acre or more as
required by the Board of
Zoning Appeals
5.2.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
a. Single-family dwellings Sixty (60) feet.
b. Two family dwellings Eighty (80) feet
c. Churches, cemeteries, golf
courses, and/or country clubs
Two-hundred (200) feet
d. Schools, including parochial
or private schools
Three-hundred (300) feet
e. All other uses One-hundred (100) feet
5.2.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
a. All lots Thirty (30) feet
5.2.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a. Single-family dwellings Ten (10) feet
b. Two-family dwellings Fifteen (15) feet.
c. All other uses Twenty-five (25) feet or more as
required by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
5.2.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-6
a. Single-family dwellings Twenty (20) feet
b. Two-family dwellings Twenty-five (25) feet.
c. All other uses Forty (40) feet or more as
required by the Board of
Zoning Appeals
5.2.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted
a. Single family and two family residential uses shall be limited to one
(1) principal building per lot.
b. Uses other than residential shall have no limitations on the number of
buildings provided however, that the aggregate of all buildings shall
not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the entire lot area.
5.2.11. Height Regulations - The maximum height of all structures shall be as
follows:
a. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
b. No accessory building shall exceed two stories in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar structures not
designed for, or suitable to human occupancy, may exceed the height
provisions of this ordinance provided that they comply with all other
codes and ordinances, and provided that they are located a distance
equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property
line.
5.2.12. Parking Requirements - Off-street parking space shall be provided on the
same lot as the principal building in accordance with Article III, Section 3.10
5.2.13. Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings shall be located on the
lot in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
5.2.14. Site Plan Review - Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan review
is required in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17. of this ordinance for
all permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal, except for single (1) family or
two (2) family residential structures. Once a site plan has been approved and
all modifications, if any, have been made a building permit may be issued.
The Building Inspector shall maintain a copy of the site plan in the permanent
files of the town.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-7
5.3. R-3, High Density Residential District.
5.3.1 Intent - The intent of the R-3 (High Density Residential) District is to provide
for an area that allows for all types of residential land uses with the exception
of mobile homes. These areas should be served by all municipal services.
5.3.2 Uses Permitted
a. Single-family detached and attached dwellings, not to include mobile
homes.
b. Two-family dwellings, not to include mobile homes.
c. Townhouses and multiple family dwellings
d. Signs as permitted in Article VIII, Section 8.1
5.3.3. Uses Permitted on Appeal - Following public notice and hearing and subject
to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
permit the following uses:
a. Public uses, including but not limited to municipal, state or federal
uses such as schools, museums, office buildings, utilities.
b. Churches and cemeteries.
c. Private or parochial schools.
d. Philanthropic or religious institutions other than churches.
e. In Home Occupations identified in Article VIII Section 8.2.
f. Boarders, Tourists and the Leasing of Rooms.
5.3.4. Uses Prohibited - Any other use not specifically permitted in Section 5.3.2 or
permitted on appeal in Section 5.3.3 or permitted on appeal by the Board of
Zoning Appeals in this section.
5.3.5. Minimum Lot Area
a. Single-family dwellings Seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) sq. ft.
b. Two family dwellings Ten-thousand (10,000) sq. ft.
c. Townhouse and multi-family Eight-thousand (8,000) sq. ft.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-8
dwellings for the first (1st) unit plus
three-thousand (3,000) sq. ft.
for each additional unit
d. Churches and/or cemeteries Two (2) acres
e. Schools, including parochial or
private schools
Five (5) acres plus one (1)
acre for each one hundred
(100) students or fraction of
one hundred (100) students
over one hundred (100).
f. Golf courses or country clubs,
including publicly owned
Ten (10) acres
g. All other uses One (1) acre or more as
required by the Board of
Zoning Appeals
5.3.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
a. Single-family dwellings Sixty (60) feet.
b. Two family dwellings Eighty (80) feet
c. Townhouse and multi-family
dwellings
One-hundred (100) feet
d. Churches, cemeteries, golf
courses, and/or country clubs
Two-hundred (200) feet
e. Schools, including parochial
or private schools
Three-hundred (300) feet
f. All other uses One-hundred (100) feet
5.3.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
a. All lots Thirty (30) feet
5.3.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a. Single-family dwellings Ten (10) feet
b. Two-family, Townhouse and
Multi-family dwellings
Fifteen (15) feet
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-9
c. All other uses Twenty-five (25) feet or more as
required by the Board of Zoning
Appeals
5.3.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
a. Single-family dwellings Twenty (20) feet
b. Two-family dwellings Twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Townhouse and Multi-family
dwellings
Thirty (30) feet
d. All other uses Forty (40) feet or more as
required by the Board of
Zoning Appeals
5.3.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted
a. Single family and two family residential uses shall be limited to one
(1) principal building per lot.
b. All other uses shall have no limitations on the number of buildings
provided, however, that the aggregate of all buildings shall not cover
more than thirty (30) percent of the entire lot area.
5.3.11. Height Regulations - The maximum height of all structures shall be as
follows:
a. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
b. No accessory building shall exceed two stories in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar structures not
designed for, or suitable to human occupancy, may exceed the height
provisions of this ordinance provided that they comply with all other
codes and ordinances, and provided that they are located a distance
equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property
line.
5.3.12. Parking Requirements - Off-street parking space shall be provided on the
same lot as the principal building in accordance with Article III, Section 3.16.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-10
5.3.13 Recreational Facilities - For all multifamily, townhouse, or apartment
developments, exceeding four units and including phased developments,
recreational space and facilities shall be provided for. The recreational space
shall constitute ten (10) percent of the required minimum lot and shall be
landscaped, lighted, and furnished appropriate to the anticipated clientele, i.e.,
including playground equipment when children are anticipated. The planning
commission shall have the authority to modify this proposed recreational
space and facilities so as to reasonably serve the anticipated residents.
5.3.14. Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings shall be located on the
lot in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
5.3.15. Site Plan Review - Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan review
is required in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17 of this ordinance for
all permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal, except for single (1) family or
two (2) family residential structures. Once a site plan has been approved and
all modifications, if any, have been made a building permit may be issued.
The Building Inspector shall maintain a copy of the site plan in the permanent
files of the town.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-11
5.4. R-4 Mobile Home/High Density Residential District.
5.4.1 Intent - The R-4 (Mobile Home Residential) District is designed to allow for
the placement of mobile homes on individual lots and to allow for the
construction of mobile home parks, as well as other residential uses.
5.4.2 Uses Permitted
a. Single-family mobile homes
b. Mobile home parks
c. Single-family detached and attached dwellings, not to include mobile
homes.
d. Two-family dwellings, not to include mobile homes.
e. Townhouses and multiple family dwellings.
f. Accessory buildings and accessory uses customarily incidental to the
above permitted uses.
g. Signs as permitted in Article VIII, Section 8.1
5.4.3. Uses Permitted on Appeal - None
5.4.4. Uses Prohibited - Any other use not specifically permitted in Section 5.4.2 or
permitted on appeal in Section 5.4.3.
5.4.5. Minimum Lot Area
a. Single family mobile home Seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) sq. ft.
b. Mobile home parks Five (5) acres.
c. Mobile home in a mobile home
park
Four thousand-five hundred
(4,500) sq. ft.
d. Single-family dwellings Seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) sq. ft.
e. Two family dwellings Ten-thousand (10,000) sq. ft.
5.4.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-12
a. Single family mobile home Sixty (60) feet.
b. Mobile home parks One hundred (100) feet for
the overall development
c. Single-family dwellings Sixty (60) feet.
d. Two family dwellings Eighty (80) feet
e. Townhouse and multi-family
dwellings
One-hundred (100) feet
5.4.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
a. All lots Thirty (30) feet.
5.4.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a. Single-family mobile homes Ten (10) feet.
b. Mobile home parks Twenty-five (25) feet for the
overall development.
c. Single-family dwellings Ten (10) feet.
d. Two-family, Townhouse and
Multi-family dwellings
Fifteen (15) feet.
5.4.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
a. Single-family mobile homes Twenty (20) feet.
b. Mobile home parks Twenty-five (25) feet for the
overall development.
c. Single-family dwellings Twenty (20) feet
d. Two-family dwellings Twenty-five (25) feet.
e. Townhouse and Multi-family
dwellings
Thirty (30) feet
5.4.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-13
a. One (1) mobile home per lot outside of a mobile home park.
b. Mobile homes inside a mobile home park shall have no limitations on
the number of buildings provided, however, that the aggregate of all
buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the entire lot
area.
5.4.11. Height Regulations - The maximum height of all structures shall be as
follows:
a. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
b. No accessory building shall exceed two stories in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar structures not
designed for, or suitable to human occupancy, may exceed the height
provisions of this ordinance provided that they comply with all other
codes and ordinances, and provided that they are located a distance
equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property
line.
5.4.12. Mobile Home Park Development Requirements - All mobile home parks
developed in the Town of Camden must meet certain development
requirements. A site plan for the proposed mobile home park shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission and will adhere to the following
development requirements.
a. Mobile Home Parks Screening - There will be screening along the side
and rear lot lines. The screening will either be a five (5) foot wide
green strip with evergreen plants at least five (5) foot tall or a fence of
a minimum height of six (6) foot. The fence will be designed to totally
block visibility of the development even when the viewer is moving.
b. Mobile Home Space - The site plan will show that there is a lot for
each mobile home with the minimum amount of area as required by
the minimum lot size. Each space shall front on a street which is part
of the mobile home park system.
c. Mobile Homes Pads
(1) All mobile homes permitted under this section shall be set
upon masonry blocks or steel piers which are constructed upon
a concrete footing, and each mobile home shall be anchored
with approved anchors as required by Tennessee Code
Annotated, Section 68-45-103.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-14
(2) All mobile homes moved into any mobile home park, existing
or new, after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be
underskirted to prevent the accumulation of refuse and rodents.
d. Street System
(1) The internal street system shall consist of paved streets that
have a paved surface of a minimum of 22 feet measured from
the edge of the paved surface to the edge of the paved surface.
(2) The construction standards for the streets are: The sub-grade
shall consist of six (6) inches of compacted chert or gravel
topped with asphalt primer as per the subdivision regulation
standards.
e. Water Line Requirements - Water lines shall be a minimum of six (6)
inches looped for adequate water pressure and fire protection with fire
hydrants being located every five hundred (500) feet. The water
system shall be designed in accordance with the same standards that
are required in the Camden Municipal Subdivision Regulations.
f. Sewer Line Requirements - Sewer lines shall be minimum four (4)
inches, with four (4) inch force mains where applicable, designed in
accordance with the same standards that are required in the Camden
Municipal Subdivision Regulations.
g. Paved Parking Requirements - All mobile home lots or spaces shall
provide a minimum of 400 sq. feet of paved parking area.
h. Drainage Plan Requirements - A drainage plan shall be submitted and
approved by the town engineer.
i. Recreational Facilities - For all mobile home parks and including
phased developments, recreational space and facilities shall be
provided and approved as part of the overall development. The
recreational space shall constitute fifteen (15%) percent of the required
minimum lot area and shall be landscaped, lighted, and furnished
appropriate to the anticipated clientele, i.e., including playground
equipment when children are anticipated. The planning commission
shall have the authority to modify this proposed recreational space and
facilities so as to reasonably serve the anticipated residents.
j. Regulations for Establishment of Mobile Home Parks
(1) Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction
of mobile home parks, the developer shall submit a site plan to
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-15
the Planning Commission for review and approval. The site
plan shall adhere to the requirements in Article III, Section
3.17 and shall also include the following;
(a) the location of the mobile home park;
(b) the proposed design including streets, proposed street
names, lot line with approximate dimensions,
easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public
uses, and any land used for purposes other than mobile
home spaces;
(c) provisions for water supply, sewerage and drainage;
and
(d) location of each mobile home lot and pad.
(2) The Planning Commission may require modification of the site
plan with respect to the following items to ensure that the
proposed project is compatible with and does not adversely
affect the adjacent properties:
(a) Relocation of drives and parking areas.
(b) Require increased lot areas and/or setbacks.
(c) Require screening.
(d) Alter building locations.
(3) In addition, the Planning Commission shall have the power to
impose greater requirements than those set forth in this section
or to impose conditions on the location and design of access
points or other features as maybe required to protect the
neighborhood from traffic congestion or other undesirable
conditions, which may include but not be limited to; the
arrangement of structures, parking or the other facilities;
required screening, vegetative buffers, or fencing; the location
and content of required recreational facilities; and the provision
of landscaping.
(4) The planning commission shall not have the power to regulate
the architectural style of buildings or other similar features not
directly related to the public health, safety and welfare. The
Planning Commission shall state in writing the reasons for
denial of any property submitted site plan. Any site plan not
acted upon within sixty (60) days from submittal shall be
deemed approved.
k. Licenses and License Fees
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-16
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate
within the City of Camden any mobile home park unless such
person shall first obtain a license for that park.
(2) Licenses shall not be transferred.
(3) The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be
established by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
Camden.
(4) The license shall be conspicuously posted in the office of, or
on the premises of, the mobile home park at all times.
l. Application for License - Applications for a mobile home license shall
be filed with and issued by the Building Inspector. Applications shall
be in writing signed by the applicant and shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Location and legal description of mobile home park.
(3) A valid state permit issued by the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation.
(4) A site plan in accordance with section 7.10 D. drawn to a scale
of one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. The plan shall show
buildings, and structures, streets, existing road ways, utilities,
the location of pads and individual mobile home spaces.
(5) Such further information as may be requested by the Building
Inspector to enable him to determine if the proposed park will
comply with legal requirements.
m. Issuance of License - The Building Inspector shall inspect the
development for conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance,
the approved site plan and health and environment laws. If such
development conforms to these requirements, the applicant shall be
issued a license.
n. Revocation of License - The Building Inspector shall make periodic
inspections of the park to ensure compliance with this Ordinance. In
case of non-compliance with any provisions of this Ordinance, the
Building Inspector shall serve warning to the licensee. Thereafter,
upon failure to the licensee to remove said violation Building
Inspector shall have the authority for the revocation of the license.
The license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to revocation
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
V-17
have been remedied and the park can be maintained and operated in
full compliance with the law.
o. Register of Mobile Homes - It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep
a register containing a record of all mobile home owners located
within the park. The register shall contain the following information:
(1) The make, model and year of all mobile homes.
(2) Owner and lease of each mobile home.
(3) The dates of arrival and/or departure of each mobile home or
recreational vehicle. The park shall keep the register available
for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public
health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate
acquisition of the information contained in the register. The
register records shall not be destroyed for a period of three (3)
years following the date of registration.
5.4.13 Non-conforming Mobile Home Parks - All additions or improvements to an
existing non-conforming mobile home park shall be conforming to these
regulations.
5.4.14. Parking Requirements - Off-street parking space shall be provided on the
same lot as the principal building in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17.
5.4.15. Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings shall be located on the
lot in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
5.4.16. Site Plan Review - Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan review
is required in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17. of this ordinance for
all permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal, except for single (1) family
and two (2) family residential structures and mobile homes outside of a
mobile home park Once a site plan has been approved and all modifications,
if any, have been made a building permit may be issued. The Building
Inspector shall maintain a copy of the site plan in the permanent files of the
town.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 1
ARTICLE VI
PROVISIONS GOVERNING BUSINESS DISTRICTS
6.1. B-1, Neighborhood Commercial District
6.1.1 Intent - The intent of the B-1 (Neighborhood Business) District is to provide
for suitable areas that provide commercial activities that are not high traffic
generators, are located near residential areas and are serviced by all municipal
services.
6.1.2. Uses Permitted
a. Retail trade, Limited to:
(1) General merchandise
(2) Food
(3) Apparel and accessories
(4) Eating and drinking
(5) Other retail trade, except for farm and garden supplies
b. Services, limited to:
(1) Finance, insurance real estate services
(2) Personal services
(3) Business services, including only
(a) Advertising service
(b) Consumer and mercantile credit reporting services,
adjustment and collection services.
(c) Duplicating, mailing and stenographic services
(d) News syndicate services
(e) Employment services
(f) Other business services, NEC *
(4) Professional services
(5) Contract construction services, offices only
(6) Governmental services, excluding correctional institutions and
military bases and reservations
(7) Educational services
(8) Miscellaneous services
(9) Child Day Care services
*NEC - Not Elsewhere Coded
6.1.3. Uses Permitted on Appeal - None.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 2
6.1.4. Uses Prohibited - Any use not specifically permitted in Section 6.1.2 or
permitted on appeal in Section 6.1.3.
6.1.5. Minimum Lot Area
a. All Uses Five thousand (5,000) sq. ft.
6.1.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
a. All Uses Fifty (50) feet
6.1.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
a. All Uses Thirty (30) feet
6.1.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a. All Uses Twenty (20) feet provided
that when the lot adjoins a
residential district it shall
adhere to the side yard
requirement for the
residential district or the
twenty (20) feet, which ever
is greater. Structures not
constructed on the side lot
line shall have a setback of
ten (10) feet.
6.1.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
a. All Uses Twenty (20) feet provided
that when the lot adjoins a
residential district it shall
adhere to the rear yard
requirement for the
residential district or the
twenty (20) foot requirement,
which ever is greater.
6.1.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted - None provided the
provisions of 6.1.5 through 6.1.9 are met.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 3
6.1.11. Height Regulations - The maximum height of all structures shall be as
follows:
a. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
b. No accessory building shall exceed two stories in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar structures not
designed for, or suitable to human occupancy, may exceed the height
provisions of this ordinance provided that they comply with all other
codes and ordinances, and provided that they are located a distance
equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property
line.
6.1.12. Parking Requirements - Off-street parking space shall be provided on the
same lot as the principal building in accordance with Article III, Section 3.10.
6.1.13. Exterior Storage - The exterior storage of goods and materials of any kind
shall be limited to the rear yard only. In instances of corner lots the rear yard
shall be the area behind the principal structure between the front yard and side
yard setbacks.
6.1.14. Landscaping - The first seven (7) feet adjacent to a residential district shall
be devoted to landscaping.
6.1.15. Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings shall be located on the
lot in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
6.1.16. Site Plan Review - Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan review
is required in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17 of this ordinance for
all permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal. Once a site plan has been
approved and all modifications, if any, have been made a building permit may
be issued. The Building Inspector shall maintain a copy of the site plan in the
permanent files of the town.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 4
6.2. B-2, General Business District
6.2.1. Intent - The intent of the B-2 (General Business) District is to provide for
suitable areas that provide a variety of commercial activities located along
major transportation routes and are serviced by all municipal services.
6.2.2. Uses Permitted
a. Retail trade, Limited to:
(1) Building materials, hardware and farm equipment.
(2) General merchandise.
(3) Food.
(4) Automotive, marine craft.
(5) Apparel and accessories.
(6) Furniture, home furnishings and equipment.
(7) Eating and drinking establishments.
(8) Other retail trade (Not elsewhere coded).
b. Services, limited to:
(1) Finance, insurance and real estate.
(2) Personal services.
(3) Business services, excluding warehousing and storage services.
(4) Repair services.
(5) Professional services.
(6) Governmental services, excluding military bases and
reservations and correctional institutions.
(7) Educational services.
(8) Miscellaneous services.
(9) Child Day Care services.
c. Cultural Activities, limited to:
(1) Libraries.
(2) Churches
(3) Museums
(4) Art galleries.
(5) Other cultural activities (not elsewhere coded).
d. Public Assembly, limited to:
(1) Motion picture theaters.
e. Amusements
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 5
f. Recreational activities
g. Transient lodgings, limited to:
(1) Motels
(2) Tourist courts
(3) Hotels
*NEC - Not Elsewhere Coded
6.2.3. Uses Permitted on Appeal - None.
6.2.4. Uses Prohibited - Any use not specifically permitted in Section 6.2.2 or
permitted on appeal in Section 6.2.3.
6.2.5. Minimum Lot Area
a. All Uses Twenty thousand (20,000)
sq.ft.
6.2.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
a. All Uses One hundred (100) feet
6.2.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
a. All Uses Thirty (30) feet
6.2.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a. All Uses Fifteen (15) feet
6.2.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
a. All Uses Twenty (20) feet provided
that when the lot adjoins a
residential district it shall
adhere to the rear yard
requirement for the
residential district or twenty
(20) feet, whichever is
greater.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 6
6.2.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted - None provided the
provisions of 6.2.5 through 6.2.9 are met.
6.2.11. Height Regulations - The maximum height of all structures shall be as
follows:
a. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
b. No accessory building shall exceed two stories in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar structures not
designed for, or suitable to human occupancy, may exceed the height
provisions of this ordinance provided that they comply with all other
codes and ordinances, and provided that they are located a distance
equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property
line.
6.2.12. Parking Requirements - Off-street parking space shall be provided on the
same lot as the principal building in accordance with Article III, Section 3.10.
6.2.13. Exterior Storage - The exterior storage of goods and materials of any kind
shall be limited to the rear yard only. In instances of corner lots the rear yard
shall be the area behind the principal structure between the front yard and side
yard setbacks.
6.2.14. Landscaping - The first seven (7) feet adjacent to a residential district shall
be devoted to landscaping.
6.2.15. Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings shall be located on the
lot in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
6.2.16. Site Plan Review - Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan review
is required in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17 of this ordinance for
all permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal. Once a site plan has been
approved and all modifications, if any, have been made a building permit may
be issued. The Building Inspector shall maintain a copy of the site plan in the
permanent files of the town.
6.3 B-3, Central Business District
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 7
6.3.1. Intent - The intent of the B-3 (Central Business) District is to provide for
suitable areas that provide a variety of commercial and cultural activities in
the downtown area of Camden.
6.3.2. Uses Permitted
a. Retail trade, Limited to:
(1) Building materials and hardware.
(2) General merchandise.
(3) Food.
(4) Apparel and accessories.
(5) Furniture, home furnishings and equipment.
(6) Eating and drinking establishments.
(7) Other retail trade (Not elsewhere coded).
b. Services, limited to:
(1) Finance, insurance and real estate.
(2) Personal services.
(3) Business services, excluding warehousing and storage services.
(4) Repair services.
(5) Professional services.
(6) Governmental services, excluding military bases and
reservations and correctional institutions.
(7) Educational services.
(8) Miscellaneous services, including churches and charitable
organizations.
c. Cultural Activities, limited to:
(1) Libraries.
(2) Churches
(3) Museums
(4) Art galleries.
(5) Other cultural activities (not elsewhere coded).
6.3.3. Uses Permitted on Appeal with Site Plan -Town houses, multiple family
6.3.4. Uses Prohibited - Any use not specifically permitted in Section 6.3.2 or
permitted on appeal in Section 6.3.3.
6.3.5. Minimum Lot Area
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 8
a. All Uses None
6.3.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
a. All Uses None
6.3.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
a. All Uses None, provided that the
structure fronts on sidewalks
and all parking is located in
the rear. Otherwise,
minimum front setback  10
feet
6.3.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a. All Uses None provided that when the
lot adjoins a residential
district it shall adhere to the
side yard requirement for the
residential district. Structures
not constructed on the side
lot line shall have a setback
of ten (10) feet.
6.3.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
a. All Uses Twenty (20) feet provided
that when the lot adjoins a
residential district it shall
adhere to the rear yard
requirement for the
residential district or the
twenty (20) foot requirement,
which ever is greater.
6.3.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted - One.
6.3.11. Height Regulations - The maximum height of all structures shall be as
follows:
a. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 9
b. No accessory building shall exceed two stories in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar structures not
designed for, or suitable to human occupancy, may exceed the height
provisions of this ordinance provided that they comply with all other
codes and ordinances, and provided that they are located a distance
equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property
line.
6.3.12. Parking Requirements - Two (2) spaces per building. If the Municipal
Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals requires additional
parking, all parking is to be p laced in the rear of the building.
The Planning Commission reserves the right to waive parking requirements
based on shared parking or pedestrian oriented businesses.
6.3.13. Exterior Storage - The exterior storage of goods and materials of any kind
shall be limited to the rear yard only. In instances of corner lots the rear yard
shall be the area behind the principal structure between the front yard and side
yard setbacks.
6.3.14. Landscaping - The first seven (7) feet adjacent to a residential district shall
be devoted to landscaping.
6.3.15. Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings shall be located on the
lot in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
6.3.16. Site Plan Review - Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan review
is required in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17 of this ordinance for
all permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal. Once a site plan has been
approved and all modifications, if any, have been made a building permit may
be issued. The Building Inspector shall maintain a copy of the site plan in the
permanent files of the town.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 10
6.4 H-M, Hospital-Medical District
6.4.1. Intent - The intent of the H-M (Hospital-Medical) District is to create a
district for the care of humans in the areas of medicine and density and to
protect such uses from incompatible uses which would create offensive noise,
dust, heavy traffic congestion and other objectionable influences and to create
a tranquil environment conducive to the care treatment and recovery of
patients.
6.4.2. Uses Permitted
a. Medical and Other Health services.
b. Accessory Uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses.
c. Child Day Care services.
6.4.3. Uses Permitted on Appeal - The following uses shall be permitted on appeal
by the Board of Zoning Appeals provided that any advertising of sales shall
be confined to the interior of the building and shall not be visible from the
outside of the building and that access to any room or enclosure set aside for
such sales shall be from the interior of the building only.
a. Retail trade, Limited to:
(1) Eating establishments.
(2) Other retail trade (Not elsewhere coded).
6.4.4. Uses Prohibited - Any use not specifically permitted in Section 6.4.2 or
permitted on appeal in Section 6.4.3.
6.4.5. Minimum Lot Area
a. Hospitals 5 Acres
b. All Other Uses Twenty thousand (20,000)
sq. ft.
6.4.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
a. All Uses None
6.4.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
a. All Uses Forty (40) feet
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 11
6.4.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a. All Uses Fifteen (15) feet provided
that when the lot adjoins a
residential district it shall
adhere to the rear yard
requirement for the
residential district or thirty
(30) feet, whichever is
greater.
6.4.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
a. All Uses Thirty (30) ft.
6.4.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted - None provided the
provisions of 6.4.5 through 6.4.9 are met.
6.4.11. Height Regulations - The maximum height of all structures shall be as
follows:
a. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height unless each side yard is increased over the required minimum
by five (5) feet for every five (5) feet, or fraction thereof, of additional
height over thirty-five (35) feet, not to exceed forty (40) feet.
b. No accessory building shall exceed two (2) stories in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar structures not
designed for, or suitable to human occupancy, may exceed the height
provisions of this ordinance provided that they comply with all other
codes and ordinances, and provided that they are located a distance
equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property
line.
6.4.12. Parking Requirements - Off-street parking space shall be provided on the
same lot as the principal building in accordance with Article III, Section 3.10.
6.4.13. Exterior Storage - The exterior storage of goods and materials of any kind
shall be limited to the rear yard only. In instances of corner lots the rear yard
shall be the area behind the principal structure between the front yard and side
yard setbacks.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 12
6.4.14. Landscaping - The first seven (7) feet adjacent to a residential district shall
be devoted to landscaping.
6.4.15. Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings shall be located on the
lot in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
6.4.16. Site Plan Review - Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan review
is required in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17 of this ordinance for
all permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal. Once a site plan has been
approved and all modifications, if any, have been made a building permit may
be issued. The Building Inspector shall maintain a copy of the site plan in the
permanent files of the town.
6.5. O-S, Office Service District
6.5.1 Intent-The intent of the 0-S District is to provide for office and services
activities that are low traffic generators, located adjacent to residential areas
and/or retail commercial districts along major arterial highways. Allowing for
such office and service uses will encourage productive use of land while
maintaining a transitional area between retail commercial districts, residential
neighborhoods, other office developments, and/or public uses preventing the
potential problems associated with the encroachment of a purely commercial
district into an area with existing residential properties.
6.5.2. Uses Permitted
a. Services, limited to:
(1) Finance, insurance real estate services
(2) Personal services limited to:
(a) Laundry and dry cleaners
(b.) Photographic services
(c.) Funeral homes excluding crematoriums
(3) Business services, including only
(a) Advertising service
(b) Consumer and mercantile credit reporting services,
adjustment and collection services.
(c) Duplicating, mailing and stenographic services
(d) News syndicate services
(e) Employment services
(f) Other business services, NEC *
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 13
(4) Professional services limited to:
(a) Physicians
(b) Dental
(c) Medical clinics-out-patient services
(d) Legal services
(e) Other professional services, NEC. limited to:
(1) Engineering and architectural services
(2) Educational and scientific research services
(3) Accounting auditing and bookkeeping services
(4) Urban Planning Services
(5) Contract construction services, offices only
(6) Governmental services, excluding correctional institutions and
military bases and reservations
(7) Educational services and child care facilities
(8) Miscellaneous services including only
(a.) Religious activities
(b.) Welfare and charitable services
(c.) Other miscellaneous services, NEC limited to
(1) Business associations
(2.) Professional membership organizations
(3.) Labor Unions and similar labor organizations
(4.) Civic social, and fraternal organizations
*NEC - Not Elsewhere Coded
6.5.3. Uses Permitted on Appeal - None.
6.5.4. Uses Prohibited - Any use not specifically permitted in Section 6.5.2
or permitted on appeal in Section 6.5.3.
6.5.5. Minimum Lot Area
a. All Uses Ten thousand (10,000) sq. ft.
6.5.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
a All Uses One-hundred (100) feet
6.5.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 14
a All Uses Thirty (30) feet
6.5.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a All Uses Twenty (20) feet provided that when the lot adjoins
a residential district it shall adhere to the side yard
requirement for the residential district or the twenty
(20) feet, which ever is greater. Structures not
constructed on the side lot line shall have a setback
of fifteen (15) feet.
6.5.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
a All Uses Twenty (20) feet provided that when the lot adjoins
a residential district it shall adhere to the side yard
requirement for the residential district or the twenty
(20) feet, which ever is greater.
6.5.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted - None provided the
provisions of 6.5 .5 through 6.5.9 are met.
6.5.11. Height Regulations - The maximum height of all structures shall be as
follows:
a. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35)
feet in height.
b. No accessory building shall exceed two stones in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar
structures not designed for, or suitable to human occupancy,
may exceed the height provisions of this ordinance provided
that they comply with all other codes and ordinances, and
provided that they are located a distance equal to their own
height plus ten (JO) feet from the nearest property line.
6.5.12. Parking Requirements - Off-street parking space shall be provided
on the same lot as the principal building in accordance with Article III,
Section 3.10.
6.5.13. Exterior Storage - The exterior storage of goods and materials of any
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 15
kind shall be limited to the rear yard only. In instances of corner lots
the rear yard shall be the area behind the principal structure between
the front yard and side yard setbacks.
6.5.14. Landscaping - The first seven (7) feet adjacent to a residential district
and/or use shall be devoted to landscaping.
6.5.15. Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings shall be located
on the lot in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
6.5.16. Site Plan Review - Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan
review is required in accordance with Article Ill, Section 3.17 of this
ordinance for all permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal. Once a
site plan bas been approved and all modifications, if any, have been
made a building permit may be issued. The Building Inspector shall
maintain a copy of the site plan in the permanent files of the town.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 1
ARTICLE VII
PROVISIONS GOVERNING INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
7.1. M-1, Industrial Districts
7.1.1 Intent - The intent of the M-1 (Light Industrial) District is to allow selected
industrial uses complemented by other uses such as wholesale sales and
limited retail sales services. These areas should be served by all municipal
services.
7.1.2 Uses Permitted
a. Wholesale trade, limited to:
(1) Motor vehicles and automotive equipment.
(2) Drugs, chemicals and allied products.
(3) Dry goods and apparel
(4) Groceries and related products
(5) Farm products (raw materials) except for livestock, horses and
mules
(6) Electrical goods
(7) Hardware, plumbing and heating equipment and supplies
(8) Machinery, equipment, and supplies
(9) Other wholesale trade, Not Elsewhere Coded, limited to:
(a) Metals and minerals (Except petroleum products and
scrap)
(b) Tobacco and tobacco products
(c) Beer, wine and distilled alcoholic beverages
(d) Paper and paper products
(e) Furniture and home furnishings
(f) Lumber and construction materials
(g) Other wholesale trade NEC, except for scrap and waste
materials
b. Retail trade, limited to:
(1) Materials, hardware and farm equipment
c. Business services, limited to:
(1) Dwelling and other building services
(2) Warehousing and storage services
d. Repair services
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 2
e. Professional services, limited to:
(1) Medical laboratory services
(2) Dental laboratory services
(3) Other medical and health services
f. Contract construction services
g. Governmental services
h. Agricultural related activities, limited to animal husbandry services
i. Manufacturing, limited to:
(1) Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather
and similar materials except for leather tanning and finishing
(2) Furniture and fixtures
(3) Printing, publishing and allied industries
(4) Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products
(5) Fabricated metal products
(6) Professional, scientific and controlling instruments;
photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks
(7) Miscellaneous manufacturing, Not Elsewhere Coded.
j. Motor vehicle transportation
k. Communication
l. Utilities
m. Other transportation, communication and utilities, Not Elsewhere
Coded
n. Accessory buildings customarily incidental to the permitted use.
o. Signs as permitted in Article VIII, Section 8.1
p. Sexually oriented businesses as defined by Camden Municipal
Ordinance
q. Child Day Care Services
(1) The sexually oriented business may not be operated within
(a) 750 feet of a church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship:
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 3
(b) 750 feet of a public or private elementary or secondary school:
(c) 750 feet of a boundary of any residential district:
(d) 750 feet of a public park:
(e) 750 feet of a licensed day-care center:
(f) 750 feet of an entertainment business that is oriented priority towards
children or family entertainment;
(2) For the purpose of this ordinance, measurement shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented
business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church,
synagogue, regular place of worship, or public or private elementary or secondary
school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district,
or residential lot, or licensed day care center, or child or family entertainment
business.
(3) I shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to
allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point
outside the establishment.
(4) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to
allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights,
or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial
representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of
this ordinance.
(5) Exterior signs shall contain no sexual or sexually oriented photographs,
silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain
only the name of the enterprise,
(6) Violation of any provision of this Section shall constitute a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of $50 per day, beginning with the date of notification.
(7) If any section, subsection, or clause of this ordinance shall be deemed to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections,
subsections, and clauses shall not be affected thereby.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 4
7.1.3. Uses Permitted on Appeal - None.
7.1.4. Uses Prohibited - Any use not specifically permitted in Section 7.1.2 or
permitted on appeal in Section 7.1.3.
7.1.5. Minimum Lot Area
a. All Uses None
7.1.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
a. All Uses None
7.1.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
a. All Uses Thirty (30) feet
7.1.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a. All Uses Twenty-feet (25) feet
provided that when the lot
adjoins a residential district it
shall adhere to the yard
requirement for the
residential district and the
twenty-five (25) foot side
yard requirement or fifty (50)
feet which ever is greater.
7.1.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
a. All Uses Twenty-feet (25) feet
provided that when the lot
adjoins a residential district it
shall adhere to the yard
requirement for the
residential district and the
twenty-five (25) foot side
yard requirement or fifty (50)
feet which ever is greater. or
the twenty (20) feet, which
ever is greater.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 5
7.1.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted - None provided the
provisions of 7.1.4 through 7.1.9 are met.
7.1.11. Height Regulations - The maximum height of all structures shall be as
follows:
a. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
b. No accessory building shall exceed two stories in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar structures not
designed for, or suitable to human occupancy, may exceed the height
provisions of this ordinance provided that they comply with all other
codes and ordinances, and provided that they are located a distance
equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property
line.
7.1.12. Parking Requirements - Off-street parking space shall be provided on the
same lot as the principal building in accordance with Article III, Section 3.10.
7.1.13. Exterior Storage - The exterior storage of goods and materials of any kind
shall be limited to the rear yard only. In instances of corner lots the rear yard
shall be the area behind the principal structure between the front yard and side
yard setbacks.
7.1.14. Landscaping - The first seven (7) feet adjacent to a residential district shall
be devoted to landscaping. As a minimum when a lot line is shared with a
residential district a tight fence or compact evergreen hedge of not less than
six (6) feet in height shall be provided.
7.1.15. Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings shall be located on the
lot in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
7.1.16. Site Plan Review - Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan review
is required in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17 of this ordinance for
all permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal. Once a site plan has been
approved and all modifications, if any, have been made a building permit may
be issued. The Building Inspector shall maintain a copy of the site plan in the
permanent files of the town.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 6
7.2. M-2, Heavy Industrial Districts,
7.2.1 Intent  The intent of the M-2 (Heavy Industrial) District is to allow a broad
range of industrial uses complemented by other uses such as wholesale sales and
limited retail sales services. These areas should be served by all municipal
services.
7.2.2 Uses Permitted
a. Wholesale Trade  limited to:
(7) Farm products (raw materials), excluding livestock, horses and mules
(8) Machinery, equipment and supplies
(9) Other wholesale trade, Not Elsewhere Coded including only:
(a) Metals and minerals, excluding petroleum products and scrap
(b) Petroleum bulk stations and terminals
(c) Tobacco and tobacco products
(d) Lumber and construction materials
b. Retail trade  limited to:
(1) Eating and drinking
c. Business services  limited to:
(1) Warehousing and storage services, excluding stockyards
(2) Repair services
(3) Contract construction services
(4) Governmental services
d. Manufacturing  limited to:
(1) Food and kindred products
(2) Textile mill products
(3) Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics,
leather and similar materials excluding:
(a) Leather and wood products
(4) Lumber and wood products
(5) Furniture and fixtures
(6) Paper and allied products, including only:
(a) Converted paper and paperboard products (except
containers and boxes)
(b) Paperboard containers and boxes
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 7
(c) Building paper and board manufacturing
(7) Printing, publishing and allied industries
(8) Chemicals and allied products, including only:
(d) Drug
(e) Soap, detergents and cleaning preparations,
perfume, cosmetics and other toilet preparations
(f) Paints, varnishes, lacquers, enamels, and allied
products
(9) Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products
(10) Stone, clay and glass products
(11) Primary metal products including only the rolling, drawing and extruding of nonferrous
metals
(12) Fabricated metal products
(13) Professional, scientific and controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods;
watches and clocks
(14) Miscellaneous manufacturing, Not Elsewhere Coded
(e) Motor vehicle transportation
(f) Communication
(g) Utilities
(h) Other transportation, communications and utilities, NEC*
(i) Federal state and municipal uses.
(j) Research laboratories
(k) Accessory buildings customarily incidental to the permitted use
(l) Signs as permitted in Article VIII, Section 8.1
7.2.3 Uses Permitted on Appeal  None
7.2.4 Uses Prohibited  Any use not specifically permitted in Section 7.2.2 or
permitted on appeal in Section 7.2.3.
7.2.5 Minimum Lot Area
a. All Uses None
7.2.6. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line
a. All Uses None
7.2.7. Minimum Required Front Yard
a. All Uses Thirty-five (35) feet
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 8
7.2.8. Minimum Required Side Yard on Each Side of the Lot
a. All Uses Twenty-feet (25) feet provided that when
the lot adjoins a residential district it shall adhere to the yard requirement
for the residential district and the twenty-five (25) foot side yard
requirement or fifty (50) feet whichever is greater, or the twenty (20) feet,
whichever is greater.
7.2.9. Minimum Required Rear Yard
a. All Uses Twenty-feet (25) feet provided that when
the lot adjoins a residential district it shall adhere to the yard requirement
for the residential district and the twenty0five (25) foot side yard
requirement or fifty (50) feet whichever is greater, or the twenty (20) feet,
whichever is greater.
7.2.10. Maximum Number of Principal Buildings Permitted  None provided the
provisions of 7.2.4 through 7.2.9 are met.
7.2.11 Height Regulations  The maximum height of all structures shall be as follows:
a. No building shall exceed four (4) stories or forty (40) feet in height.
b. No accessory building shall exceed two stories in height.
c. Free-standing poles, spires, towers, antennae and similar structures not
designed for, or suitable to human occupancy, may exceed the height
provisions of this ordinance provided that they comply with all other
codes and ordinances, and provided that they are located a distance equal
to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property line.
7.2.12 Parking Requirements  Off-street parking space shall be provided on the same
lot as the principal building in accordance with Article III, Section 3.10.
7.2.13. Exterior Storage  The exterior storage of goods and materials of any kind shall
be limited to the rear yard only. In instances of corner lots the rear yard shall be
the area behind the principal structure between the front yard and side yard
setbacks.
7.2.14. Landscaping  The first five-(5) feet of any required yard adjacent to a street and
the first seven (7) feet adjacent to a residential district shall be devoted to
landscaping. As a minimum when a lot line is shared with a residential district a
tight fence or compact evergreen hedge of not less than six (6) feet in height shall
be provided.
7.2.15. Accessory Buildings and Uses  Accessory buildings shall be located on the lot
in accordance with Article III, Section 3.3.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VII- 9
7.2.16. Site Plan Review  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, site plan review is
required in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17 of this ordinance for all
permitted uses and uses permitted on appeal. Once a site plan has been approved
and all modifications, if any, have been made a building permit may be issued.
The Building Inspector shall maintain a copy of the site plan in the permanent
files of the town.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-1
ARTICLE VIII
DISTRICT REGULATIONS - FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SECTIONS 13-7-201 THROUGH 13-7-210
OF THE TENNESSEE CODE ANNOTATED FOR THE PURPOSE OF AMENDING THE
CAMDEN, TENNESSEE MUNICIPAL ZONING ORDINANCE REGULATING THE
FLOODPLAIN AREAS OF CAMDEN, TENNESSEE TO MINIMIZE DANGER TO LIFE
AND PROPERTY. THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE INCORPORATED INTO THE CAMDEN
MUNICIPAL ZONING ORDINANCE AS CHAPTER 8.
8.1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND
OBJECTIVES
8.1.1 Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the State of Tennessee has in Sections 13-7-201 through 13-7-
210, Tennessee Code Annotated delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Camden, Tennessee
Mayor and Board Of Aldermen, does ordain as follows:
8.1.2 Findings of Fact
a. The Camden Mayor and Board Of Aldermen wishes to maintain
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and in order to do
so must meet the requirements of 60.3(d) of the Federal Insurance
Administration Regulations found at 44 CFR Ch. 1 (10-1-88 Edition)
and subsequent amendments.
b. Areas of Camden are subject to periodic inundation which could result
in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
c. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and by
uses in flood hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods; or
construction which is inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-2
8.1.3 Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas. This Ordinance is designed to:
a. Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to water or erosion
hazards, or which cause in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights,
or velocities;
b. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community facilities,
be protected against flood damage;
c. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which accommodate flood waters;
d. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage, and;
e. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards.
8.1.4 Objectives
The objectives of this Ordinance are:
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, street and bridges located
in floodable areas;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
g. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
floodable area; and,
h. To establish eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-3
8.2. DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Ordinance shall be
interpreted as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
Ordinance its most reasonable application.
a. "Accessory Structure" shall represent a subordinate structure to the principal
structure and, for the purpose of this section, shall conform to the following:
1. Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation.
2. Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential.
3. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
4. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation
which may result in damage to other structures.
5. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed.
b. "Act" means the statutes authorizing the National Flood Insurance Program that
are incorporated in 42 U.S.C. 4001-4128.
c. "Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to
the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common
load bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which
is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing
walls is new construction.
d. "Appeal" means a request for a review of the Building Official's interpretation
of any provision of this Ordinance or a request for a variance.
e. "Area of Shallow Flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with one percent or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
f. "Area of Special Flood-related Erosion Hazard" is the land within a community
which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The
area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map
(FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion
hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further
refined.
g. "Area of Special Flood Hazard" is the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM,
Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99.
h. "Base Flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-4
i. "Basement" means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
j. "Breakaway Wall" means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
k. Building", for purposes of this section, means any structure built for
support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. (See "structure")
l. "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage
of equipment or materials.
m. "Elevated Building" means a non-basement building (i) built to have the
bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and
piers), (ii) and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the
case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated
building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood waters.
n. "Emergency Flood Insurance Program" or "Emergency Program" means the
program as implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with section
1336 of the Act. It is intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of
insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the initial
FIRM.
o. "Erosion" means the process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
This peril is not per se covered under the Program.
p. "Exception" means a waiver from the provisions of this Ordinance which
relieves the applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order or
other determination made or issued pursuant to this Ordinance.
q. "Existing Construction" any structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced before the effective date of this Ordinance.
r. "Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of this ordinance.
s. "Existing Structures" see "Existing Construction"
t. "Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-5
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads).
u. "Flood" or "Flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. the overflow of inland or tidal waters;
2. the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
v. "Flood Elevation Determination" means a determination by the Administrator
of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that
has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.
w. "Flood Elevation Study" means an examination, evaluation and determination
of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations,
or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
x. "Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the flood related erosion areas having special hazards have
been designated as Zone A, M, and/or E.
y. "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
z. "Flood Insurance Study" is the official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles as well
as the Flood Boundary Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
aa. "Floodplain" or "flood-prone Area" means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
ab. "Floodplain Management" means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
ac. "Flood Protection System" means those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the
area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of
the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane
tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood
modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
ad. "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-6
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
ae. "Flood-related Erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
af. "Flood-related Erosion Area" or "Flood-related Erosion Prone Area" means a
land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to
the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven
currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.
ag. "Flood-related Erosion Area Management" means the operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related
erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans,
flood-related erosion control works and flood plain management regulations.
ah. "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
ai. "Floor" means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a
garage used solely for parking vehicles.
aj. "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
ak. "Functionally Dependent Use" means a use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
al. "Highest Adjacent Grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
am. "Historic Structure" means any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the National Register;
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-7
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
an. "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment,
designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to
contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
ao. "Levee System" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
ap. "Lowest Floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
non-elevation design requirements of this Ordinance.
aq. "Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The
term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
ar. "Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
as. "Map" means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Agency.
at. "Mean Sea Level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the
tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the
floodplain. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term is synonymous with
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-8
au. "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929 is a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
av. "New Construction" any structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of this Ordinance. The term also
includes any subsequent improvements to such structure.
aw. "New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of this Ordinance.
ax. "100-year Flood" see "Base Flood".
ay. "Person" includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including State and local
governments and agencies.
az. "Recreational Vehicle" means a vehicle which is:
1. built on a single chassis;
2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
3. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
4. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
ba. "Regulatory Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
bb. "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
bc. "Special Hazard Area" means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or
FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.
bd. "Start of Construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a
manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-9
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
be. "State Coordinating Agency" (Tennessee Department of Economic and
Community Development, Local Planning Assistance Office) means the
agency of the state government, or other office designated by the Governor of
the State or by state statute at the request of the Administrator to assist in the
implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program in that state.
bf. "Structure", for purposes of this section, means a walled and roofed building
that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage
tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures.
bg. "Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
bh. "Substantial Improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions or; (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
bi. "Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Parks or
Subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of
the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or
improvement commenced.
bj. "Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this Ordinance which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
bk. "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this Ordinance is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-10
bl. "Water Surface Elevation" means the height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified)
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal
or riverine areas.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-11
8.3. GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.3.1 Application
This Chapter shall apply to all areas within the incorporated area of Camden,
Tennessee.
8.3.2 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified on the Camden, Tennessee, Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Community -
Panel Numbers 47001001-47001007. Effective Date: July 17, 1986 and any
subsequent amendments or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be
a part of this Ordinance. These areas shall be incorporated into the Camden,
Tennessee Zoning Map.
8.3.3 Requirement for Development Permit
A development permit shall be required in conformity with this Chapter prior to
the commencement of any development activity.
8.3.4 Compliance
No structure or use shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other
applicable regulations.
8.3.5 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easement, covenant, or deed restriction. However, where this Ordinance conflicts
or overlaps with another, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
8.3.6 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, all provisions shall be: (1)
considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the
governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other
powers granted under state statutes.
8.3.7 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Ordinance does
not imply that land outside the flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not
create liability on the part of the Town of Camden, Tennessee or by any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-12
8.3.8 Penalties for Violation
Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Town of Camden, Tennessee from taking such other
lawful actions to prevent or remedy any violation.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-13
8.4. ADMINISTRATION
8.4.1 Designation of (Building Official)
The Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this Ordinance.
8.4.2 Permit Procedures
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Building Official on
forms furnished by him prior to any development activity. The development
permit may include, but is not limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn
to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or
equipment, drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is
required:
a. Application stage
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor
(including basement) of all buildings.*
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
building will be flood-proofed, where base flood
elevation data is available.*
3. Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that
the non-residential flood-proofed building will meet the floodproofing
criteria in 8.4.2, where base flood elevation data is
available.*
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
* (see 2. below)
8.4.3 Construction Stage
Within unnumbered A zones, where flood elevation data are not available, the
Building Official shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development
permit. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the measurement
of the lowest floor of the building and the highest adjacent grade. USGS
Quadrangle maps may be utilized when no more detailed reference exists to
establish reference elevations.
Within all flood zones where base flood elevation data are utilized, the Building
Official shall require that upon placement of the lowest floor, or flood-proofing
by whatever construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of
the permit holder to submit to the Building Official a certification of the elevation
of the lowest floor, or flood-proofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as built,
in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by, or under the
direct supervision of, a registered land surveyor, professional engineer, or
architect and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular
building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of,
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-14
a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken
prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The
Building Official shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby,
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
8.4.4 Duties and Responsibilities of the Building Official
Duties of the Building Official shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Review of all development permits to assure that the requirements of
this Ordinance have been satisfied, and that proposed building sites will
be reasonably safe from flooding.
b. Advice to permittee that additional federal or state permits may be
required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known,
require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file
with the development permit. This shall include Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U. S. C.
1334.
c. Notification to adjacent communities and the Tennessee Department of
Economic and Community Development, Local Planning Office, prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submission of
evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
d. Record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level or highest
adjacent grade, whichever is applicable) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance
with 8.4.2.
e. Record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level or highest
adjacent grade, whichever is applicable) to which the new or
substantially improved buildings have been flood-proofed, in accordance
with 8.4.2.
f. When flood-proofing is utilized, the Building Official shall obtain
certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in
accordance with 8.4.2.
g. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of
the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be
a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the
Building Official shall make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in 8.6.
h. When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency then the
Building Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-15
other source, including data developed as a result of these regulations, as
criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development in Zone A on the Community FHBM or FIRM meet
the requirements of this Chapter.
i. All records pertaining to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
maintained in the office of the Building Official and shall be open for
public inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited retrieval
within combined files.
j. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated
portion of any water course is maintained.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-16
8.5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
a. General Standards
In all flood prone areas the following provisions are required:
1. New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
2. Manufactured homes shall be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but
are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces;
3. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
4. New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
5. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment,
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding;
6. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
7. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters;
8. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
9. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building
which is in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall meet
the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this Chapter; and,
10. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building
which is not in compliance with the provision of this Ordinance, shall be
undertaken only if said non-conformity is not extended.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-17
8.5.2 Specific Standards
These provisions shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard as provided
herein:
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been
provided, including A zones, A1-30 zones, AE zones, AO zones, AH zones and
A99 zones, and has provided a regulatory floodway, as set forth in 8.3.2 the
following provisions are required:
a. Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest
floor, including basement elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the
base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with
standards of 8.5.2.
b. Non-Residential Construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than
one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings
located in all A-zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated
provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water,
and are built with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the (Building Official) as set forth in 8.4.2.
c. Elevated Building. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed
to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and
exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls.
1. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the
following minimum criteria.
a. Provide a minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one foot above grade; and
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided they
permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both
directions.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-18
2. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises
(standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or
elevator); and
3. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms in such a way as to
impede the movement of floodwaters and all such petitions shall
comply with the provisions of 8.5.2.
d. Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles
1. All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on
individual lots or parcels, in expansions of existing
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or in substantially
improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet
all the requirements of new construction, including elevations
and anchoring.
2. All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be
elevated so that:
a. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level
of the base flood elevation on a permanent
foundation;
b. The manufactured home must be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement; and,
c. In or outside of an existing or new manufactured
home park or subdivision, or in an expansion of an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, on
which a manufactured home has incurred
"substantial damage" as the result of a flood, any
manufactured home placed or substantially improved
must meet the standards of 8.5.2(a) and 8.5.2(b)
above.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-19
3. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
c. The recreational vehicle must meet all the
requirements for new construction, including
anchoring and elevation requirements of 8.5.2(a) or
8.5.2(b) and 8.5.2(c), above.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached structures.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation
data or floodway data have not been provided, the provisions
of 8.4.4. shall be utilized for all requirements relative to the
base flood elevation or floodways.
8.5.3 Standards for Areas of Special Flood Hazard Zones A1-30 and AE With
Established Base Flood Elevation But Without Floodways Designated
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in 8.3.2, where
streams exist with base flood data provided but where no floodways have been
provided, (zones A1-30 and AE) the following provisions apply:
8.5.31 No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or
substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood
hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. The
engineering certification should be supported by technical data that
conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
8.5.32 New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be
elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with
Article 5. Section B.
8,5.4 Standards For Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO and AH Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in 8.3.2, are areas
designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards
associated with base flood depths of one to three feet (l' - 3') where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply:
8.5.41 All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the
depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above
the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-20
floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least two (2) feet above
the highest adjacent grade.
8.5.42 All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
buildings shall:
8.5.421 have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet,
above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is
specified, the lowest floor, including basement shall be
elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade;
or,
8.5.422 together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
completely flood-proofed to or above that level so that any
space below that level is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
8.5.43 Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
8.5.5 Standards For Areas Protected by Flood Protection System (A-99 Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article 3. Section
B. are areas of the 100-year flood protected by a flood protection system which is
under construction but where base flood elevations and flood hazard factors have
not been determined. With these areas (A-99 Zones) the following provisions
apply:
8.5.51 All provisions of Article 4. and Article 5. Section A. and H. shall
apply.
8.5.6 Standards for Areas of Special Flood Hazard With Established Base Flood
Elevation And With Floodways Designated
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in 8.3.2 here streams
exist with base flood data and floodways provided, the following provisions
apply:
8.5.61 Encroachments, including fill material, new construction, substantial
improvements or other developments shall be located within designated
floodways, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
encroachments or new development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge at any point within the community. The engineering
certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to
standard hydraulic engineering principles.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-21
8.5.62 If 8.5.61 above is satisfied, new construction or substantial improvements
of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established
in accordance with Article 5. Section B.
8.5.7 Standards for Subdivision Proposals
Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine whether
such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or
other proposed new development is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals
shall be reviewed to ensure that:
8.5.71 All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
8.5.72 All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such
as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
8.5.73 All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
8.5.74 Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions) which is greater than fifty lots and/or five acres.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-22
8.6. VARIANCE PROCEDURES
The provisions of this section shall apply exclusively to areas of special flood hazard.
8.6.1 Board of Zoning Appeals
8.6.11 The Camden Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
Chapter.
8.6.12 Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures (see definition) upon a determination that the proposed repair
or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
8.6.13 In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this Ordinance, and:
8.6.131 The danger that materials may be swept onto other property
to the injury of others;
8.6.132 The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion;
8.6.133 The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage;
8.6.134 The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
8.6.135 The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the
case of a functionally dependent facility;
8.6.136 The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
8.6.137 The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;
8.6.138 The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
8.6.139 The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site, and;
8.6.140 The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems, and streets and bridges.
8.6.14 Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this
Ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-23
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this Ordinance.
8.6.15 Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
8.6.2 Conditions for Variances
8.6.21 Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard; and in the
instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the
minimum relief necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and
design of the building.
8.6.22 Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient
cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and (iii) a determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
Ordinances.
8.6.23 Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance, and that such construction below the base flood level
increases risks to life and property.
8.6.24 The Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and
report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
upon request.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-24
8.7. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
8.7.1 Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective upon its passage, in accordance with the
Charter of Camden, Tennessee, the public welfare demanding it.
Approved and adopted by the Camden, Tennessee Mayor and Board Of Aldermen.
______________________________
Date
______________________________
Mayor of Camden, Tennessee
Attest:
______________________________
City Recorder
_____________________________
Date of Publication of
Caption and Summary
1st Reading __________________
2nd Reading __________________
3rd Reading __________________
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-25
8.8 Erosion And Sediment Control
The principal effect that land development activities have on the natural or geologic
erosion consists of exposing disturbed soils to precipitation and to surface storm runoff.
Uncontrolled erosion and sediment from these areas often cause considerable economic
damage to individuals and to society in general. Surface water pollution, channel and
reservoir siltation, and damage to public facilities, as well as to private property, are
some of many examples of problems caused by uncontrolled erosion and sedimentation.
The following are those measures and regulatory requirements which have been set forth
for the purpose of controlling erosion and sedimentation caused by soil disturbance.
8.8.1. Definition of Land or Soil Disturbance - Any activity involving the alteration of
topography or the shaping of land for construction, development, or excavation
purposes which in any way alters the soil cover, affects on-site drainage and
storm
water runoff, affects drainage on off-site properties~ or alters natural drainage
patterns or streams and stream-flow characteristics.
8.8.2. General Planning Guidelines - For erosion and sediment control program to be
effective, it is imperative that provisions for sediment control measures be made
in the planning stage. The following are guidelines which shall be used in
practical combinations during the development and preparation of any erosion
and
sedimentation plan for any area being developed for residential, industrial,
commercial, recreational, transportation or public and institutional uses.
a. The development plan should be fitted to the soils and topography so as to
create the least erosion potential.
b. Wherever feasible during construction, natural vegetation should be
retained and protected. Where inadequate vegetation exists, temporary or
permanent vegetation should be established.
c. Where land must be stripped of vegetation during construction, limit the
exposed area to the smallest practical size at any one time.
d. Limit the duration of exposure to the shortest practical time.
e. Critical areas exposed during construction should be protected with
temporary vegetation and/or mulching.
f. Permanent vegetation and improvements such as streets, storm sewers or
other features of the development, capable of carrying storm runoff in a
safe manner, should be installed as early as possible.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-26
g. Provisions should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused
by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
h. Sediment basins to remove suspended soil particles from runoff waters
from land undergoing development should be constructed and maintained
wherever erosive conditions indicate they are needed to prevent off-site
damages.
i. Diversions, grassed waterways, grade stabilization structures, and similar
mechanical control measures required by the site should be installed as
early in the development of the area as possible.
j. Earth cut and fill slopes of 3:1 or flatter are desirable for erosion control
and maintenance. The slopes shall not be steeper than 2 horizontal to 1
vertical unless stabilized by structural measures (Ex. retaining walls,
cribbing, etc.)
8.8.3. General Criteria For Controlling Erosion And Sediment - The General
Criteria is minimum requirements for controlling erosion and sedimentation from
land disturbing activities. These General Criteria do not replace the requirement
for individually developed erosion and sediment control plans; however, they do
establish minimum standards of soil conservation practice which apply to all land
disturbing projects. Applicable General Criteria shall be satisfied in each
approved erosion and sediment control plan; however, if a plan is found to be
inadequate (with respect to the General Criteria) in the field, they apply in
addition to the provisions of the approved plan, unless a variance has been
granted. Local inspectors and persons responsible for carrying out approved plans
must therefore be aware of the General Criteria as well as the provisions of the
approved plans themselves. Nothing in the General Criteria shall limit the right of
the Planning Commission to impose additional or more stringent standards for
controlling erosion and sedimentation when recommended by the Town Engineer
during the plan approval process.
a. Stabilization of Denuded Areas and Soil Stockpiles
(1) Permanent or temporary soil stabilization must be applied to
denuded areas within 15 days after final grade is reached on any
portion of the site. Soil stabilization must also be applied within 15
days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade but will
remain dormant (undisturbed) for longer than 60 days.
(2) Soil stabilization refers to measures which protect soil from the
erosive forces of raindrop impact and flowing water. Applicable
practices include vegetative establishment, mulching, and the early
application of gravel base on areas to be paved. Soil stabilization
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-27
measures should be selected to be appropriate for the time of year,
site conditions and estimated duration of use.
(3) Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or protected with sediment
trapping measures to prevent soil loss.
(4) Throughout the implementation phase of any approved plan dust
production from all activities shall be strictly controlled. The
person responsible for implementing the approved plan shall
institute those dust control measures necessary to assure that
adjacent properties are not adversely affected by dust.
b. Establishment of Permanent Vegetation - A permanent vegetative cover
shall be established on denuded areas not otherwise permanently
stabilized. Permanent vegetation shall not be considered established until a
ground cover is achieved which, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission is mature enough to control soil erosion satisfactorily and to
survive severe weather conditions.
c. Protection of Adjacent Properties
(1) Properties adjacent to the site of a land disturbance shall be
protected from sediment deposition. This may be accomplished by
preserving a well-vegetated buffer strip around the lower perimeter
of the land disturbance, by installing perimeter controls such as
sediment barriers, filters or dikes, or sediment basins, or by a
combination of such measures.
(2) Vegetated buffer strips may be used alone only where runoff in
sheet flow is expected. Buffer strips should be at least 20 feet in
width. If at any time it is found that a vegetated buffer strip alone
is
ineffective in stopping sediment movement onto adjacent property,
additional perimeter controls must be provided.
d. Timing and Stabilization of Sediment Trapping Measures - Sediment
basins and traps, perimeter dikes, sediment barriers and other measures
intended to trap sediment on-site must be constructed as a first step in
grading and be made functional before upslope land disturbance takes
place. Earthen structures such as dams, dikes, and diversions must be
seeded and mulched within 15 days of installation.
e. Sediment Basins - Stormwater runoff from drainage areas with five acres
or greater disturbed area must pass through a Sediment Basin or other
suitable sediment trapping facility with equivalent or greater storage
capacity. The Planning Commission may require sediment basins or traps
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-28
for smaller disturbed areas where deemed necessary. This sediment basin
requirement may also be waived, by variance, if the Planning Commission
agrees that site conditions do not warrant its construction.
f. Cut and Fill Slopes - Cut and fill slopes must be designed and constructed
in a manner which will minimize erosion. Consideration must be given to
the length and steepness of the slope, the soil type, upslope drainage area,
groundwater conditions and other applicable factors. Slopes which are
found to be eroding excessively within one year of construction must be
provided with additional slope stabilizing measures until the problem is
corrected. The following guidelines are provided to aid site planners and
the Town Engineer in developing an adequate design:
(1) Roughened soil surfaces are generally preferred to smooth surfaces
on slopes.
(2) Diversions should be constructed at the top of long steep slopes
which have significant drainage areas above the slope. Diversions
or terraces may also be used to reduce slope length.
(3) Concentrated stormwater should not be allowed to flow down cut
or fill slopes unless contained within an adequate temporary or
permanent channel, flume or slope drain structure.
(4) Wherever a slope face crosses a water seepage plane which
endangers the stability of the slope, adequate drainage or other
protection should be provided.
g. Stormwater Management Criteria for Controlling Off-Site Erosion -
Properties and waterways downstream from development sites shall be
protected from erosion due to increases in the volume, velocity and peak
flow rate of stormwater runoff. In the absence of local stormwater
management criteria which have been approved by the Soil Conservation
Service the following criteria shall apply:
(1) Concentrated stormwater runoff leaving a development site must
be discharged directly into a well-defined, natural or man-made
off-site receiving channel or pipe. If there is no well-defined offsite
receiving channel or pipe, one must be constructed to convey
stormwater to the nearest adequate channel. Newly constructed
channels shall be designed as adequate channels.
(2) An adequate channel shall be defined as a natural or man-made
channel or pipe which is capable of conveying the runoff from a
storm event the Town Engineer deems appropriate without
overtopping its banks or eroding after development of the site in
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-29
question. A receiving channel may also be considered adequate to
any point where the total contributing drainage area is at least 100
times greater than the drainage area of the development site in
question; or, if it can be shown that the peak rate of runoff from the
site for a storm event the Town engineer deems appropriate will
not be increased after development.
(3) If an existing off-site receiving channel is not an adequate channel,
the applicant must choose one of the following options:
(a) Obtain permission from downstream property owners to
improve the receiving channel to an adequate condition.
Such improvements shall extend downstream until an
adequate channel section is reached.
(b) Develop a site design that will not cause the predevelopment
peak runoff rate from a storm event the Town
Engineer deems appropriate to increase. Such a design may
be accomplished by enhancing the infiltration capability of
the site or by providing on-site storm water detention
measures. The pre-development and post-development
peak runoff rates must be verified by sound, accepted
engineering methods and calculations.
(c) Provide a combination of channel improvement,
stormwater detention, or other measures which is
satisfactory to the Town Engineer to prevent downstream
channel erosion.
(4) All channel improvements or modifications must comply
with all applicable laws and regulations. Modifications to
flowing streams should be made in accordance with all
applicable laws and regulations.
(5) If the applicant chooses an option which includes
stormwater detention, he must provide the Town with a
plan for maintenance of the detention facilities. The plan
shall. set forth the maintenance requirements of the facility
and the party responsible for performing the maintenance.
The responsible party may be an individual, organization or
the local government--whichever has consented to carry out
the maintenance. If the designated maintenance
responsibility is with an individual or organization other
than the local government~ a maintenance agreement
should be executed between the responsible party and the
local government.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-30
(6) Increased volumes of unconcentrated sheet flows which
will cause erosion or sedimentation on adjacent property
must be diverted to a stable outlet or detention facility.
(7) In applying these stormwater management criteria,
individual lots in subdivision developments shall not be
considered separate development projects, but rather the
subdivision development, as a whole, shall be considered a
single development project.
h. Stabilization of Waterways and Outlets - All on-site stormwater
conveyance channels shall be designed and constructed to
withstand the expected velocity of flow from a 2-year frequency
storm without erosion. Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion
must also be provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved
channels.
i. Storm Sewer Inlet Protection - All storm sewer inlets which are
made operable during construction shall be protected so that
sediment-laden water will not enter the conveyance system without
first being filtered or otherwise treated to remove sediment.
j. Working in or Crossing Watercourse
(1) Construction vehicles should be kept out of watercourses to
the extent possible. Where in-channel work is necessary,
precautions must be taken to stabilize the work area during
construction to minimize erosion. The channel (including
bed and banks) must always be restabilized immediately
after in-channel work is completed.
(2) Where a live (wet) watercourse must be crossed by
construction vehicles regularly during construction, a
Temporary Stream Crossing must be provided.
k. Underground Utility Construction - The construction of nonexempt*
underground utility lines shall be subject to the following
criteria:
(1) No more than 500 feet of trench are to be opened at one
time.
(2) Where consistent with safety and space considerations,
excavated material is to be placed on the uphill side of
trenches.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-31
(3) Trench dewatering devices shall discharge in a manner
which will not adversely affect flowing streams, drainage
systems or off-site property.
* Non-exempt utility construction includes the
installation, maintenance or repair of all utilities
which disturb more than 10,000 square feet except:
(a) Individual service connections.
(b) Telephone and electric lines.
(c) Underground public utility lines under existing hard
surfaced roads, streets, or sidewalks, provided such
land disturbing activity is confined to the area
which is hard surfaced.
l. Construction Access Routes - Wherever construction vehicle access routes
intersect paved public roads, provisions must be made to minimize the
transport of sediment (mud) by runoff or vehicle tracking onto the paved
surface. Where sediment is transported onto a public road surface, the
roads shall be cleaned thoroughly at the end of each day. Sediment shall
be
removed from roads by shoveling or sweeping and be transported to a
sediment controlled disposal area. Street washing shall be allowed only
after sediment is removed in this manner.
m. Disposition of Temporary Measure~ - All temporary erosion and sediment
control measures shall be disposed of within 30 days after final site
stabilization is achieved or ~after the temporary measures are no longer
needed, unless otherwise authorized by the local program administrator.
Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil areas resulting from the
disposition of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized to
prevent further erosion and sedimentation.
n. Maintenance - All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control
practices must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure continued
performance of their intended function.
8.8.4. Erosion Control Measures - Erosion control measures which may be used singly
or in combination are indicated below together with brief statements of their site
adaptation or limitations.
a. Vegetative Protection - Suitable for all soils capable of supporting plant
growth. Vegetation alone will not provide adequate protection on soils
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-32
that are unstable because of their structure, texture, internal water
movement, or excessively steep slopes. Vegetation protection is divided
into:
(1) Short Term Seeding to protect areas for 12 months or less.
(2) Permanent Seeding or Sodding for areas to be protected longer
than 1 year.
b. To be used with all seedings on disturbed soil areas for
temporary use without seeding during months unfavorable to seeding.
c. Grassed Waterway - This type of control is a vegetatively lined channel
designed to carry concentrated storm water. Such runoff may be flow
which has collected in natural depressions or from diversions, or from
other site features. Grassed waterways should not be used for long
duration base flows.
d. Diversions - A diversion consists of a channel or a channel with
supporting ridge constructed across a sloping land surface on the contour
or with predetermined grades to intercept and divert surface runoff before
it gains sufficient volume or velocity to create harmful erosion. It should
have capacity to carry storm runoff and may or may not have a vegetative
lining, depending upon the velocities anticipated and the soil materials in
the channel. Flow from a diversion must be discharged into a protected
area or a grassed waterway.
e. Grade Stabilization Structures - These structures are used to reduce grade
and to dissipate the energy of flowing water by dropping it in a relatively
short horizontal distance. By using these, the grades and velocities in
grassed waterways or bare channels can be reduced to non-eroding limits.
This measure includes drop structures made of concrete, corrugated metal
pipe, and other suitable materials.
f. Debris Basins - These basins consist of an earth fill type dam and spillway
in a drainageway downstream from a construction area for the purpose of
trapping sediment and debris. The basin must have an adequate capacity
for all sediment or arrangements made to remove it mechanically as the
basin becomes filled. The whole structure may be removed after the
construction area has become stable or may be retained to enhance the
area.
g. Land Grading - Re-shaping the ground surface by grading to planned
grades and conformation that will be conducive to preventing excessive
erosion.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-33
h. This measure controls erosion by reducing the surface runoff, or
lowering a high water table, through underground conduits or filter drains.
i. Sediment Control, Measure - Dike - A temporary means of trapping and
storing sediment from eroding areas under construction in order to protect
properties or stream channels below the installation from damage by
excessive sedimentation and debris.
j. Urban Stream Bank Protection - The control of bank erosion in main
stream channels can be accomplished in various ways. Methods
commonly
used in urban areas include concrete, sod, riprap, gabions, and flexible
fabric forms filled with mortar. The purpose of bank control measures is to
install a barrier that will withstand the erosive forces exerted by flowing
water.
k. Urban Gutter Drain Sediment Barrier - These temporary bathers are used
to prevent sediment from entering storm sewer systems prior to the
establishment of protective soil cover. The barriers are removed after the
area under development is permanently protected against erosion by
vegetative or mechanical means.
8.8.5. Erosion And Sediment Control Plan
a. Plan Submission - No person may engage in any land disturbing activity
until he has submitted to the Planning Commission an erosion and
sediment control plan for such land disturbing activity and such plan has
been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission.
b. Plan Review and Approval: Issuing Permits
(1) The Planning Commission shall, within forty-five (45) days,
approve any such plan if it determines that the plan meets the
General Criteria outlined herein, and if the person responsible for
carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform the
measures included in the plan. The plan must be received at the
town office at least 15 days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting.
(2) No person acting on behalf of the Town, including a Town
Superintendent or any other agency authorized under any other law
to issue grading, building or other permits for activities involving
land disturbing activities, may issue any such permit unless the
applicant submits with his application the approved erosion and
sediment control plan or certification of such approved plan.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-34
(3) The permit requirement for land disturbing activities shall not
apply to agricultural farming operations, commercial nursery
operations or to residential landscaping or gardening activities.
c. Plan Requirements - Erosion and sediment control plans submitted for
review and approval by the Planning Commission shall contain the
following information:
(1) Narrative
a. Project description - Briefly describe the nature and
purpose of the land disturbing activity, and the amount of
grading involved.
b. Existing site conditions - A description of the existing
topography, vegetation, and drainage.
c. Adjacent areas - A description of neighboring areas such as
streams, lakes, residential areas, roads, etc., which might be
affected by the land disturbance.
d. Soils - A brief description of the soils on the site giving
such information as soil name, mapping unit, erodability,
permeability, depth, texture and soil structure.
e. Critical Areas - A description of areas of the site which
have potentially serious erosion problems
f. Erosion and sediment, control measures - A description of
the methods which will be used to control erosion and
sedimentation on the site. (Must satisfy the General
Criteria)
g. permanent stabilization - A brief description, including
specifications~ of how the site will be stabilized after
construction is completed.
h. Stormwater management considerations - Will the
development of the site result in increased peak rates of
runoff? Will this result in flooding or channel degradation
downstream? if so considerations should be given to
stormwater control structures on the site. (See General
Criteria)
i. Maintenance - A schedule of regular inspections and repair
of erosion and sediment control structures shall be set forth.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-35
j. Calculations - Any calculations made for the design of such
items as sediment basins, diversions, waterways, and
calculations for runoff and stormwater detention basin
design.
(2) Site Plan
a. Vicinity map - A small map locating the site in relation to
the surrounding area.
b. Existing contours - The existing contours of the site shall
be shown on a map.
c. Existing vegetation - The existing tree lines, grassy areas,
or unique vegetation shall be shown on a map.
d. The boundaries of the different soil types shall be
shown on a map.
e. Indicate north - The direction of north in relation to the site
shall be shown.
f. Critical erosion areas - Areas with potentially serious
erosion problems should be shown on a map.
g. Existing drainage patterns - The dividing lines and the
direction of flow for the different drainage areas shall be
shown on a map.
h. Final contours - Changes to the existing contours shall be
shown on a map.
i. Limits of clearing and grading - Areas which are to be
cleared and graded shall be outlined on a map.
j. Location of practices - The locations of the erosion and
sediment control and stormwater management practices
used on the site shall be shown on a map.
k. Detail drawings - Any structural practices indicated on the
plan shall be explained and illustrated with detail drawings.
d. Plan Amendment
An approved plan may be amended upon recommendation by the Planning
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-36
Commission:
(1) Where the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan
finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons
the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed
amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this
act, are agreed to by the Planning Commission and the persons
responsible for carrying out the Plan.
e. Performance Guarantees - The Planning Commission and Camden Town
staff, prior to the issuance of any permit, may require from any applicant a
reasonable performance bond, cash escrow, letter of credit, any
combination thereof or such other legal arrangement deemed acceptable.
Within sixty (60) days of the completion of the land disturbing activity,
such bond or other instrument shall be refunded to the applicant provided
all requirements of the approved erosion control plan have been met.
f. Inspections - The designated agent shall provide for periodic inspections
of the land disturbing activity to ensure compliance with the approved
plan. The owner, occupier, or operator shall be given an opportunity to
accompany the inspectors.
g. Violations and Enforcement -
(1) If the designated agent determines that a permittee has failed to
comply with an approved plan, such agent shall immediately serve
upon the permittee, by registered or certified mail, a notice to
comply. Such notice shall set forth specifically the noted
deficiencies and the time within which such measures shall be
completed.
(2) A violation of an approved plan or commencement of any land
disturbing activity without an approved plan, or performance
guarantee shall be deemed a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding fifty ($50) dollars. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(3) The Town of Camden may apply to any court of competent
jurisdiction for injunctive relief to enjoin a violation or threatened
violation.
h. Variances - The Planning Commission may waive or modify any of the
General Criteria which are deemed inappropriate or too restrictive for site
conditions, by granting a variance. Variances may be granted under the
following conditions:
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
VIII-37
(1) At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request variances
to become part of the approved erosion and sediment control plan.
The applicant must explain the reasons for requesting variances in
writing. Specific variances which are allowed by the Planning
Commission must be documented on the approved plan.
(2) During construction, the person responsible for implementing the
approved plan must request variances in writing to the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission must respond in writing
approving or disapproving such request. Without a written
approval, no variances shall be considered valid. The Planning
Commission shall respond to such variance requests within 45
days.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-1
ARTICLE IX
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
9.1. Regulations Governing Signs
9.1.1 Purpose The regulations set forth herein are established in order to promote and
protect public health, safety, comfort, prosperity, welfare, and in order to
accomplish the following specific purposes: to enhance the economy, business,
and industry of Camden by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective use
and display of signs; to enhance the physical appearance of the city; to protect the
general public from damage and injury which might be caused by the faulty and
uncontrolled construction and use of signs within the city; to protect the public
use of streets and highways by reducing sign or advertising distractions that may
increase traffic accidents; to project the physical and mental well being of the
general public by recognizing and encouraging a sense of aesthetic appreciation
for the visual environment; and to preserve the value of private property by
assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses.
9.1.2. General Provisions Relating to All Signs - All signs within the Town of Camden
shall adhere to following provisions.
a. All signs shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge of any
highway, street, or road.
b. All signs shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet from the edge of any
sidewalk.
c. In no case shall any sign be located on the public right-of-way or extend
out over the right-of-way or interfere with traffic or pedestrian safety or
vision.
9.1.3. Prohibited Signs - The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning
districts in the Town of Camden.
a. Signs on public property, except for public signs in conjunction with city,
state and federal government uses and temporary signs upon permission
by the public authority having jurisdiction.
b. Signs erected at the intersection of any streets or alleys in such a manner
as to obstruct free and clear vision; or in any location where, by reason of
the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or
be confused with any authorized traffic signs, signal or device, or which
makes use of the words "STOP, LOOK, DRIVE-IN", "GO SLOW",
"CAUTION", or similar wording or other symbols as to interfere with,
mislead or confuse traffic. No signs shall be allowed between a height of
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-2
two and one-half (2.5) ft. and ten (10) ft. of the front property line in order
to prevent any obstruction of vision.
c. Signs which blend with or can be confused with traffic signals.
d. Signs which contain reflective materials which present a hazard or danger
to traffic or the general public.
e. Signs which are structurally unsound or which are rendered structurally
sound by guy wires.
f. Signs which display thereon or advertise any obscene, indecent or
immoral matter.
9.1.4. Exempted Signs - The following types of signs shall be allowed in all zoning
districts of the Town of Camden provided that the sign conforms to these
regulations. A sign permit is not required to erect exempt signs described below.
a. Signs not more than two (2) sq. ft. which identify street numbers, owner
names, occupant name, and professional names, as allowed herein.
b. Official National, State, or Municipal flags properly displayed.
c. Signs, identifying merchandise, or manufacturer, offering sale if on a
dispensing or vending machine, or on windows.
d. Signs wholly within buildings or windows.
e. Public signs which are signs erected by, or on the order of a public officer
in the performance of his public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs,
legal notices and such temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs as
may be approved by the Building Inspector.
f. Historical markers as required by local, State, or Federal authorities.
g. Signs of a primary decorative nature, clearly, incidental and customary
and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday.
h. No trespassing or no dumping signs.
i. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when
cut into any masonry surface or when constructed on bond or
noncombustible material.
j. Public signs, or signs specifically authorized for public purposes by any
law, statute or ordinance; which may be of any type, number, area, height
above grade, location, illumination or animation, required by law, statute
or ordinance under which the signs are erected. Also exempted are signs
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-3
on public property erected by order of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen,
which shall be allowed subject to all appropriate sight, distance, and safety
considerations being met, as determined by the Mayor and Board of
Aldermen.
k. Warning signs warning the public of the existence of danger, containing
no advertising material, of a size as may be necessary to be removed upon
the subsidence of danger.
l. Private property directional signs such as "no parking", "exit", "parking",
etc. not to exceed five (5) sq. Ft.
9.1.5. Public / Semi-Public Signs - All public / semi public organizations including but
not limited to Local, State and Federal Buildings, Churches, Schools,
Philanthropic and Non Profit Organizations shall be permitted signs in all districts
provided the following provisions are adhered to and a sign permit has been
granted.
a. A public / semi-public sign shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet
from the edge of any highway, street, or road and a minimum of three (3)
feet from the edge of any sidewalk.
b. A public / semi-public sign shall be limited to one (1) building sign not to
exceed twenty (20) percent of the face of the wall.
c. A public / semi-public sign shall be limited to one (1) ground sign not to
exceed thirty-six (36) square feet.
d. A public / semi-public sign shall be limited to two (2) off-premises
directional signs that do not exceed (6) square feet in area per sign.
e. A public / semi-public sign shall in no case be located on the public rightof-
way, extend out over the right-of-way or interfere with traffic or
pedestrian safety or vision.
9.1.6. Real Estate Signs - Real estate signs shall be permitted in all districts provided the
following provisions are adhered. A sign permit is not required for real estate
signs.
a. All real estate signs shall not have a height greater than eight (8) ft.
b. All lots are limited to one real estate sign per frontage road
c. All real estate signage is limited to twenty (20) sq. ft. in area in a
residential district and thirty-two (32) sq. ft. in a commercial or industrial
district.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-4
9.1.7. Permitted Signs - For this section, a business is defined as any establishment, firm
or business with a valid business license engaged in a commercial, industrial or
service oriented activity and shall be allowed signage in accordance with these
regulations.
a. Signs permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts
(1) Real Estate Signs
(2) Residential Identification Sign - A residential identification sign
shall be limited to one (1) side and shall not be greater than sixteen
(16) square feet. Each recognized residential subdivision and
apartment complex shall be limited to one (1) sign per vehicular
ingress/egress, not to exceed two (2) signs.
(3) Public /Semi Public Signs
(4) Temporary Signs
(5) Any other signage approved by the board of zoning appeals for any
use on appeal.
b. Signs permitted in the B-3, H-M, M-1 and M-2 Districts
(1) Real Estate Signs
(2) Ground Signs - All ground signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in
height, shall be limited to an area of one-hundred (100%) of the
total street frontage with a maximum of fifty (50) square feet for
all faces and shall be limited to identifying the name of the place or
development and any businesses therein.
(3) Business Sign - All attached business signs and painted business
signs shall not extend above the roof line nor project at an angle
beyond the edge of any walls or structure and shall be mounted
flush with the wall. Each business shall be limited to one (1)
attached business sign or one (1) painted sign per building face
that faces a public street not to exceed two (2) signs and shall be
no greater in area than ten (10%) percent of the face of the wall
with a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
(4) Awnings and Canopies - An awning or canopy with a business
name or related information is defined as an attached business sign
and shall be calculated into the total allowable square footage. The
lowest portion of a canopy shall not be less than eight (8) feet
above the ground.
(5) Public / Semi Public Signs.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-5
(6) Temporary Signs.
c. Signs permitted in the B-1 and B-2 Districts.
(1) Real Estate Signs
(2) Business Sign - All attached business signs and painted business
signs shall not extend above the roof line nor project at an angle
beyond the edge of any walls or structure and shall be mounted
flush with the wall. Each business shall be limited to one (1)
attached business sign or one (1) painted sign per building face
that faces a public street not to exceed two (2) signs and shall be
no greater in area than twenty (20%) percent of the face of the wall
with a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet. The side wall
shall be no greater in area than ten (10%) percent of the face of the
side wall with a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
(3) Awnings and Canopies - An awning or canopy with a business
name or related information is defined as an attached business sign
and shall be calculated into the total allowable square footage. The
lowest portion of a canopy shall not be less than eight (8) feet
above the ground.
(4) Ground Mounted Sign - Each lot is limited to one (1) of the
following types of signs for each side of the lot that fronts a public
street not to exceed two (2) signs. Lots fronting on two or more
streets are allowed the permitted signage for each street frontage.
Signage cannot be accumulated and used on one street in excess of
that allowed for lots with only one frontage street.
(a) Ground Signs - All ground signs shall not exceed six (6)
feet in height, shall be limited to an area of one-hundred
(100%) of the total street frontage with a maximum of fifty
(50) square feet for all faces, shall be located a minimum of
10 feet from the edge of any adjacent street rights-of-way,
and shall be limited to identifying the name of the place or
development and any businesses therein
(b) Grouping Signs - All grouping signs shall not exceed forty
(40) feet in height, shall be limited to an area of onehundred
(100%) of the total street frontage with a
maximum of one-hundred and fifty (150) square feet for all
faces, shall be limited to identifying the name of the place
or development and any businesses therein.
(c) Pole signs - All pole signs shall not exceed forty (40) feet
in height, shall be limited to an area of one-hundred (100%)
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-6
of the total street frontage with a maximum of one-hundred
(100) square feet for all faces. A maximum of two faces
per sign is allowed. A maximum of two signs shall be
allowed on the same pole; however, the total sign area for
both signs cannot exceed the maximum one hundred (100)
square feet. The bottom of the sign must be a minimum of
10 ft. above the ground/pavement elevation.
(5) Public / Semi Public Signs
(6) Temporary Signs
9.1.8 Temporary Signs All temporary signs shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet
from the edge of any highway, street, or road and a minimum of three (3) feet
from the edge of any sidewalk. Temporary signs are allowed in all districts as
specified below and a sign permit is required for all temporary signs except for
vehicle signs, construction signs, posters, and garage sale signs.
a. Street Banners - It shall be unlawful for any person to have placed across
or upon any public street, alley or place a banner, electrical or floral
festoon, without first obtaining a permit. Such banner or electrical or
floral festoon shall be in conjunction with an official, civic, or
philanthropic, festival, or parade and shall be allowed for a period not to
exceed thirty-five (35) days as determined by the Building Inspector.
Street banners shall be removed within seven (7) days after the event
being advertised has occurred.
b. Off-Building Advertising Banners - Off-building advertising banners shall
be allowed, after obtaining a permit, for a period not to exceed fourteen
(14) days per calendar quarter. They are subject to the building setback
requirements of the zone in which they are located. They may be used
only in commercial and industrial districts and may not exceed twentyfour
(24) sq. ft. in total area. On-building banners do not require a permit;
however, total signage on any face of a building must not exceed 25% of
the total surface area.
c. Posters - Posters shall only be authorized in conjunction with an official,
civic, or philanthropic event and shall be allowed only thirty-five (35)
days prior to and forty-eight (48) hours after the event.
d. Vehicular Signs - Any vehicle carrying or having a sign painted on it shall
be considered a sign regulated under this chapter. Such signs shall be
prohibited unless displayed on a vehicle in operable condition carrying all
current valid licenses, tags or plates as required by all governmental
authorities. This may include valid dealer licenses, tags or plates.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-7
e. New Business or Ownership - New business or ownership shall be
permitted one (1) temporary sign for a period not to exceed 30 days
provided all other provisions in this section are adhered to.
f. Construction - Construction signs shall be allowed in all districts during
the actual period of construction and shall be limited in size to sixty-four
(64) sq. ft. and a height of ten (10) ft. The sign announcement shall be
limited to the project name, sponsor or funding agent, owner, general
contractor and subcontractors, architect or engineer.
g. Garage Sales - Garage sale signs not exceeding five (5) sq. ft. in area
provided it is an on-site sign. This sign shall be allowed to be erected no
more than seven (7) days prior to and two (2) days after the event in which
it advertises.
h. Residential Development Signs - Residential developments shall be
limited to one (1) on site sign limited to one (1) face and shall be no
greater than sixteen (16) square feet and one (1) off site sign which shall
be limited to two (2) faces and shall be no greater than ten (10) square feet
per face.
i. Model Home Sales Signs - Model home sales shall be limited to one (1)
on site sign limited to one (1) face and shall be no greater than sixteen
(16) square feet.
j. Special Events - Churches, Schools, Philanthropic, Civic and other Non
Profit Organizations shall be allowed one (1) on site sign limited to thirtytwo
(32) square feet and two (2) directions signs each of which may not
exceed twelve (12) square feet in area. Such signs shall be allowed seven
(7) days prior and one (1) day after said event.
k. Political and Campaign Signs - Political and campaign signs on behalf of
candidates for public office or measures of election ballots provided that
said sign conforms to the following regulations.
(1) Said signs may be erected no earlier than ninety (90) days prior to
said election and shall be removed within fourteen (14) days
following said election.
(2) No sign shall be located within or over the public right-of-way.
(3) The candidate or the candidate's organization must obtain a general
sign permit covering all of the candidate's signs in Camden. There
will be no charge for this permit.
(4) Political signs shall be limited to 16 sq. ft. in area in residential
districts and shall be limited to 32 sq. ft. in all other districts.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-8
9.1.9. Illegal, Nonconforming, and Unused Signs
a. Illegal Signs - Any illegal sign shall be removed from the premises upon
which it is located within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this
Ordinance or notice of violation and shall not remain on the premises or
elsewhere in the City until a sign permit is issued.
b. Nonconforming Signs - With the exception of portable signs, any sign that
has been erected, constructed or placed in its location and that is being
used as of the effective date of this ordinance, shall be conclusively
presumed to have been so erected, constructed or placed and used in
compliance with the codes and ordinances of the Town of Camden
pertaining to signs that were in effect immediately prior to such date.
(1) Any sign that is non-conforming because it fails to comply with
the provisions of this ordinance may not be repaired, restored or
reconstructed provided that such work alters structurally, extends,
or enlarges, in whole or in part, unless such sign as so altered,
extended or enlarged shall conform with the provisions of this
Ordinance and a proper permit is obtained.
(2) No owner, user, or other person shall alter any non-conforming
sign (including alterations in the colors, letters, words, numbers,
objects or symbols appearing thereon excluding message boards),
unless such sign as so altered shall conform with the provisions of
this ordinance. The violation of any one or more of the following
regulations shall constitute a forfeiture of the right to continue to
use and maintain a non-conforming sign. Consequently, this sign
will now be defined as an illegal sign.
(a) A non-conforming sign shall not be replaced with another
non-conforming sign.
(b) A non-conforming sign shall not have any changes in the
words, logo or symbols which are a part of a message
unless the sign is a freestanding message board, nonportable.
(c) A non-conforming sign shall not be structurally altered so
as to prolong the life of the sign, increased in size, or
shape, or type, or design.
(d) A non-conforming sign shall not be re-established after
damage or destruction if the estimated expense of
construction exceeds 50% of the value of the original
structure.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-9
(e) A non-conforming sign shall not be re-established after the
activity or name of the business or ownership shall be
changed requiring a change in the sign name or
advertisement itself.
(3) All signs which are nonconforming because of: the use of flashing,
blinking, intermittent or exposed lighting (except neon); signs
which constitute a traffic hazard, block or restrict the visibility of
motorists or pedestrians; otherwise constitute an immediate hazard
to the general health, safety and welfare of the public, shall be
brought into conformity within one hundred twenty (120) days of
the effective date of this Ordinance. If such signs are not removed
within the aforementioned one hundred twenty (120) day period,
written notification of the obligation to remove such signs shall be
furnished by the Building Inspector and delivered to the sign
owner/user/property owner by certified mail and the
owner/user/property owner shall thereafter be required to remove
said sign from the premises within five (5) days of the receipt of
notification from the Building Inspector. Failure to remove such
signs within the time periods herein provided shall constitute a
violation of this Ordinance.
(4) Disposition: It shall be the duty of the sign owner/user and
property owner to remove any nonconforming sign in accordance
with the requirements of this Section.
(5) A request for a variance or interpretation of this Ordinance, as it
pertains to the non-conformity and which is filed within thirty (30)
days of the effective date of this ordinance, shall stay further
administrative actions pertaining to said sign until such time as the
variance or request for interpretation is acted upon.
c. Unused (Abandoned) Signs
(1) Definition: An unused or abandoned sign is a sign which meets
any of the following criteria:
(a) A sign which identifies an establishment, goods or services
which are no longer provided on the premises where the
sign is located.
(b) A sign which identifies a time, event or purpose which has
passed or no longer applies.
(c) This also applies to sign structures with or without a sign.
(2) Disposition:
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-10
(a) Any sign which is defined under paragraph 1(a) of this subsection
and which condition exists for a period of one month and which
sign is otherwise nonconforming shall be removed by the
owner/user/property owner within five (5) days of the end of the
one month (thirty [30] day) period.
(b) Any sign which is defined under subparagraph 1(a) of this
subsection which remains in such condition for a period of one
month and which sign is otherwise conforming shall have its copy
vacated within thirty (30) days from when the stated circumstances
commenced. If the copy remains vacant for a period of six (6)
months or more from the date the stated circumstances
commenced, the sign structure shall be removed by the
owner/user/property owner. Removal shall be within five (5) days
following the expiration of the aforementioned six (6) month
period.
(c) Any sign defined under subparagraph 1(b) of subsection C shall be
removed by the owner/user/property owner within three (3) days
from the time the event or purpose has passed or no longer applies.
(d) Removal:
(i) Any illegal, nonconforming or unused sign which is not
removed from the premises by the owner/user/property
owner within the time frames prescribed herein shall be
considered a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance
and shall be subject to the maximum penalties allowed by
law. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute
a separate offense.
(ii) Failure to Remove: A failure to remove any illegal,
nonconforming or unused sign and subsequent failure by
the Building Inspector to duly notify the
owner/user/property owner of the provisions of this Section
shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of any violations
of this Ordinance, nor shall such inaction be deemed to
constitute a determination that any such sign is legal, in
conformity with this Ordinance or to be given any special
status. If, through administrative neglect or inaction, any
owner/user/property owner is not notified of the
requirements of this Ordinance within the time frames
herein set forth, but is later so notified, said
owner/user/property owner shall take action to either
correct the illegality, nonconformity or nonuse or shall
cause the sign to be removed within twenty (20) days of
such notification.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-11
9.1.10 Construction, Lighting, and Maintenance Standards
a. General Regulations
(1) All signs and their locations shall comply with the provisions of
the Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance, the Standard Building
Code, the National Electrical Code, current edition, and additional
standards hereinafter set forth.
(2) Signs shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to
obstruct any fire escape, required exit way, window or door
opening used as a means of egress to prevent free passage from
one part of a room to another part thereof or access thereto.
(3) Signs shall not be attached in any form, shape or manner which
will interfere with any opening required for ventilation, except that
such a sign may be erected in front of and may cover transom
windows when not in violation of the provisions of the Building or
Fire Prevention Codes.
(4) The height of the signs shall in no case exceed the height
restrictions for buildings in that zoning district.
(5) In no case shall existing supports, such as utility poles or traffic
control sign supports, be utilized for any sign.
(6) All signs shall maintain clearances from overhead electrical
connectors as follows:
(a) Under six hundred (600) volt, insulated - 3 feet
(b) Under six hundred (600) volt, bare - 5 feet
(c) Six hundred one (601) volt to twenty-five hundred (2,500)
volt - 5 feet
(d) Two thousand five hundred one (2,501) volt to nine
thousand (9,000) volt - 6 feet
(e) Nine thousand one (9,001) volt to twenty-five thousand
(25,000) volt - 9 feet
(f) Twenty-five thousand one (25,001) volt to seventy-five
(75) KV - 10 feet
(g) Above seventy-five (75) KV - 12 feet
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-12
(7) Signs shall not be suspended by chains or other devices that will
allow the sign to swing, due to wind action. Signs shall be
anchored to prevent any lateral movement that could cause wear
on supporting members or connections.
(8) Supports and braces shall be an integral part of the sign design.
Angle irons, chains, or wires used for supports or braces shall be
hidden from public view to the extent technically feasible.
(9) Freestanding signs shall be self-supporting structures and be
permanently attached to sufficient foundations.
(10) Attached business signs must derive their principle and total
support from the building to which they are attached.
(11) All signs shall be constructed to withstand wind loads of 30
pounds per square foot on the largest face of the sign and structure.
(12) In no case shall the existing ground elevation be built up in order
to have a taller sign.
b. Electrical Standards
(1) Electrical service to on-premise free-standing signs shall be
concealed whenever possible.
(2) Electrical signs shall be marked with input amperes at full load.
(3) Each illuminated and/or electrical sign shall bear thereon a label or
certification visible from the ground, from the Underwriter's
Laboratories, Inc., or any other approved independent electrical
inspection agency qualified to make such certification or have
written approval from the local Electrical Inspector.
(4) No artificial light, of whatever type or nature used in conjunction
with or the lighting of any sign, shall be constructed as to direct or
reflect any artificial light onto any structure or to constitute a
hazard to the safe and efficient operation of vehicles upon a street
or highway.
(5) Flashing signs, flashing or moving lights on signs, and reflective
pennants are prohibited, except that both signs that exhibit time,
temperature, date or other similar information and search lights
permitted by the Building Inspector as an attention getting device
are permitted.
(6) In no case shall electrical wiring, extension cords, or any other
means of power be laid on the ground or parking areas.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-13
c. Maintenance Standards
(1) Every sign, including, but not limited to those signs for which
permits are required, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and
good structural condition at all times, including replacement of
defective parts (except when a weathered or natural surface is
intended), repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the
maintenance of such sign.
(2) The ground area around any freestanding sign shall be kept free
and clean of weeds, trash and other debris.
9.1.11 Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
a. Right to Appeal
(1) Except for instances relating to signs located or proposed to be
located on public property, which is within the jurisdiction of the
Mayor and Board of Alderman, any person who has been ordered
by the Building Inspector for the removal of any sign, or any
person whose application for a permit for a sign has been refused,
may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals by serving written
notice to the Building Inspector. Such appeals to the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall be on forms provided by the Building
Inspector and upon filing of a notice of appeal, the Building
Inspector shall take no further action with regard to the sign
involved until the final decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals
has been rendered, unless the Building Inspector finds by reason of
condition, location or nature of the sign involved presents an
immediate and serious danger to the public, in which case he shall
proceed immediately as provided herein.
(2) Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant variances
concerning the height and setback of signs, the period for removal
of nonconforming signs, the maximum sign area, the maximum
number of signs, the removal of prohibited signs, and such others
as provided for herein only if the following determinations have
been made:
(a) The appeal falls within the jurisdiction of the Board.
(b) That all parties directly in interest have been notified of the
proceedings.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-14
(c) That the granting of the appeal would not have the effect of
applying sign standards from a less restrictive zone.
(d) That the property cannot be reasonably used in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(e) That the difficulty complained of is unique to the property
in question and is not common to all properties similarly
situated.
9.1.12 Permits - No sign shall be erected, altered, or relocated without a building permit
acquired subject to the following:
a. The permit application shall contain the location of the sign structure, the
name and address of the sign owner and sign erection, a drawing showing
the design, location, materials and colors of the sign.
b. Required electrical permits shall be obtained prior to submission for a
building permit.
c. A building permit for a sign shall become null and void if the sign has not
been completed within six (6) months of the date of the permit or the sign
varies in any respect from the approved design and location.
d. Normal sign maintenance to prolong the life of the sign shall not require a
permit.
e. Permits issued to non-profit organizations will not be charged a fee.
9.2. Regulations Governing Home Occupations - The standards set forth below shall be
used by the Board of Zoning Appeals in evaluating an application for a home occupation.
In evaluating an application for home occupation, the Board of Zoning Appeals must
ensure the following: (1) that the public interest has been adequately protected; (2) that
no change in the character of the surrounding neighborhood will occur as a result of the
home occupation; (3) that no excessive noise, heat, increased traffic and parking and
odor or hazard will result from the home occupation; (4) that the proposed home
occupation will not place a strain or burden on existing public facilities and services,
particularly sewer and water service, street improvements, fire and police protection; (5)
that the home occupation cannot be located in a more appropriate zoning district as a use
permitted by right thereby ensuring protection to similar uses located in other appropriate
districts.
9.2.1. Performance Standards - Home occupations are permitted as an incidental and
subordinate use in specified residential districts when the applicant submits to the
Board of Zoning Appeals satisfactory evidence of compliance with all of the
following conditions:
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-15
a. Employees - A home occupation shall be conducted solely by the resident
occupants in their residence;
b. Incidental and Subordinate Uses - The applicant must clearly demonstrate
to the Board of Zoning Appeals that the home occupation is incidental and
subordinate to its use for residential purposes. To ensure the incidental
and subordinate character, the home occupation shall be limited to fifteen
(15) percent of the total area of the first floor of the residence in R-1, but
no more than three hundred (300) square feet per dwelling unit.
c. Appearance - In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or
the occupations within the residence be conducted in a manner which
would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by
the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission
of sounds, noises or vibrations.
d. Accessory Buildings - No building or space outside the principle building
shall be used for home occupation purposes.
e. Traffic - The additional parking generated by the home occupation shall
take place on the site and the use may increase vehicular traffic flow and
parking by no more than one (1) additional vehicle at a time. The
occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of
materials to or from the premises.
f. Nuisance Controls - Home occupations shall not generate traffic, parking
noise, vibrations, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference beyond
what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district.
g. Utilities - The public utility cost (water, sewer, electricity, solid waste
collection, etc.) incurred in the operation of the home occupation shall not
exceed what is normal to the use of the property for residential purposes.
h. Signs - only one sign shall be allowed. It may indicate the name of the
occupant and/or the name of the home occupation. It shall not exceed one
(1) square foot in area, shall be non-illuminated and attached flat to the
main structure or visible through a window.
9.2.2. Permitted Home Occupations - Home occupations include, but are not necessarily
limited to the following provided all of the conditions and standards as set forth
herein can be met by the applicant, and subject to the approval of the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
a. Artist and Sculptors
b. Authors, Composers, and Musicians
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-16
c. Dressmakers, seamstress and tailors
d. Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving lapidary work
e. Office facility of a rabbi, minister or priest
f. Office facility of a salesperson, sales representative or manufactures
representative provided that no retail or wholesale transactions are made
on the premises
9.2.3. Home Occupations Specifically Prohibited - The following are business activities
that are specifically prohibited as home occupations.
a. Antique shop
b. Barber Shop
c. Beauty Shop
d. Funeral Chapel or Funeral Home
e. Medical or Dental Clinic or Hospital
f. Renting of trailers
g. Restaurant
h. Stable or kennel
i. Tourist home
j. Veterinary clinic or hospital
k. Gun sales or repair
9.2.4. Business License and Certificate of Occupancy - If the special use permit for a
home occupation is approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals, that applicant shall
secure a license to operate the home occupation from the Office of City Clerk.
Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the Building Inspector will
insure that the proper business license has been issued for the home occupation
and that all requirements of the character and code or ordinance of the City of
Camden are complied with prior to the start of actual operations. The business
license and certificate of occupancy shall be renewed annually to insure
compliance with applicable municipal codes as well as laws of the State of
Tennessee.
9.3. Regulations Regarding Boarders, Tourist and Renting of Rooms.
9.3.1 Specific Standards The standards set forth below shall be used by the Board of
Zoning Appeals in evaluating an application to allow for Boarders, Tourists or the
Renting of Rooms. The taking of Boarders, Tourists and the Renting of Rooms is
a use permitted on appeal specific to each district by the Board of Zoning appeals
and shall be considered as an incidental and subordinate use in the district in
which it is allowed. Prior to granting a permit for the taking of boarders, tourists
or the leasing of rooms the Board of Zoning Appeals shall ensure that the
following conditions have been met.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
IX-17
a. A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space for each room or unit
occupied by the boarder, roomer or tourist shall be provided in addition to
any residential parking on the premises.
b. The outside appearance of the dwelling unit shall maintain conformance
with the general character of the neighborhood.
c. The number of rooms or units used for occupancy by boarders, roomers or
tourists shall not exceed three (3) units or rooms per dwelling.
d. All area and yard requirements of the district must be met.
e. The proposed use of the dwelling shall not be advertised by the display of
goods or signs on the lot on which the proposed use is located.
f. Proprietors of the proposed uses enumerated in this section shall be
residents of the dwelling unit in which the use is located.
9.3.2. Criteria for Review - Prior to the approval of any use on appeal, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall ensure the requested use adheres to the following criteria:
a. The use requested on appeal is to be located on a route designated as
either an Arterial or Collector Street on the official Major Road Plan for
Camden.
b. All area, yard and density and parking requirements shall be met.
c. A site plan of the use shall be submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
d. If approved, all modifications requested by the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit. The site plan
shall be maintained in the permanent files of the Town of Camden.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
X-1
ARTICLE X
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
10.1. Lot of Record - Where the owner of a lot of official record at the time of the adoption of
this ordinance does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the yard or other
requirements of this ordinance, an application may be submitted to the Board of Zoning
Appeals for a variance from the terms of this ordinance, in accordance with Article XV.
Permission to use such lots may be granted, however, providing that the yards and other
requirements of the district are compiled with as closely as is possible in the opinion of
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
10.1.1. Minimum Size - In no case shall the Board of Zoning Appeals permit a residence
to be erected on a lot whose width at the building line is less than sixty (60) feet
and whose total lot area is less than three thousand five hundred (3500) square
feet.
10.1.2. Adjoining Substandard Lots of Record - Where two or more substandard lots of
record with a continuous frontage are under the same ownership, or where a
substandard lot of record has continuous frontage with a larger tract under the
same ownership, such lots shall be combined to form one or more building sites
meeting the minimum requirements of the district in which they are located.
10.2. Setback Line - The setback requirements of this ordinance for dwellings shall not apply
to any lot where the average depth of existing setbacks on the developed lots located
within one hundred (l00) feet on each side of such lot is less than the minimum required
front yard depth. In such cases, the front yard setback may be less than required but not
less than the average of the existing depth for front yards on developed lots within one
hundred feet. In residential districts, however, the setback shall in no case be less than
twenty (20) feet from the center line of the streets.
10.3. Exceptions on Height Limits - The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to
church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy,
monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, windmills, chimneys,
smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers, masts and aerials.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
XI-1
ARTICLE XI
ENFORCEMENT
11.1. Enforcing Officer - The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced
by a building inspector, appointed by the chief legislative body, who shall have the power
to make inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the
enforcement of this ordinance.
11.2. Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy - It shall be unlawful to commence
the excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any buildings, including
accessory buildings, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building until the
inspector has issued a building permit for such work.
(a) Issuance of a Building Permit In applying to the building inspector for a building
permit, the applicant shall submit a dimensioned sketch or scale plan indicating
the shape, size and location of the lot to be built upon; the shape, size, height, and
location of all buildings to be erected, altered, or moved, and of any building
already on the lot. He shall also state the existing and intended use of all such
buildings and supply such other information as may be required by the building
inspector for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being
observed. If the proposed excavation, filling or construction, as set forth in the
application, is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and other
ordinances of the Town of Camden then in force, the building inspector shall
issue a building permit for such excavation or construction upon payment of the
required fee. If a building permit is refused, the building inspector shall state
such refusal in writing with the cause. Building permits must be used within six
(6) months after permit is issued. If no substantial progress on construction has
been made six (6) months after the permit is issued, the permit is considered to be
expired.
(b) Certificate of Occupancy. Upon the completion of the construction or alteration
of a building for which permit has been granted, application shall be made to the
building inspector for a certificate of occupancy. Within three (3) days of such
application, the building inspector shall make a final inspection of the property in
question and shall issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or structure is
found to conform to the provisions of this ordinance and the statements made in
the application for the building permit. If such certificate is refused, the building
inspector shall state such refusal in writing, with the cause. No land or building
hereafter erected or altered in its use shall be used until such a certificate of
occupancy has been granted.
11.3. Penalties - Any person violating any provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not less than two dollars ($2) nor more
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
XI-2
than fifty dollars ($50) for each offense. Each day such violation shall continue
constitutes a separate offense.
11.4. Remedies - In case any building, structure or land is used, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this ordinance, the
building inspector or any other appropriate authority, or any adjacent or neighboring
property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies
may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent
the occupancy or use of such building.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
XII-1
ARTICLE XII
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
12.1 Purpose - The Board of Zoning Appeals is created as an appellate board to review:
actions of the Building Inspector; applications for Uses Permitted on Appeal and requests
for Variances. In all cases the actions of the Board of Zoning Appeals for the City of
Camden shall be governed as set forth below.
12.2. Creation and Appointment - A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established in
accordance with Section 13-7-205 of the Tennessee Code Annotated. The Board of
Zoning Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members, not less than one (1) of whom may
be a member of the Camden Municipal Planning Commission appointed by the chief
executive officer of the town, and confirmed by a majority vote of the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen. The term of membership shall be three (3) years, except that the initial
individual appointments to the Board shall be terms of one (1), two (2), and three (3)
years, respectively. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term by appointment by
the chief executive officer and confirmation by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
12.3. Procedure
a. Meetings Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the
chairman, and at such other times as the board may determine. The board shall
adopt rules of procedure and shall keep records of applications and action
thereon, which shall be a public record. All meetings shall be open to the public
with advance notice of 7 days in a local newspaper.
b. Decisions In any decision made by the Board on a variance, the Board shall
indicate the specific section of this Ordinance under which the variance is being
considered, and shall state its finding beyond such generalities as "in the interest
of public health, safety and general welfare, and in cases pertaining to hardship,
shall specifically identify the hardship warranting such action by the Board.
c. Process At the public hearing of the case before the Board, the appellant shall
appear in his own behalf or be represented by counsel or agent. The appellants
side of the case shall be heard first and those in objection shall follow. To
maintain orderly procedure, Roberts Rules of Order shall govern all meetings
12.4. Appeals - An appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person, firm
or corporation aggrieved, or by any governmental officer, department, board or bureau
affected by any decision of the building inspector based in whole or in part upon the
provisions of this ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Board of
Zoning Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Building
Inspector shall transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed was taken. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, giving public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
XII-2
decide the same within fifteen (l5) days from the date of the hearing. Upon the hearing
any person or party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or attorney.
12.5. Powers - The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers:
a. Administrative Review
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or change made by the
building inspector or other administrative official in the refusal, carrying
out or enforcement of any provision of this Ordinance.
(2) To permit the extension of a district for a district for a distance of not
more than twenty-five (25) feet where the boundary line of a district
divides a lot or tract held in a single ownership at the time of the passage
of this Ordinance.
(3) To interpret the Official Zoning Map where questions of designation arise.
(4) To interpret with the use of the Standard Land Use Coding Manual
whether or not a specific use falls into the categories listed in the
Commercial and Industrial district sections.
b. Variance - To hear and decide applications for variance from the terms of this
Ordinance, but only where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of specific piece of property which at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance was a lot of record; or where, by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or conditions of a piece
of property the strict application of the provisions of the ordinance would result in
exceptional difficulties or the exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of
such property, provided that such relief may be granted without the substantial
detriment to the public and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose
of this Ordinance. Financial disadvantage to the property owner is no proof of
hardship within the purpose of zoning and as further explained below.
The Board shall not grant a variance unless it makes findings based upon
evidence presented to it as follows:
(1) The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographic conditions of
the specific property involved would result in a particular hardship upon
the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict
application of this Ordinance were carried out.
(2) The conditions upon which the petition for variance is based would not be
applicable, generally, to other property within the same district.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
XII-3
(3) The variance will not authorize activities in a zoning district other than
those permitted by this Ordinance.
(4) Financial returns alone shall not be considered basis for granting a
variance.
(5) The alleged difficulty or hardships has not been created by any person
having an interest in the property after the effective date of this ordinance.
(6) That granting the variance requested will not confer on this applicant any
special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other lands, structures,
or building in the same district.
(7) The variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the
reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
(8) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare
or injurious to other property or improvements in the area in which
property is located.
(9) The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air
to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion in the public
streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety, or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the area.
(10) The variance is not based on the fact of non-conforming use of
neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district.
(11) Under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeals grant a variance to
allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the
district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the
terms of this Ordinance in said district.
c. Conditions and Restrictions by the Board The Board may impose such conditions
and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to
reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variation upon surrounding
property and better carry out the general intent of this Ordinance.
d. Special Exceptions - Allow, in accordance with the following procedure, the uses
designated as Uses Permitted on Appeal provided that prior to the establishment
of any use permitted on appeal by the Board of Zoning Appeals, the applicant
shall submit a site plan in accordance with Article III, Section 3.17, showing the
development concept for the tract with the Board of Zoning Appeals having the
right to refer the site plan to the Planning Commission for a review and
recommendation, but shall approve or deny the application within thirty (30) days
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
XII-4
of submission to the Board unless the applicant allows additional time for action
and that all provisions set forth in the appropriate zoning district have been met.
e. Restrictions - The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have the power to permit a
use prohibited by this ordinance, have the power to expand a non conforming use
or have the power to subdivide land.
12.7. Rules of the Board
The Board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings. Such rules shall at a
minimum require that:
a. The presence of 3 members shall constitute a quorum and the concurring vote of
at least a majority of the members present shall be necessary to deny or grant any
application before the Board.
b. The Board shall elect from its members its own Chairman and Vice-Chairman and
Secretary who shall serve for 1 year and may upon election serve succeeding
terms.
c. Any member of the Board who shall have direct or indirect interest in any
property which is the subject matter of, or affected by a decision of the Board
shall be disqualified from participating in the discussion, decision, and
proceedings of the Board in connection therewith. The burden of revealing any
such conflict rests with individual members of the Board. Failure to reveal any
such conflict shall constitute grounds for removal from the Board.
12.8. Assistance to the Board of Zoning Appeals
a. Staff The Board may call upon any other office or agency of the city government
for information in the performance of its duties and it shall be the duty of such
other agencies to render such information to the Board as may be reasonably
required.
b. Other Boards or Commissions Other Boards or Commissions, other than the City
Board, shall be permitted to submit an advisory opinion on any matter before the
Board and such opinion shall be made part of the record of such public hearing.
c. Right to Entry Upon Land The Board, its members and employees, in the
performance of its work, may enter upon any land within its jurisdiction and make
examinations and surveys and place or remove public notices as required by this
Ordinance.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
XIII - 1
ARTICLE XIII
AMENDMENT
13.1. Zoning Amendment Petition - The Board of Mayor and Alderman, of Camden,
Tennessee, may amend the regulations, restrictions, boundaries, or any provision of this
ordinance. Any member of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may introduce such
amendment, or any official, board or any other person may present a petition to the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen requesting an amendment or amendments to this ordinance.
13.2. Planning Commission Review - No amendment shall become effective until it is first
submitted to and approved or disapproved by the Camden Municipal Planning
Commission. If the proposed amendment is disapproved by the planning commission, it
shall require the favorable vote of a majority of the entire membership of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen to make such amendment effective. If the Camden Municipal
Planning Commission does not approve or disapprove an amendment which has been
submitted for their review within thirty (30) days after such submission, the failure to act
on such amendment shall be deemed approval.
13.3. Public Hearing on Proposed Amendment - Upon the introduction of any amendment to
this ordinance or upon the receipt of a petition to amend this ordinance, the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen shall publish a notice of such request for an amendment, together
with the time set for hearing by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on the requested
change. Said notice shall be published in some newspaper of general circulation in the
Town of Camden, Tennessee. Such hearing by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall
take place not sooner than fifteen (l5) days after the date of publication of notice of such
hearing shall be collected by the Town of Camden from any party or parties entering a
petition for amendment.
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
XIV - 1
ARTICLE XIV
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
14.1. Conflict with other Ordinances - In case of conflict between this ordinance or any part
thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of the Town of
Camden, Tennessee, the most restrictive shall in all cases apply.
14.2. Validity - If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance shall be held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not
affect any other section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance which is not of
itself invalid or unconstitutional.
14.3. Effective Date - This ordinance shall take effect and be in force immediately after
adoption, the public welfare requiring it.
Approved and Certified by the Planning Commission.
Secretary of Planning Commission
Date of Public Hearing _________________
Passed First Reading _________________
Passed Second Reading _________________
Mayor
Attest:
Town Recorder
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
XIV - 2
14.4. Readoption Date
Approved and Certified by the Planning Commission.
Secretary of Planning Commission
Date of Public Hearing _________________
Passed First Reading _________________
Passed Second Reading _________________
Mayor
Attest:
Town Recorder
Camden Municipal Zoning Ordinance
A - 1
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A1 Building Permit
APPENDIX A2 Petition of Change or Relief
APPENDIX A3 Site Plan Certificates
A-2
TOWN OF CAMDEN, TENNESSEE
APPLICATION FOR A BUILDING PERMIT
Permit No. ______________________ Date ___________________________
Owners Name: __________________________________________________________________
Address: _______________________________________________________________________
Name of Subdivision: _____________________________ Lot Number ___________________
Lot Size: ________ ft x ________ ft Building Size ________ ft x ________ ft
Type of Construction Residential _____ Commercial _____ Industrial _____ Addition
_____ Accessory _____ Garage _____ Demolition _____ Move _____ Other _________
Purpose of Construction: New Building _____ Repair or Addition to Existing Structure ______
Construction Material: Frame _____ Brick Veneer ____ Masonry ____ Concrete Block ____
Steel Beam/Metal ____ Other _______________________________
Utilities: Public Water (yes no) Public Sewer (yes no) Electricity (yes no) Gas (yes no)
Heating: Gas ____ Oil ____ Electricity ____ Coal ____ Wood ____ Other ________________
Flood Elevation (if applicable) _____________________________________________________
I certify that the information shown is correct and that if a permit is granted, I hereby agree to
abide by all the requirements of the Town's Building Code, Zoning Law and other Town Laws
affecting the proposed structure. It is understood that off-street parking is to be provided by the
applicant.
____________________________ _________________________________
Signature of Applicant Owner, Contract, Architect, Agent
____________________________ _________________________________
Address Telephone Number
This application approved on _________________________ for construction
cost of _____________________ amount of $____________.
________________________________
Building Inspector
A-3
PETITION FOR CHANGE OR RELIEF UNDER THE MUNICIPAL ZONING
ORDINANCE OR MAP OF THE TOWN OF CAMDEN
1. Applicant Name _______________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________
2. Owner Name _______________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________
3. Nature of Petition Rezoning ______ Use on Appeal ______ Variance __________
Ordinance Amendment ______ Ordinance Interpretation ___________
3. If requesting a Rezoning fill out the following section:
a. Street Address: ________________________________________________________
b. Tax Map Number _________ Parcel Number ________ Area in Acres __________
c. Vicinity Roads ________________________________________________________
d. Present Zoning Classification _____________________________________________
e. Requested Zoning Classification __________________________________________
f. Available Utilities Water (yes) (no), Sewer (yes) (no), Electric (yes)
(no)
g. Attach Map of affected property
4. If requesting a Use on Appeal fill out the following section:
a. Property address affected ________________________________________________
b. Present Zoning ________________________________________________________
c. Reason for request _____________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
d. Attach Site Plan of existing or proposed structure for the use on appeal
5. Any other request fill out the following section:
a. Present Zoning: _______________________________________________________
b. Reason for request: _____________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
I hereby certify that the statements made here in by me herein and the maps other accompanying
data submitted herewith are true and correct. I will be responsible for the cost of publishing and
filing this application.
______________________________________
A-4
Signature of Applicant
SITE PLAN CERTIFICATES
CERTIFICATE OF ACCURACY OF ENGINEERING AND DESIGN
I, _______________________________________, a professional Architect, Engineer, Surveyor
do hereby certify that the plans, engineering and designs governing the construction this site plan
are true and correct, and conform to the requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of Town
of Camden, Tennessee.
_________________ ____________________________
Date Signature
______________________________________________________________________________
PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
I, ______________________________________, do hereby certify that the Camden Municipal
Planning Commission has approved this site plan.
__________________
(Date)
_____________________________
Secretary, Camden Municipal
Planning Commission

CAMDEN,
TENNESSEE
MUNICIPAL SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
MUNICIPAL SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
CAMDEN, TENNESSEE
AS AMENDED 2007
As Amended January, 1996
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CAMDEN, TENNESSEE
Prepared
by the
Camden Municipal Planning Commission
Don King, Chairman
Elvin Johnson, Mayor
Lindsey Park
John G. Robertson
Jim Medlin
Assisted by the
Department of Economic and Community Development
Local Planning Assistance Office
Jackson, Tennessee
July, 1985
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
ARTICLE I PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION AND DEFINITIONS I-1
A. Purpose I-1
B. Authority I-1
C. Jurisdiction I-1
D. Definitions I-2
ARTICLE II PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL II-1
A. General II-1
B. Major Subdivision - Preliminary Sketch Plat II-2
C. Major Subdivision - Final Plat II-3
D. Minor Subdivision II-5
E. Resubdivision of Land II-8
F. Vacation of Plats II-9
ARTICLE III GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM
STANDARDS OF DESIGN III-1
A., Streets III-1
B. Blocks III-5
C. Lots III-5
D. Public Use and Service Areas III-7
E. Suitability of the Land III-7
F. Large Tracts of Parcels III-8
G. Multi-Family and Townhouse Developments III-8
H. Variances III-10
I. Zoning or Other Regulations III-10
ARTICLE IV DEVELOPMENT PREREQUISITE TO FINAL APPROVAL IV-1
A. Required Improvements IV-1
B. Guarantee in Lieu of Completed Improvements IV-6
ARTICLE V ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS V-1
A. Enforcement V-1
B. Penalties V-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS CONT.
PAGE
ARTICLE VI VARIANCES AND AMENDMENTS VI-1
A. Variances VI-1
B. Amendments VI-1
ARTICLE VII LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS VII-1
A. Separability VII-1
B. Conflict With Other Regulations VII-1
C. Adoption and Effective Date VII-1
APPENDICES A-1
Subdivision Record - Preliminary Plat A-2
Subdivision Record - Final Plat A-4
Forms For Final Plat Certifications A-6
Suggested Steps for a Developer of a Subdivision A-8
Answer to Questions Often Asked about Subdivision Regulations A-9
Camden Subdivision Regulations I-1
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
OF
CAMDEN, TENNESSEE MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
(Hereafter referred to as the planning commission)
ARTICLE I
PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION AND DEFINITIONS
A. Purpose
Land subdivision is the first step in the process of community development. Once land
has been cut into streets, lots and blocks, and publicly recorded, the correction of defects
is costly and difficult. Subdivision of land sooner or later becomes a public
responsibility, in that roads and streets must be maintained and various public services
customary to urban areas must be provided. The welfare of the entire community is
thereby affected in many important respects. It is therefore to the interest of the public,
the developer and the future owners that subdivisions be conceived, designed and
developed in accordance with sound rules and proper minimum standards.
The following subdivision standards guiding the planning commission are designed to
provide for the harmonious development of the area; to secure a coordinated layout and
adequate provision for traffic and also to secure adequate provision for light, air,
recreation, transportation, water, drainage, sewer, and other sanitary facilities.
B. Authority
These subdivision regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Sections 13-3-
401 through 13-3-411, 13-4-301 through 13-4-309 of the Tennessee Code Annotated.
The planning commission has fulfilled the requirements set forth in these acts as
prerequisite to the adoption of such regulations, having filed a certified copy of the Major
Street and Road Plan in the office of the Register of Benton County, Tennessee.
C. Jurisdiction
These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within the corporate limits of
Camden and within the Camden Planning region as established by resolution of the
Tennessee State Planning Office as now or hereafter established.
Any owner of land within this area wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the planning
commission a plat of the subdivision according to the procedures outlined in Article II
which plat shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in Article III.
Improvements shall be installed as required by Article IV of these standards.
Camden Subdivision Regulations I-2
D. Definitions
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to eliminate ambiguity by providing a full
definition of certain words and phrases which are used in these regulations.
Definition of Words
For the purposes of these regulations and in order to carry out the provisions and
intentions as set forth herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and
interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense include the future
tenses; words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number
include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation as
well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel"; the word
"building" includes the word "structure"; and the terms "shall" and "will" are always
mandatory and not directory, and the word "may" is permissive.
The following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be
interpreted as such throughout these regulations. Terms not herein defined shall have the
meaning customarily assigned to them.
Block: A surface land area which is separated and distinguished from other surface land
areas by visible physical boundaries such as streets, railroads, rivers, or other physical
barriers.
Block Number: The official number or letter assigned to a block for identification
purposes.
Bond: Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property,
or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Planning Commission.
Buildable Area of a Lot: That portion of a lot bounded by the required rear and side
yards and the building setback line.
Building Setback Line: A line in the interior of a lot which is generally parallel to, and a
specified distance from, the street right-of-way line or lines; which creates a space
between such lines in which no building shall be placed.
Building: Any enclosed structure intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons,
animals, or chattel.
Dedication: The setting aside of land and/or improvements for a particular use.
Developer: An individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity or agent thereof
which undertakes the activities covered by these regulations, In as mush as the
subdivision plan drawings are merely a necessary means to the end of assuring
satisfactory development, the term "developer" includes "Subdivider", "owner" or
Camden Subdivision Regulations I-3
"builder" even though the persons and their precise interests may vary at different project
stages.
Easement: The right to use another person's property but only for a limited and
specifically named purpose, the owner generally continues to make use of such land since
he has given up only certain, and not all, ownership rights.
Easement Area: A strip of land over, under, or through which an easement has been
granted.
Engineer: A qualified Civil Engineer registered and currently licensed to practice
engineering in the State of Tennessee.
Floodplain: An area of a river or stream, together with appropriate adjacent land,
established to insure adequate and safe drainage.
Floodway: The stream channel and the portion of the adjacent floodplain which must be
reserved solely for the passage of floodwaters to prevent an increase in flood heights of
more than one (1)foot above natural or predevelopment flood levels.
Frontage: All property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing
or terminating) measured along the line of the street; or if the street is deadened, then all
of the property abutting one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the
street.
Health Department: Benton County Health Department.
Improvements: Physical changes made to raw land and structures on or under the land
surface in order to make the land usable for man's activities. Typical improvements in
these regulations would include but not be limited to grading, street pavement, curbs,
gutters, drainage ditches, storm and sanitary sewers, street name signs, and street trees.
Individual Sewage Treatment Facility: A sewage disposal system developed to function
on an individual lot basis. A septic tank is a type of individual sewage treatment facility.
Lot: A parcel of land which is or may be occupied by a building and its accessory
building or use customarily incidental thereto, together with such yards or open spaces
within the lot lines as may be required by these regulations.
Lot Corner: A lot of which at least two (2) adjoining sides abut on a street, provided that
the interior angle at the intersection of two such sides is less than one hundred thirty-five
(135) degrees.
Lot Area: The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line measured in
the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
Camden Subdivision Regulations I-4
Lot Frontage: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street excluding
the side dimensions of a corner lot.
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot Number: The official number assigned to a lot for identification purposes.
Lot Width: The width of a lot at the building setback line measured at right angles to its
depth.
Major Street Plan: The official plan adopted by the Camden Municipal-Regional
Planning Commission designating types and locations of streets within the corporate
limits and planning region.
Major Subdivision - All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions including but
not limited to subdivisions of more than 4 lots or subdivisions of any size requiring any
new or improved road, the extension of utilities, or the creation of any public or private
drainage or other improvements.
Minor Subdivision - Any subdivision of four (4) or less lots fronting on an existing
public way; not involving requiring any new or improved road, any new or improved
public way, the extension of utilities, or the creation of any public or private drainage or
other improvements; and not in conflict with any provision of the adoption general plan,
any Major Road Plan, Zoning Ordinance or these regulations.
Monuments: Markers placed on or in the land.
Percolation Test: An examination of subsoil used in determining the acceptability of the
site and the design of the subsurface disposal system.
Planning Commission: The Municipal-Regional Planning Commission of Camden,
Tennessee.
Plat: A map, drawing or chart upon which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is
drawn.
Plat, Final: The material which comprises the second and last "official" submission of a
subdivision scheme to the Planning Commission, and which consists of an applied
construction drawing of the "as-Built" physical improvements.
Plat, Preliminary: The material which comprises the first "official" submission of a
subdivision scheme to the Planning Commission, and which consists of an application, a
Camden Subdivision Regulations I-5
draft copy of any protective covenants, the subdivision design drawings, and construction
drawings of the proposed improvements.
Protective Covenants: Contracts between the land subdivide and lot purchaser
expressing agreement covering use of the land.
Public Sewer System: A central sewer system, owned, operated and maintained by a
municipality, county, or utility district.
Public Hearing: A meeting for the review of a matter where opinions may be presented
by the public. These hearings may take place during the regular Planning Commission
meetings and are held according to state laws.
Public Uses: Public parks, schools, and administrative, cultural, and service buildings,
not including public land or buildings devoted solely to storage and maintenance of
equipment and material.
Public Utility: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly
authorized to furnish under state or municipal regulations to the public electricity, gas,
steam, communications, telegraph, transportation, water, or sewer.
Recreational Facilities: Country clubs, riding stables, golf courses, and other similar
recreational areas and facilities including swimming pools.
Regional Planning Commission: Any regional planning commission established under
authority granted by Section 13-1-106 Tennessee Code Annotated, and includes any
municipal planning commission designated by the State Planning office as the regional
planning commission of a planning region composed of the territory of a single
municipality together with the territory adjoining but outside of such municipality, no
part of which is more than five (5) miles beyond the limits of such municipality.
Register of Deeds: Benton County Register of Deeds.
Reserve Strip: A portion of land set aside to prevent and prohibit access to adjoining
property or public thoroughfare.
Right-Of-Way: A dedication of land to be used generally for streets, alleys, or other
public uses wherein the owner gives up all his rights to the property as long as it is being
used for the dedicated purposes. Also, a land measurement term meaning the distance
between lot property lines which generally contain not only the street pavement but also
the sidewalks, grass area, and utilities.
Road: For the purpose of these regulations, "road" shall be defined the same as "street".
Roadway: The portion of the street right-of-way which contains the street pavement,
curb, and gutter, and is used primarily as a channel for vehicular movement and
Camden Subdivision Regulations I-6
secondarily as a drainage channel for storm water. In these regulations where curbs are
required, the pavement is measured from face to face of the curbs; without curbs, it is the
measurement of the wearing surface.
Sanitary Sewer System: A public or community sewage disposal system of a type
approved by the State Department of Public Health.
Secretary: The person designated by the Planning Commission as it secretary.
Setback: The distance required to obtain the minimum front, side, and rear yards.
Street: A general term used to describe a right-of-way which provides a channel for
vehicular and pedestrian movement between certain points in the community, which may
provide for vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it, and which may
also provide space for the location of underground and above ground utilities.
a. Arterial Street - A major street used primarily for heavy through traffic which will
be so designated on the Camden Major Road Plan.
b. Collector Street - A street designed to carry traffic from minor streets to the major
road system including the principal entrance streets to a residential development
and the streets for major circulation within such a development. Collector streets
are usually designated as such on the Camden Major Road Plan.
c. Cul-de-sac or Dead End Street - A local street with only one outlet for which
there are no plans for extension and need for extension.
d. Marginal Access Street - A minor street which is constructed parallel and adjacent
to an arterial street for the purpose of providing access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
e. Minor Residential or Local Street - A neighborhood or commercial area street
used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
f. Alley - A minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
Street Furniture: Any improvements placed within the street right-of-way, such as utility
poles, street sighs, etc.
Street Grade: The officially established grade of the street upon which a lot fronts. If
there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at the midpoint of
the lot shall be taken as the street grade.
Street Line: The legal line between street right-of-way and abutting property.
Camden Subdivision Regulations I-7
Street Sign: The sign designating the official name of the street.
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, sites, or
other divisions requiring new street or utility construction, or any division of five (5)
acres or less for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building
development, and includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, relates to
the process of resubdividing or to the land or area subdivided.
Major Subdivision - All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions including but
not limited to subdivisions of more than 4 lots or subdivisions of any size requiring any
new or improved road, the extension of utilities, or the creation of any public or private
drainage or other improvements.
Minor Subdivision - Any subdivision of four (4) or less lots fronting on an existing
public way; not involving requiring any new or improved road, any new or improved
public way, the extension of utilities, or the creation of any public or private drainage or
other improvements; and not in conflict with any provision of the adoption general plan,
any Major Road Plan, Zoning Ordinance or these regulations.
Surveyor: A qualified surveyor registered and currently licensed to practice surveying in
the State of Tennessee.
Easement, Travel. The right granted by the owner of land to another party by deed or
prescription permanently recorded into perpetuity, to allow access across one parcel of
land to another. Easements for the purpose of access as further defined in Tennessee
Code Annotated 13-4-308 for areas in the Town.
Unit: A subsection of a total subdivision developed as a complete entity.
Use: The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended,
or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its
equivalent shall not be deemed to include any non-conforming use.
Way: A street or alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for
passage of persons or vehicles.
Yard, Front: An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, extending
the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the
building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be
measured between the front line (extended) of the building and the street line.
Camden Subdivision Regulations I-8
Yard, Rear: An open (other than for permitted accessory structures) space on the same
lot with the principal building between the rear line of the building and the rear line of
the lot and extending the full width of the lot.
Yard, Side: An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building, situated
between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the
rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line.
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-1
ARTICLE II
PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL
The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision plat consist of two (2) separate steps.
The initial step is the preparation and submission to the planning commission of a preliminary
sketch plat of the proposed subdivision. The second step is the preparation and submission to the
planning commission of a final plat together with required certificates. This final plat becomes
the instrument to be recorded in the office of the county register when duly signed by the
secretary of the planning commission.
The subdivider shall consult early and informally with the planning commission and its technical
staff for advice and assistance before the preparation of the preliminary sketch plat and its formal
application for approval. This will enable him to become thoroughly familiar with these
regulations, the Major Street and Road Plan and other official plans or public improvements
which might affect the area. Such informal review should prevent unnecessary and costly
revisions.
A. General
1. Any owner of land lying within the area of jurisdiction of the planning
commission who wishes to divide such land into two (2) or more lots, sites, or
divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building
development, or who wishes to resubdivide for this purpose, shall submit a plan
of such proposed subdivision to the planning commission for approval and shall
obtain such approval prior to the filing of his subdivision plat for record. Any
such plat of subdivision shall conform to the minimum standards of design for the
subdivision of land as set forth in Article III of these standards and shall be
presented in the manner specified in the following sections of this Article. No
plat of a subdivision of land within the area of planning jurisdiction shall be filed
or recorded by the county register without the approval of the planning
commission as specified herein.
2. In order to secure review and approval by the Planning Commission of proposed
subdivision, the prospective subdivider shall, prior to the making of any street
improvements or installations of utilities, submit to the planning commission a
preliminary sketch plat as provided in Section B of this Article. On approval of
said preliminary sketch plat he may proceed with the preparation of the final plat
and other documents required in connection therewith as specified in Section C of
this Article and the improvements set forth in Article IV.
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-2
B. Major Subdivision - Preliminary Sketch Plat
1. At least 7 days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered the subdivider
shall submit to the planning commission 4 copies of a preliminary sketch plat of
the proposed subdivision drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100
feet.
2. The sketch plat which shall meet the minimum standards of design as set forth in
Article III and the general requirements for the construction of public
improvements as set forth in Article IV shall give the following information
insofar as possible:
a. The proposed subdivision's name and location, the name (s) and address
(es) of the owner or owners, and the name of the designer of the plat who
shall be an engineer or surveyor approved by the planning commission.
b. Date, approximate north point, and graphic scale.
c. The location of existing and platted property lines, existing streets,
buildings, water courses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes,
water mains, and any public utility easements or lines, the present zoning
classification, if any, on the land to be subdivided and on the adjoining
land; and the names of adjoining property owners of subdivision.
d. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, water, gas, and electricity)
showing feasible connections to the existing or any proposed utility
systems. When such connections are not practicable, any proposed
individual water supply and/or sewage disposal system must be approved
by the city or county health department.
e. The proposed street names, and the locations and dimensions of proposed
streets, alleys, easements, parks, and other open spaces reservations, lot
lines, building setback lines and utilities.
f. Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet except when
specifically not required by the planning commission.
g. The acreage of the land to be subdivided.
h. Location sketch map showing relationship of subdivision site to the area.
i. If any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flood, as defined
in Section E of Article III of these regulations, the limit of such flood shall
be shown.
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-3
3. Within 30 days after submission of the preliminary sketch plat, the planning
commission will review it and indicate approval, disapproval, or approval subject
to modification. If a plat is disapproved, reasons for such disapproval shall be
stated in writing. If approved subject to modifications, the nature of the required
modifications shall be indicated.
4. One (1) copy of the preliminary sketch plat will be retained in the planning
commission files; one (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider with any
notations at the time of approval or disapproval and the specific changes, if any,
required.
5. Failure of the planning commission to act on the preliminary sketch plat within
thirty-five (35) days after submission in the municipality or sixty (60) days after
submission inside the Planning Region but outside the municipality will be
deemed approval of this plat.
6. The approval of the preliminary sketch plat by the planning commission will not
constitute acceptance of the final plat and will not be indicated on the preliminary
sketch plat.
7. The approval of the preliminary sketch plat shall lapse unless a final plat based
thereon is submitted within 12 months from the date of such approval unless an
extension of the time is applied for and granted by the planning commission.
C. Major Subdivision - Final Plat
1. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary sketch plat as
approved; and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of
the approved preliminary sketch plat which he proposes to record and develop at
the time, provided however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of
these standards.
2. At least 7 days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered the subdivider
shall submit the original drawing in black drawing ink and 4 copies (Black and
white prints or blue line prints), together with any street profiles or other plans
that may be required by the planning commission.
The plat shall be drawn to a scale or one (1) inch equals 100 feet on sheets not
larger than 42 and 60 inches. When more than one sheet is required, an index
sheet or the same size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision with the sheets
lettered in alphabetical order as a key.
When the plat has been approved by the planning commission one (1) copy will
be returned to the subdivider, with the approval of the planning commission
certified thereon, for filing with the county register as the official plat of record.
The original tracing containing all required certifications will be returned to the
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-4
subdivider for his records and the other copy will be retained in the records of the
planning commission.
3. The planning commission shall approve or disapprove this Final Plat within
thirty-five (35) days after submission in the municipality or sixty (60) days after
submission inside the Planning Region but outside the municipality. Failure of
the planning commission to act on this Final Plat within thirty-five (35) days after
submission in the municipality or sixty (60) days after submission inside the
Planning Region but outside the municipality shall be deemed approval of it. If
the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the
records of the planning commission.
4. Approval of the final plat by the planning commission shall not constitute the
acceptance by the public of the dedication of any streets or other public way or
ground.
5. The final plat shall show:
a. The lines of all streets and roads, alley lines, lot lines, building setback
lines, lots numbered in numerical order, house numbers, reservations for
easements, and any areas to be dedicated to public use or sites for other
than residential use with notes stating their purpose and any limitations.
b. Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the
location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line,
block line and building line whether curved or straight, and including true
north point. This shall include the radius, central angle, and tangent
distance for the center line of curved streets and curved property lines that
are not the boundary of curved streets.
c. All dimensions to the nearest one hundredth (100th) to a foot and angles
to the nearest minute.
d. Location and description of monuments.
e. The names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets and the
location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property.
f. Date, title, name and location of subdivision, graphic scale, and true north
point.
g. Location sketch map showing site in relation to area.
h. If any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flood, as defined
in Section E. of Article III of these regulations, the limit of such flood
shall be shown.
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-5
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-6
6. The following certificates shall be presented with the final plat:
a. Certification showing that applicant is the land owner and dedicates
streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public use.
b. Certification by surveyor or engineer to accuracy of survey and plat and
placement of monuments.
c. Certification by the city or county health officer when individual sewage
disposal or water systems are to be installed.
d. Certification by city Engineer that the subdivider has complied with one
of the following alternatives:
(1) Installation of all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of the standards, or
(2) Posting of a security bond in sufficient amount to assure such
completion of all required improvements.
e. Certification of approval to be signed by the secretary of the planning
commission.
D. MINOR SUBDIVISION
Whenever a proposed subdivision containing 4 or less lots fronting on an existing public
way; not involving any new or improved public way, the extension of utilities, or the
creation of any public or private drainage or other improvements, and not in conflict with
any provision of the adoption general plan, any Major Road Plan, Zoning Ordinance or
these regulations, this procedure for review and approval of the subdivision may apply.
The subdivider may, if he desires, submit only a Final Minor Plat in securing plat
approval provided that the plat submitted complies with all the requirements of the Final
Minor Plat . However, if any corrections or modifications are needed, the Planning
Commission shall disapprove the plat and require it to be re-submitted for approval. The
Planning Commission may require a topographic survey or engineering plan in instances
where the suitability of the land is questionable due to availability of existing utilities,
drainage, erosion-control, soil composition, or any other problem is likely.
The procedure for review and approval of a minor subdivision and its documentation
shall consist of one (1) step. This step is the preparation of a Final Minor Plat with all
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-7
the required certificates for submission to the Planning Commission. The preparation of
a Final Minor Plat is mandatory for all minor subdivision proposals. The Final Minor
Plat, once approved by the Planning Commission and signed by the Secretary of the
Planning Commission, becomes an instrument to be recorded by the Office of the County
Register.
The Final Minor Plat is the culmination of the land subdivision process. When approved
and duly recorded as provided by law, the Final Minor Plat becomes a permanent public
record of the survey of the lots or parcels, rights-of-way, easements and public lands, and
the restrictive covenants as may be applicable to the lots or parcels within the boundary
of the subdivision. As such, it serves as a vital instrument in the sale and transfer of real
estate, in the dedication of rights-of-way easements, and public lands, and in future land
survey of the properties contained in or adjoining the subdivision.
1. Submission Of Final Minor Plat
a. The developer shall submit four (4) copies of the Final Minor Plat to the Assistant
City Clerk or Zoning Compliance Official no less than ten (10) days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting at which it is to be considered.
b. The original of the Final Minor Plat shall be in black permanent ink twenty inches
by twenty-four inches (20" x 24"), to a scale of one inch equals one-hundred feet
(1" = 100').
2. Final Minor Plat Content
The Final Minor Plat shall include the following information:
a. The lines of all streets and roads with names, alley lines, lot lines, building
setback lines, lots numbered in numerical order, all existing and proposed public
and private easements including their location, purpose and width, and the
instrument number for any existing easements; and any areas to be dedicated to
public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose
and any limitations.
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-8
b. Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location,
bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, block line and
building line whether curved or straight, and curved property lines that are not the
boundary of curved streets.
c. All dimensions to the nearest one hundredth (100th) of a foot and bearings to the
nearest minute.
d. Location and description of monuments.
e. The names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets and the location
and ownership of adjoining properties.
f. Date, title and name of the subdivision, designer of the subdivision, vicinity map,
graphic scale, total acreage subdivided and note pertaining to acreage of the
parent tract or remaining property, if applicable, zoning classification and true
north arrow.
g. Any restrictive covenants which are to apply to lots or other parcels within the
subdivision.
h. Tax Map, Group, and Parcel Number
i. Location, size, and type of all existing utilities (i.e. water, sewer, fire hydrants,
electric, septic, wells, and gas);
j. Septic Restrictions, proposed septic fields, and proposed well sites, when
applicable;
k. One hundred (100) year floodplain, floodway boundaries, and elevations of each
or reference to zone as per the current Federal Emergency Management Flood
Insurance Rate Map with Panel Number and Effective Date;
l. Major environmental features, including but not limited to rivers, streams, and
drainage ditches;
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-9
m. Drainage, if applicable as determined by the Planning Commission;
n. The following certificates are required on the plat (See Appendix):
(a) Certification showing that the applicant is the land owner and dedicates
the streets, rights-of-way, utilities and any sites for public or private use to
the City of Camden (or Benton County, if applicable).
(b) Certification by a registered land surveyor as to the accuracy of the
survey, the plat and the placement of the monuments.
(c) Certification of availability of water by the Camden Public Works
Director or certification of approval by the Benton County
Environmentalist for an individual subsurface water (well) system.
(d) Certification of availability of sewer by the Camden Public Works
Director or certification of approval by the Benton County
Environmentalist for an individual subsurface sewage disposal (septic
tank) systems with attached septic restrictions.
(e) Certification of access through an adopted public way or permanent access
easement.
(f) Certificate of Approval for Recording
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-10
3. PLAT REVIEW
a. Subdivision Review Committee
The Assistant City Clerk or Zoning Compliance Official, the planning staff, and
appropriate department directors shall recommend to the Planning Commission
the approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of the application and shall
include all department comments received.
b. Planning Commission
Within thirty-five (35) days after submission of the Final Minor Plat in the
municipality or sixty (60) days after submission of the Final Minor Plat inside the
Planning Region but outside the municipality, the Planning Commission shall
review the plat and indicate its approval, disapproval, or approval subject to
modifications. If a plat is disapproved, reasons for such disapproval shall be
stated in writing. If approved subject to modifications, the nature of the required
modifications will be indicated. The Planning Commission may, prior to the
close of the public meeting, hold the matter under advisement or defer a decision
until the next regular meeting. Substantial changes made to the plat after review
by the Subdivision Review Committee shall be cause for the Planning
Commission to defer a decision pending review of a revised plat.
c. Revised Plat
If modifications are requested by the Planning Commission or staff, and if
variances have been granted, the developer shall submit a letter addressing the
revisions requested, a revised Final Minor Plat indicating any approved
variances, not less than seven (7) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting
at which it is to be considered.
d. Failure To Take Action
Failure of the Planning Commission to act on the Final Minor Plat within thirtyfive
(35) days after submission of the Final Minor Plat in the municipality or sixty
(60) days after submission of the Final Minor Plat inside the Planning Region but
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-11
outside the municipality, will be deemed as approval of the plat, provided,
however, that the applicant, with the Commission's approval, may waive this
requirement and consent to the extension of such period.
4. PLAT APPROVAL
a. Action Upon Approval
1. Upon approval of the Final Minor Plat by the Planning
Commission, the developer shall submit to the City of Camden the
original and one (1) copy of the Final Minor Plat for the citys
files. The Assistant City Clerk or Zoning Compliance Official
shall verify that the plat is acceptable for recording and that
required modifications, if any, have been properly made. Upon
such verification, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall
attest to approval by signing the appropriate certificate on the
original and copy of the plat. The Assistant City Clerk or Zoning
Compliance Official or his designated representative, shall record
the approved plat in the Office of the Register of Benton County,
Tennessee, and shall note the date, plat book and page number of
recording on the file copy of the plat. The developer shall provide
the recordation fee.
2. Recording of the Final Minor Plat
A recorded original plat shall be retained as a permanent record in the
Planning Commission files.
E. Resubdivision of Land
1. For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such
changes affects any street layout shown on such map, or area reserved thereon for
public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to
the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such resubdivision shall
be approved by the Planning Commission by the same procedure, rules, and
regulations as for a subdivision. The Planning Commission may require the
Camden Subdivision Regulations II-12
written consent of any and all lot owners in a subdivision before approving any
change in a recorded final plat.
2. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or
more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that
such lots will eventually be re subdivided into smaller building sites, the Planning
Commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of
streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for the
future opening of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat.
F. Vacation of Plats
1. Any plat or part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at
anytime before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to which a
copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same.
2. Such an instrument shall be approved by the Planning Commission in like manner
as plats of subdivision.
3. Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or
filed in a like manner as plats of subdivision; and being duly recorded or filed
shall operate or destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so
vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, and public grounds,
and all dedications laid out or described in such plats.
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-1
ARTICLE III
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN
A. Streets
1. Conformity to the Major Street and Road Plan
The location and width of all streets and roads shall conform to the official Major
Street and road Plan.
2. Relation to Adjoining Street System
The proposed street system shall extend existing streets or projects. They shall be
extended at a width no less than the required minimum width.
3. Street Elevation
The planning commission may require where necessary profiles and elevations of
streets for areas subject to flood. Fill may be used for streets provided such fill
does not unduly increase flood heights. Drainage openings shall be so designed
as to not restrict the flow of water and unduly increase flood heights.
4. Street Width
The minimum width of right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be as
shown on the Major Street and road Plan or if not shown on such plan, shall be
not less than as follows:
a. Arterial Streets and Highways .......................................................... 80 feet
or as may be required.
Arterial streets and highways are those to be used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic and will be located on the Major Street and road Plan.
b. Collector Streets ................................................................................ 60 feet
Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of arterial streets and highways and include the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for major
circulation within such a development.
c. Minor residential Streets ................................................................... 50 feet
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-2
Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting
residential properties and designed to discourage their use by through
traffic.
d. Marginal Access Streets .................................................................... 50 feet
Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent
to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
e. Dead-end Streets (Cul-de-sac) .......................................................... 50 feet
Cul-de-sacs are permanent dead-end streets or courts designed so that they
cannot be extended in the future.
f. Alleys ................................................................................................ 20 feet
Alleys are minor public ways used primarily for service access to the back
or side properties otherwise abutting on a street.
In cases where topography or other physical conditions make a street of
the required minimum width impracticable, the planning commission may
modify the above requirements. Through proposed neighborhood or local
business areas the street widths shall be increased ten (10) feet on each
side to provide for movement of vehicles into and out of necessary ofstreet
parking areas without interference to traffic.
5. Additional Width on Existing Streets
Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to
meet the above minimum street width requirements.
a. The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the
subdivision is on both sides of the existing street.
b. When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street,
one-half (1/2) of the required right-of-way, measured from the center line
of the existing roadway, shall be provided.
6. Restriction of Access
When a tract fronts on an arterial street or highway, the planning commission may
require such lots to be provided with frontage on a marginal access street.
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-3
7. Street Grades
Grades on major streets and roads shall not exceed seven (7) per cent. Grades on
other streets may exceed seven (7) per cent but not ten (10) per cent.
8. Horizontal Curves
Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of a
street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets
sixty (60) feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature shall be not less
than three hundred (300) feet; on other streets, not less than one hundred (100)
feet.
9. Vertical Curves
Every change in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve constructed so as to
afford a minimum sight distance of two hundred (200) feet, said sight distance
being measured from the drivers eyes, which are assumed to be four and one-half
(4 1/2) feet above the pavement surface, to an object four (4) inches high on the
pavement. Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades drawn to a
scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet horizontal, and
one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet vertical, may be required by the planning
commission.
10. Intersections
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible, and no
intersection shall be at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees.
Property line radii at street intersections shall not be less than twenty (20) feet,
and where the angle of street intersection is less than seventy-five (75) degrees,
the planning commission may require a greater curb radius. Where ever
necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without
curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property
line as such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to
permit such construction.
11. Tangents
A tangent of at least one hundred (100) feet in length shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-4
12. Street Jogs
Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet
shall not be allowed.
13. Dead-End Streets
a. Minor terminal streets or courts designed to have one end permanently
closed shall be no more than five hundred (500) feet long unless
necessitated by topography. they shall be provided at the closed end with
a turn-around having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty (80)
feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet or
the planning commission may approve an alternate design.
b. Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it is desirable to
provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be
extended by dedication to the boundary of such property. Such dead-end
streets shall be provided with a temporary turn-around having a roadway
diameter of at least eight (80) feet.
14. Private Streets and Reserve Strips
There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every lot in
subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated street. there shall
be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such
strips is definitely placed with the community under conditions approved by the
planning commission.
15. Street Names
Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing
and names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets
duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue,
boulevard, driveway, place or court. Through its index list of street names on file
the planning commission can assist the subdivider in avoiding duplication.
16. Alleys
Alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots used for business purposes, and
shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces
evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys.
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-5
17. Drainage
All roads must be so designed as to provide for the discharge of surface water
from the right-of-way of all streets by grading and drainage as shall be required
by the Planning Commission. Where it is the opinion of the Planning
Commission that water cannot be
18. Travel Easements
A permanent travel easement may be permitted under certain conditions pursuant
to Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 13-4-308. These easements shall meet the
following minimum standards, requirements and any special conditions attached
by the Planning Commission, and the requirements and special conditions for the
easement shall be placed on the Final Plat for recording.
a. A permanent easement shall be of a required width of no less than fifty
(50) feet. However, the Planning Commission may require greater widths
if necessary to meet special conditions presented by the site or reflected on
the Final Plat.
b. A permanent easement providing legal access to more than one lot shall be
improved to meet the road and construction standards as specified herein
for private street improvements. Modification of said standards may be
directed by the Planning Commission to meet site specific conditions.
c. If, at any future date, a permanent easement is submitted for acceptance as
a public street or road, it shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
for approval and recommendation to the City Board of Commissioners. In
considering the easement for approval as a public street or road, the
Planning Commission shall require the improvements to the easement to
meet the minimum street construction standards in effect at the time the
request for public acceptance is made.
d. A building permit may be issued for a building to be located on a recorded
lot of record prior to the effective date of these regulations, which lot
fronts on a permanent easement with access to an existing public street or
road; provided, however, that any future subdivision of said lot or parcel
shall be subject to these provisions.
B. Blocks
1. Length
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-6
Blocks shall not be less than 4 hundred feet nor more than 1,200 feet in length,
except as the planning commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of
land or desired features of street pattern. In blocks over eight hundred (800) feet
in length the planning commission may require one (1) or more public cross
walks of not less than ten (10) feet in width to extend entirely across the block
and at locations deemed necessary.
2. Width
Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) rows of lots, except where reverse
frontage on major streets and roads is provided for where prevented by
topographical conditions or size of the property; in which case the planning
commission will approve a single row of lots of minimum depth.
C. Lots
1. Flood Free Building site
Each lot in a subdivision shall contain a food free building site above the
elevation of the designated flood, as defined in Section E of this Article, and
outside the limits of any existing easement or building setback lines required by
Subsection 4 of this Section.
2. Arrangement
Where practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines and
radial to curved street lines. Each lot shall front on a public street or road, private
street, or permanent travel easement, which is not less than 50 feet wide for a
distance of fifty (50) feet.
3. Minimum Size
The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be such as the planning commission
deems appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Where
public water and sanitary sewer systems are reasonably accessible, the subdivider
shall connect with such systems and provide a connection or connections to each
lot. Where a public sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage
disposal may be used, if it meets all applicable public health regulations. Where a
public water supply is not accessible, a water well or other source may be used
upon approval by the planning commission.
a. Residential lots served by public water and sanitary sewer systems shall
not be less than 70 feet wide at the building setback line nor less than
10,000 square feet in area.
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-7
b. Residential lots not served by public water and sanitary sewer systems
shall not be less than 85 feet wide at the building setback line nor less than
20,000 square feet in area. Provided, however, greater area may be
required by the planning commission as indicated by data from
percolation tests and investigations or as determined by the city or county
health officer.
c. Size of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial
properties shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and
parking facilities required by the type of use and development
contemplated. Platting of individual lots should be avoided and instead an
overall-design of the land should be used for such purposes.
4. Building Setback Lines
a. The minimum depth of building setback lines from the street shall not be
less than 30 feet, and in the case of corner lots, 30 feet from the side street.
b. In the case of electric transmission lines where easement widths are not
definitely established there shall be a minimum building setback line from
the center of the transmission line as follows:
Voltage of line Minimum building setback
46 KV 37 1/2 feet
69 KV 50 feet
161 KV and over 75 feet
5. Corner Lots
Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the additional side-yard
requirements of the zoning ordinance or building setback lines outlined above.
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-8
6. Double and Reverse Frontage Lots
Double frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separate
residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantage
of topography and orientation.
D. Public Use and Service Areas
due consideration shall be given to the allocation of areas suitably located and of
adequate size for playgrounds and parks for local or neighborhood use as well as for use
as public service areas.
1. Public Open Space
Where a school, neighborhood park or recreation area or public access to water
frontage, shown on an official map or in a plan made and adopted by the planning
commission, is located in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision, the
planning commission may require the dedication or reservation of such open
space within the subdivision up to a total of 10 per cent of the gross area or water
frontage of the plat, for park, school or recreation purpose.
2. Easements for Utilities
Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the planning commission may
require easements, not exceeding 12 feet in width, for poles, wires, conduits,
storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains or other utility lines along
all rear lot lines, along side lot lines if necessary, or if advisable in the opinion of
the planning commission. Easements of the same or greater width may be
required along the lines of or across lots, where necessary for the extension of
existing or planned utilities.
3. Community Assets
In all subdivisions due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large
trees and water courses, and for historical spots and similar community assets
which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property.
E. Suitability of the Land
1. The planning commission shall not approve the subdivision of land if, from
adequate investigations conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been
determined that in the best interest of the public the site is not suitable for platting
and development purposes of the type proposed.
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-9
PRIVATE ROADS AND RESERVE STRIPS
Walnut Street
Reserve Strip
Private Road
DEAD END STREETS
500' Maximum Length 100'
Permanent Turn Around (Cul-De-Sac) Temporary Turn Around
Future
Development
EXISTING
RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATION
ON EXISTING STREETS
Development on one side of the street Development on both sides of the street
} ROW {
Required Additional ROW
Required Additional ROW
Required Additional ROW
(1/2 Required)
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-10
INTERSECTIONS
Bad Better
TANGENTS
100' Min
BLOCKS
LENGTH
400' Min - 1200' Max
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-11
HORIZONTAL CURVES
10o
CL
R = 100' to 300'
MAXIMUM GRADES
Major Street
Minor Street
12%
6%
TYPES OF LOTS
Double Corner
Interior
Flag
Corner
Land Locked
Lot
Lot
Frontage
Lot
Lot
Lot
Lot
Corner Interior
Lot
Lot
Lot
Interior
Lot
Interior
ROAD JOGS
Unacceptable Acceptable
Existing Road
150'
Minimum
New Road or
Existing Road
New Road
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-12
SETBACKS AND YARDS
Side Yard
Front Yard
Rear Yard
Lot Line
Lot Line
Required Rear Yard
Required Front Yard
Setback Line
Setback Line
Setback Line
Structure Side
Yard
Side
Yard
Buildable Area
Buildable Area
CORNER LOTS
Corner Lots
are wider to
permit additional
setback standards
MINIMUM LOT SIZE
With Public Sewer and Water Without Public Sewer but with Water
Determined by
Zoning Ordinance
the Or
Determined by
the
Zoning Ordinance
County Health
the
Determined by
Department
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-13
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
OPEN SPACE
OR
PARKLAND
Good Better
RESTRICTION OF ACCESS
Marginal Access Street
Arterial Highway
STREET NAMES
Joe Road Joe Road
Jane Cove Jane Cove
ALLEYS
Commercial
Development
Alleys
Permitted
Under Special
Circumstances
Development
Residential
No Alleys
Permitted
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-14
2. Land subject to flooding, and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable, shall
not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase
danger to health, life or property or flood hazard. Such land within the plat shall
be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
F. Large Tracts or Parcels
When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall
be arranged so as to allow for the opening of streets in the future and for logical further
resubdivision.
G. Multi-family and Townhouse Developments
A comprehensive multi-family or townhouse developments, including the large scale
construction of housing units, together with necessary drives and ways of access, built
without the subdivision of land may be approved by the Planning Commission although
the design of the project does not include standard streets, lots or subdivision
arrangements. T his approval will be contingent on the project being under single or
corporate ownership if departure from the foregoing standard can be made without
destroying the intent of these regulations.
Preliminary Plan
Before initiating construction, fill, or grading of a tract of land for multi-family or
townhouse development the owner of lessee of the site shall submit to the planning
commission a preliminary plan for the use and development of the entire tract.
The Preliminary Plan shall:
1. Be drawn to a scale 1" = 100'
2. Include the following:
a. Existing and proposed roads and drainage;
b. Curb cuts, drives, and parking areas;
c. General location of all structures planned for the site.
d. Number of dwelling units;
e. Areas proposed for open space, recreation facilities, or landscaping;
f. Existing and proposed utility layout.
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-15
g. The acreage of the site;
h. Date, approximate north point, and graphic scale;
i. The names of the owners of adjacent lots or tracts.
3. Exhibit a vicinity map showing the relation of the proposed development to the
area.
Within thirty (30) days after submission of the preliminary plan, the planning
commission shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plan. If the plan is
disapproved, reasons for such disapproval will be stated in the records of the
planning commission.
Final Plan
Prior to the construction of any multi-family or townhouse development the owner or
lessee shall present a final plat to the Planning Commission. The final plan shall satisfy
all the requirements imposed by the planning commission and must be approved by the
planning commission.
The Final Plan shall:
1. Be drawn to a scale of 1" = 100'
2. Shall include the following:
a. Existing and proposed roads and drainage.
b. Curb cuts, drives and parking areas.
c. The required setback lines and location of all structures to be built on the
site.
d. Finished grade plan.
e. The boundary of the 100-year flood plain.
f. Recreation areas.
3. The following certificates shall be presented with Final Plan:
a. Certification by a licensed surveyor that said boundaries are true and
correct.
Camden Subdivision Regulations III-16
b. Certification by the owner and trustee of the mortgage, if any, that they
adopt the plan and dedicate the streets as shown in the plan and agree to
make any required improvements of adjacent streets as shown on the plan.
c. Certification by the Environmentalist or county health officer that
acceptable disposal standards are met in those subdivisions for which
individual sewage disposal and/or water systems are to be installed.
H. Variances
Variances may be granted under the following conditions:
1. Where the subdivider can show that strict adherence to these regulations would
cause unnecessary hardship. (Financial hardship shall not be a consideration).
2. Where the planning commission decides that there are topographical or other
conditions peculiar to the site and a departure from these regulations will not
destroy their intent. Any variance thus authorized shall be stated in writing in the
minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning on which the departure is
justified.
I. Zoning or Other Regulations
No final plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning resolution shall be
approved unless it conforms to such ordinance.
When there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and
those contained in zoning regulations, building code, or other official regulations, the
highest standard shall apply.
Camden Subdivision Regulations IV-1
ARTICLE IV
DEVELOPMENT PREREQUISITES TO FINAL APPROVAL
A perfectly prepared and recorded subdivision or plat means little to a prospective lot buyer until
he can see actual physical transformation of raw acreage into lots suitable for building purposes
and human habitation. Improvements by the subdivider spare the community of a potential tax
liability. The following tangible improvements or provision for their estimated cost are required
before final plat approval in order to assure the physical reality of a subdivision which approval
and recordation will establish legally.
A. Required Improvements
Every subdivision developer shall be required to grade and improve streets and alleys and
to install monuments, sewers, storm water inlets and water mains, in accordance with
specifications established by Camden.
1. Monuments
a. Concrete monuments four (4) inches in diameter or four (4) inches square,
three (3) feet long, with a flat top, shall be set at all street corners, at all
points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, and at angle points and points of curve in each street. The top
of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the
location and shall be set flush with the finished grade.
b. All other lot corners shall be marked with iron pipe not less than threefourths
(3/4) inches in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long and
driven so as to be flush with the finished grade.
2. Grading
All streets, road and alleys shall be graded by the subdividers so that pavements
can be constructed to the required cross section. Deviation from the above due to
special topographical condition will be allowed only with special approval of the
planning commission. Where streets are constructed under or adjacent to existing
electric transmission lines or over gas transmission lines, the nearest edge of the
pavement shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any transmission line
structure and all grading for the street shall be done in a manner which will not
disturb the structure or result in erosion endangering the structure. In the case of
electric transmission lines the clearance from the pavement to the nearest
conductor shall meet the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code.
Camden Subdivision Regulations IV-2
a. Preparation: Before grading is started the entire right-of-way area shall be
first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials
and all trees not intended for preservation.
b. Cuts: All tree stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to
a depth of two (2) feet below the subgrade. Rock, when encountered,
shall be scarified to a depth of twelve (12) inches below the subgrade.
c. Fill: All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the
construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. Excess
materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed
from the development site. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed
twelve (12) inches loose and compacted by a sheep's foot roller. The
filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to a roller shall be
mechanically tamped, but where water is used to assist compaction, the
water content shall not exceed the optimum of moisture.
d. Slopes: cut and fill slopes adjacent to the roadway shall not be steeper
than the below standards unless stabilized.
0' - 4' slope of 3/1*
4' - 6' slope of 2.5/1
6' - 10' slope of 2/1
Over 10' slope of 1.5/1
*i.e. one (1) ft. drop for each three (3) ft. in width.
3. Storm Drainage
a. An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes,
culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided
for the proper drainage of all surface water.
b. Storm drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where
feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and
shall be constructed in the following manner:
1. The developer shall provide open drainage ditches on each side of
the road-bed. The open drainage ditches shall have a minimum
depth of 18 inches below the road-bed with sides sloped to a 3 to 1
minimum ratio.
2. Unless otherwise determined by the Planning Commission or the
respective county and city representative, all intersections of road
shall contain concrete headwalls with a width and height at least
three times the diameter of the pipe the headwalls shall be at least
6 inches thick for pipes 15" to 24" in diameter and 12 inches thick
for pipes over 24" in diameter.
Camden Subdivision Regulations IV-3
Before any culvert is installed, the respective county or city
representative must first inspect the intersection to determine the
size of culvert, over 15" if necessary to prevent future drainage
problems. the developer will be responsible for the provisions of
the specified culvert and installation of the culvert in the manner as
so indicated by the respective representative.
3. At locations other than road intersections and where cross drains
are required to accommodate the natural water flow, the drainage
pipe or culvert shall also be of metal or aluminum and at least 15"
in diameter or larger as determined by the respective county or city
representative.
4. In all subdivisions, the cross drains shall be of sufficient length to
permit full width or roadway and the required slopes. Cross drains
shall also be built on straight line and grade and shall be laid on a
firm base but not rock. In addition, pipes shall be laid with the
spigot end pointing in the direction of the flow and with the ends
fitted and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth uniform
invert. They shall be placed at a sufficient depth below the road
bed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact and in no case shall the
top of the pipe be less than one (1) foot below the roadbed.
c. The size of the waterway opening required per drainage structure shall be
determined by use of the Talbot formula but in no case shall a pipe less
than 15 inches in diameter be used. the following drainage table is based
on Talbot's formula for determining pipe size for the area to be drained.
Diameter Acres Acres
of Pipe (Rolling Land) (Level Land)
15" 0 - 6 0 - 11
18" 9 18
24" 20 39
30" 36 71
36" 59 115
42" 89 175
48" 125 250
54" 175 345
60" 230 455
66" 295 585
72" 375 735
d. Multiple pipe installation may be used provided the small pipes are
equivalent in water carrying capacity to the larger pipe. The following
Camden Subdivision Regulations IV-4
table shows the number of smaller diameter pipes equal in water carrying
capacity to the pipe of larger size.
Number of Smaller Pipes and Sizes
Larger
Pipe
Size 15" 18" 21" 24" 30" 36" 42" 48" 54"
15" 1
18" 2 1
21" 3 2 1
24" 3 2 2 1
30" 5 3 3 2 1
36" 8 5 4 3 2 1
42" 11 7 5 4 3 2 1
48" 15 10 7 5 3 2 2 1
54" 19 13 9 7 4 3 2 2 1
60" 25 16 11 8 5 4 3 2 2
66" 29 20 14 10 6 4 3 2 2
72" 37 25 17 12 3 5 4 3 2
e. If necessary to determine proper drainage facilities, the Planning
Commission or the respective county or city representative may require
the developer to outline the entire drainage area of the proposed
construction along with a map showing the various road and parcels and
indicating the general flow of the surface water, either by contours or by
means of arrows running with the flow. Any elevations of the pipes and
elevations of the inlets, as nearly as can be shown. Also, the area tributary
to the various proposed inlets shall be outlined and the number of areas
contained in each indicated by figures adjacent to the inlet to which they
are applicable.
4. Roadway Construction and Roadway Surfacing
a. Base: After preparation of the subgrade, the roadbed shall be surfaced
with material required by local standards, but of no lower classification
than crushed rock, stone or gravel. The size of the crushed rock or stone
shall be than generally known as "crusher run stone" from two and one
half (2 1/2) inches down including dust. Spreading of the stone shall be
done uniformly over the area to be covered by means of appropriate
spreading devices and shall not be dumped in piles. After spreading, the
stone shall be rolled until thoroughly compacted. The compacted
thickness of the stone roadway shall be no less than six (6) inches.
b. Outside Shoulder: After the roadway base has been constructed, the
placing of earth for a three (3) foot outside shoulder shall be completed
Camden Subdivision Regulations IV-5
and the earth compacted, shaped, and finished. The elevation of the
outside shoulder is to be at, or near the surface elevation of the base
course.
c. Prime Coat: After a thoroughly compacted base and outside shoulder has
been established, a prime coat shall be applied as specified in Section 402,
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Tennessee
Department of Highways and Public Work - January 1, l968, and the latest
revisions thereto.
d. Wearing Surface: Within the town of Camden, the wearing surface shall
consist of two (2) inches of hot mix.
5. Minimum Pavement Widths
Due to the diversity of development in the planning region, ranging from sparsely
populated agricultural areas to the densely populated urban areas, required
pavement widths will necessarily vary with the character of building development
and the amount of traffic encountered. Minimum pavement widths shall be as
follows:
a. Minor Residential Streets ............................................................... 20 feet
b. Marginal Access Streets ................................................................. 22 feet
c. Dead-end Streets (cul-de-sac) ........................................................ 40 feet
d. Arterial Streets and Highways ................................ as may be required; not
usually paved by developer.
f. Collector Streets ............................................................................. 22 feet
For definitions and functions of the various types of streets listed above, refer to
Article III, Section A, Subsection 4.
6. Sidewalks
When installed by the developer, sidewalks shall be located not less than one (1)
foot from the property line to prevent interference of encroachment by fencing,
walls, hedges or other planting or structures placed on the property line at a later
date. In single family residential areas concrete sidewalks shall be four (4) feet
wide and four (4) inches thick. In multi-family or group housing developments
sidewalks shall be five (5) feet wide and (4) inches thick. In commercial areas
sidewalks shall be ten feet wide and four (4) inches thick.
7. Installation of Utilities and Driveways
Camden Subdivision Regulations IV-6
After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the
underground work--water mains, gas mains, etc., and all service connections shall
be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across
the flat section. All driveways for houses to be built by the developer shall be cut
and drained.
8. Water Supply System
Water mains properly connected with community water supply system or with an
alternate supply approved by the city or county health officer shall be constructed
in such a manner as to serve adequately for both domestic use and fire protection,
all lots shown on the subdivision plat.
Water mains for a community water supply system shall be no less than six (6)
inches in diameter and the planning commission may require larger mains if they
are needed to serve properly future extensions. the location and types of valves
and hydrants, the amount of soil cover, the pipes and other features of the
installation shall be approved by the planning commission. Fire hydrants shall be
installed in all developments so that there is no more than 500 feet between
hydrants or no more than 500 feet from any lot to the nearest hydrant. All
systems shall be designed to minimize the infiltration of flood water.
9. Sanitary Sewers
When located within or adjacent to a public sewerage system, sanitary sewer
mains no less than eight (8) inches in diameter and of a type approved by the
planning commission shall be installed in such a manner as to serve all lots with
connection to the public system. All systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of, or discharges from flood waters.
Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sewerage system, they must
contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal
fields and must be approved in writing by the city or county health officer.
B. Guarantee in Lieu of Completed Improvements
No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for
record by the county register of deeds until one of the following conditions has been met;
1. All required improvements have been constructed in a satisfactory manner and
approved by City engineer; or
2. The planning commission has accepted a security bond in an amount equal to the
estimated cost of installation of the required improvements, whereby
Camden Subdivision Regulations IV-7
improvements may be made and utilities installed without cost to Camden in the
event of default of the subdivider.
Camden Subdivision Regulations V-1
ARTICLE V
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
The enforcement of these regulations and penalties for the unapproved recordation or transfer of
land are provided by state law in the authority granted by public acts of the State of Tennessee.
A. Enforcement
1. No plat or plan of a subdivision of land into two or more lots located within the
area of planning jurisdiction shall be admitted to the land records of the county or
received or recorded by the county registrar of deeds until said plat or plan has
received final approval in writing by the planning commission as provided in
Section 13-4-302 and 13-3-402, Tennessee Code Annotated.
2. No board, public officer, or authority shall light any street, lay or authorize the
laying of water mains or sewers, or the construction of other facilities or utilities
in any street located within the area of planning jurisdiction unless such street
shall have been accepted, opened or otherwise received the legal status of a public
street prior to the adoption of these regulations, or unless such street corresponds
in its location and lines to a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the
planning commission, or on a street plan made and adopted by the commission as
provided in section 13-4-307 and 13-3-406, Tennessee Code Annotated.
B. Penalties
1. No county registrar shall receive, file, or record a plat of a subdivision within the
planning region without the approval of the planning commission as required in
Section 13-4-302 and 13-3-402, Tennessee Code Annotated, and any county
registrar so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as other
misdemeanors as provided by law.
2. Section 13-4-306 and 13-3-410, Tennessee Code Annotated provides that
whoever being the owner or agent of the owner of any land, transfers or sells or
agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by
other use of a plat of subdivision of such land without having submitted a plat of
such subdivision to the planning commission and obtained its approval as
required before such plat be recorded in the office of the appropriate county
register, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanors, punishable as other
misdemeanors as provided by law; and the description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The
municipality, through its solicitor or other official designated by its chief
legislative body and the county, through its county attorney, or other official
Camden Subdivision Regulations V-2
designated by the quarterly county court may enjoin such transfer or sale or
agreement by action or injunction.
3. Any building or structure erected or to be erected in violation of the subdivision
regulations shall be deemed an unlawful building or structure, and the building
commissioner or the solicitor of the municipality or other official designated by
the chief legislative body and/or the county attorney or other official designated
by the quarterly county court may bring action to enjoin such erection or cause it
to be vacated or removed as provided in Section 13-4-308 and 13-3-411,
Tennessee Code Annotated.
Camden Subdivision Regulations VI-1
ARTICLE VI
VARIANCES AND AMENDMENTS
A. Variances. Variances may be granted where the Planning Commission decides that there
are topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, and a departure from these
regulations will not destroy their intent. Any variance thus authorized shall be stated in
writing in the minutes of the Planning Commission with the reasoning on which the
departure is justified set forth.
B. Amendments. These regulations may be amended from time to time by the Planning
Commission. However, before enacting an amendment, the Planning Commission shall
hold a public hearing thereon, at least thirty (30) days notice of the time and place of
which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
Camden Subdivision Regulations VII-1
ARTICLE VII
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
A. Separability
Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect
the validity of the regulations as a whole or part thereof which is not specifically declared
to be invalid or unconstitutional.
B. Conflict with other Regulations
Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein
and those contained in other local, county, state, or federal regulations, codes or other
official applicable regulations, the highest or more restrictive standards shall apply.
C. Adoption and Effective Date
1. Before adoption of these subdivision standards a public hearing as required by
section 13-4-303 and 13-3-403 Tennessee Code Annotated, was afforded and
interested person or persons and was held on ____________________.
2. These rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after their
adoption and effective date.
Adopted__________________________
Effective________________________
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-1
APPENDICES
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-2
SUBDIVISION RECORD
PRELIMINARY PLAT
Name of Subdivision ______________________________________________________
Location _________________ Civil District ______________ Zoning District __________
Owner __________________ Address __________________ Tel. _________________
Agent __________________ Address __________________ Tel. _________________
Surveyor ________________ Address __________________ Tel. _________________
Date submitted for preliminary approval _______________________________________.
CHECK LIST
____ Copies submitted as required prior to meeting.
____ Drawn to required scale.
____ Name, location, owner and surveyor.
____ Date, north point, and graphic scale.
____ Location of all existing physical features on land and nearby properties.
____ Names of adjoining property owners and/or subdivisions.
____ Plans of proposed utility layouts.
____ Names, locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and
reservations, lot lines, etc.
____ Profiles of all streets at require scales.
____ Contours at not more than 5' intervals.
____ Acreage of land to be subdivided.
____ Conforms to general requirements and minimum standards of design.
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-3
Approved_________to proceed to final plat. Subject to following modifications:
date
________________________________________________________________
Variances granted:______________________________________________
Disapproved:______________For following reasons:________________
date
Signed:_________________________
Secretary of Planning
Commission
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-4
SUBDIVISION RECORD
FINAL PLAT
Name of Subdivision _______________________________________________________
Location _______________ Civil District ________________ Zoning District ___________
Owner _______________ Address _____________________ Tel. ___________________
Preliminary approval granted: ____________ Submitted for Final approval ________________
date
CHECK LIST
____ Submitted within special time from preliminary approval.
____ Copies submitted as required prior to meeting.
____ Drawn to scale of ________ equals ________ on sheets not larger than
(inches) (feet)
_ 24 x 36___.
(inches) (inches)
____ Date, true north point, graphic scale, name and location of subdivision.
____ Reservations, easements or other non-residential areas.
____ Bearings of property lines and sufficient engineering data to locate all lines including
radii, angles and tangent distances.
____ Dimensions to the nearest 100th of a foot and angles to the nearest minute.
____ Lot lines, alley, building setback lines. ____ Lines and names of all streets
and roads.
____ Location and description of monuments. ____ Lots numbered in numerical order.
____ Names, locations of adjoining properties.
____ Certificate of Ownership and Dedication. ____ Certificate of Accuracy.
____ Certificate of Approval of Water and Sewerage System.
____ Certificate of Approval of Streets and Utilities.
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-5
____ Certificate of Approval of recording.
____ Proposed deed restrictions if not a zoned area.
____ Conforms to General requirements and Minimum standards of Design.
____ Required physical improvements have been made or bonds posted in the amount of
$___________.
____ Approved for Recording __________. Variances granted: ______________
date
____ Disapproved:__________for the following reasons:_______________________
date
___________________________________________________________
Signed: _______________________________
Secretary of the Planning Commission
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-6
FORMS FOR FINAL PLAT CERTIFICATIONS
CERTIFICATE OF ACCURACY
I, ______________________________________________________________ ,
(Printed Name of Signer)
do hereby certify that I am a registered (Professional Civil Engineer) (Land Surveyor),
and that I have surveyed the lands, embraced within the plat or map designated as
_________________________________,a subdivision all lying within the corporate
limits of the City of Camden, Tennessee or the Camden Planning Region; said plat or
map is a true and correct plat or map of the lands embraced therein, showing the
subdivision thereof in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the Camden
Municipal/Regional Planning Commission; I further certify that the survey of the lands
embraced within said plat or map has been correctly monumented in accordance with
the Subdivision Regulations of the Camden Municipal/Regional Planning Commission.
In witness whereof, I, the Said (printed name of signer), (Professional Civil Engineer)
(Land Surveyor), hereunto set out by hand and affix my seal the ____ day of _______,
20 __.
________________________________
(Land Surveyor)
State of Tennessee
Certificate No. ____________________ (SEAL)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CERTIFICATE OF THE APPROVAL OF SEPTIC (If outside the Corporate Limits)
(Language and septic restrictions to be supplied by Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation. Any required restrictions are to be on the face of the
plat signed by the County Environmentalist. Proof of existing septic tanks, references to
existing septic facility locations or additional information may be required by the
Planning Commission prior to subdivision plat approval, which may be noted on the plat
or documented in attachments.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL FOR RECORDING
I, _________________________, do hereby certify that the Camden
Municipal/Regional Planning Commission has approved this plat of subdivision for
recording.
___________ _________________________________________________
Date Secretary, Camden Municipal Regional Planning Commission
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-7
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION
I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and
described hereon as recorded in Deed Book page in the Office of the Register of
Benton County, Tennessee and that I (we) adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our)
free consent, establish the minimum building restriction lines, and dedicate the streets,
easements, rights-of-way, rights of access and all areas of public and private use as
noted and hereby certify that I am the owner in fee simple, duly authorized so to act,
and that said property is unencumbered by any taxes that have become due and
payable.
____________________, 20 __ _________________________________
Date Owner
________________________________
Owner
STATE OF TENNESSEE
COUNTY OF BENTON
Before me, the undersigned, a notary public in and for the State and County aforesaid,
duly commissioned and qualified, personally appeared (printed name of signer), with
whom I am personally acquainted and who, upon oath, acknowledge himself to be
owner of the (printed name of subdivision) Subdivision, and he as such owner, executed
the foregoing instrument for the purpose therein contained by signing his name as
owner.
In witness whereof, I hereunto set out my hand and affix my seal this _______________
day of _________________,__________.
_________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission expires: ________
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-8
MORTGAGEE CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, (printed name of Mortgagee) , Mortgagee of the property
shown and described hereon as recorded in Deed Book page in the Office of the
Register of Benton County, Tennessee and that I (we) adopt this plan of subdivision
with my (our) free consent, establish the minimum building restriction lines, and
dedicate the streets, easements, rights-of-way, rights of access and all areas of public
and private use as noted and hereby certify that I am the owner in fee simple, duly
authorized so to act, and that said property is unencumbered by any taxes that have
become due and payable.
_________________________________
Mortgagee
STATE OF TENNESSEE
COUNTY OF BENTON
Before me, the undersigned a notary public in and for the State and County aforesaid,
duly commissioned and qualified, personally appeared (printed name) of
(printed name of subdivision) Subdivision, and he as such representative executed
the foregoing instrument for the purpose therein contained by signing his name as
representative of the mortgagee.
In witness whereof, I hereunto set out my hand and affix my seal this _______________
day of _________________, __________.
_________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission expires: _______
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-9
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF AVAILABILITY OF WATER(Minor Plat Only)
I, (printed name of signer) , do hereby certify that I have reviewed the
proposed minor subdivision and certify that public water and fire hydrants are available.
____________________, 20 _____ ________________________
Date Camden Water Manager
______________________________________________________________________
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF AVAILABILITY OF SEWER (Minor Plat Only)
I, (printed name of signer) , do hereby certify that I have reviewed the
proposed minor subdivision and certify that public sewer is available.
____________________, 20 _____ ________________________
Date Camden Wastewater Manager
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF ACCESS TO A PUBLIC STREET (Minor Plat
Only)
I, (printed name of signer) , do hereby certify that I have reviewed the
proposed minor subdivision and certify that all lots have access to an adopted public
way.
____________________, 20 _____ _______________________________________
Date Camden Street Superintendent / Benton County Highway
Chief Administrative Official (if applicable)
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-10
SUGGESTED STEPS FOR A DEVELOPER OF A SUBDIVISION
Confer with the Planning Commission and fits staff representative to become thoroughly familiar
with the subdivision requirements, the major street plan and other public improvements which
might affect the area to be subdivided.
Have preliminary sketch plat prepared by a reputable engineer or surveyor.
Discuss preliminary plat with staff representative. This preapplication review by a trained land
planner may save this subdivider time and costly revisions as well as possible saving through
better design.
Submit required copies of the sketch plat to the Planning Commission for preliminary approval
in advance of its regular monthly meeting.
WHEN PRELIMINARY APPROVAL HAS BEEN GRANTED:
See City engineer or designated approving agent(s) for street and utility specifications; contact
city or county health officials for septic tank specification if public sewers are not available.
Develop subdivision according to preliminary plat and required modifications, if any. Install
improvements.
Obtain certificates from street and health officials certifying that improvements have been made
or that a performance bond has been posted.
Prepare final plat.
Submit final plat to the Planning Commission for approval. When approved, the Planning
Commission secretary will sign the certificate of approval for recording.
The subdivider now records the plat with the county register's office. He is now ready to sell his
lots.
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-11
ANSWER TO QUESTIONS OFTEN ASKED ABOUT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
1. Are subdivision regulations fair to everyone?
Yes, the written regulations provide the local planning with uniform procedures,
standards of design and construction by which to appraise equally and fairly all plats for
land subdivision.
2. Who is affected by the regulations?
Every owner of land within the planning region who divides land into smaller parcels, or
changes the size of shape of existing lots.
3. Am I affected if I resubdivide my tract into two parcels?
Yes, "subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
sites or divisions for immediate or future sale or building development, and includes
resubdivision.
4. What's to prevent me from recording a subdivision plat without approval?
The county register of deeds is prevented by law from recording land subdivision lying
within planning regions without final approval in writing.
5. Can I sell by an unapproved plat and then record my lots by metes and bounds?
No. State law makes it a misdemeanor, punishable by law, to use an unapproved
subdivision plat even if metes and bounds description is used in the instrument of transfer
or sale.
6. What happens if I sell unapproved and unrecorded lots from my subdivision?
(a) A state law has been broken (Section 13-4-306 and 13-3-410 Tennessee Code
Annotated).
(b) Some cloud would exist on the title to the lot.
(c) Most lending agencies will not approve or guarantee loans.
(d) State law requires that public bodies shall not extend sewers, water mains,
lighting or other utilities in unauthorized roads.
(e) Where zoning is in effect a building permit to construct any building will be
withheld.
Camden Subdivision Regulations A-12
(f) Any building or structure re-erected in violation may be forced to be vacated or
removed.
(g) The legislative body of a county or municipality may stop sales by injunction or
other legal action.
7. What improvements will I need to install in my subdivision?
Most subdivision regulations will require the developer to grade and improve streets,
install curbs and sidewalks, monuments, sewers, and water mains in accordance with
adopted specifications.
8. Won't subdivision regulations cause expensive development and cost me a lot of money?
Quite the contrary. Properly planned subdivisions make the most of land with a
minimum of construction and operating cost. Good design takes advantage of all
capabilities of the site and results in a minimum amount of streets and utilities with a
maximum number of well-arranged and easier sold lots. Good land subdivision affects
the value of the land and the immediate return to the investor, while saving the developer
money.
9. How do I go about having a subdivision approved?
Your local planning commission's printed set of regulations include the procedure for
having a plat approved. The planning commission meets at regular intervals and your
preliminary sketch is submitted in advance of the meeting at which it is to be considered.
It is suggested that you consult your planning commission early so as to become familiar
with the official plans that might affect your area.
10. What is I wish to lay out a commercial or industrial subdivision?
The provisions of subdivision regulations apply to all subdivision of land, including that
for use of business and industry. Since space, parking and service requirements will vary
greatly, it is impossible to establish standards for all types of uses. For that reason,
specific requirements for lot sizes and area are set forth only for residential areas.
11. Where can I get technical site planning assistance?
Your planning commission will help by recommending several competent subdivision
designers who can contribute much to the financial success of your subdivision.
Although they will not prepare final plans for you, trained planners are available at the
nearest office of the Local Planning Assistance Office.