CITY OF ETOWAH, TENNESSEE
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2019 S-4 Supplement is current through
Ordinance 836, passed 7-22-2019
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF ETOWAH, TENNESSEE
City Commission
Burke Garwood, Mayor
Jim Swayne, Vice Mayor
Mike Casteel, Commissioner
Gene Keller, Commissioner
Max Miller, Commissioner
 
Officials
Tina Tuggle   City Manager
Eva Valentine Human Resources/Risk Management
Russ Blair    City Attorney
Alison Bull   Finance Director/City Recorder
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 782
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF ETOWAH, TENNESSEE
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING THE EXISTING MUNICIPAL
CODE AND GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF ETOWAH.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Etowah,
Tennessee are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form
and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and
WHEREAS, the City of Etowah, Tennessee is a home rule municipality pursuant to
Article XI, Section 9, of the Constitution of the State of Tennessee and is
therefore empowered to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing
ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to
incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the City Commission of the City of Etowah, Tennessee has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of
a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form;
and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the City
and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect immediately
upon passage.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF ETOWAH
Section 1.    The general ordinances of the City of Etowah, Tennessee as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and complied in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Etowah.”
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   CHARTER
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   10.   Rules of Construction; General Penalty
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   30.   City Commission
   31.   Organizations
   32.   Municipal Court
   33.   Inmate Labor
   34.   Finance and Taxation
   35.   Personnel
   36.   Administrative Hearing Officer
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   50.   Refuse and Trash
   51.   Sewers
   52.   Water
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   70.   General Provisions
   71.   Traffic Regulations
   72.   Parking Rules
   73.   Recreational Vehicles
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   90.   Animals
   91.   Health and Sanitation; Nuisances
   92.   Junk and Junk Vehicles
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   110.   General Provisions
   111.   Permits and Solicitations
   112.   Taxicabs
   113.   Amusements
   114.   Personal Property Sales
   115.   Alcohol
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   130.   General Offenses
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   150.   Building Regulations; Construction
   151.   Streets and Roadways
   152.   Mobile and Manufactured Homes
   153.   Floods
   154.   Zoning
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   I.   Franchises and Agreements
   II.   Annexations and Deannexations
   III.   Closings and Vacations
   IV:   Zonings and Rezonings
   V.   Administration
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
   References to Tennessee Code Annotated
   References to 1994 Code
   References to Resolutions
   References to Ordinances
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchise, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or conveyed to the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the City Commission of the City of Etowah and the Recorder of
the City of Etowah is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code
of Ordinances in the Office of the Recorder.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Commission of the City of Etowah.
DATE ADVERTISED in The Daily Post-Athenian : September 14, 2015.
Passed on 1st reading: August 24, 2015
Passed on 2nd reading: September 28, 2015
This the   7th   day of   October  , 2015
                                       E. Burke Garwood /s/                   
   
                                       E. BURKE GARWOOD, III, Mayor
ATTEST:
Rebecca Penney /s/                   
Rebecca Penney, City Recorder
 
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
Russell J. Blair /s/                   
Russell J. Blair, City Attorney
E. BURKE GARWOOD, III, Mayor
CHARTER FOR THE CITY OF ETOWAH, TENNESSEE
Chapter
   
Article I
   
Article II:  Corporate Boundaries
   
Article III:  Corporate Powers
   
Article IV:  Elections
   
Article V:  City Commission
   
Article VI:  Ordinances
   
Article VII:  Mayor
   
Article VIII:  Officers and Employees
   
Article IX:  City Manager
   
Article X:  City Attorney
   
Article XI:  Taxation
   
Article XII:  Department of Finance
   
Article XIII:  Taxation and Revenues
   
Article XIV:  City Bonds
   
Article XV:  Budget and Appropriations
   
Article XVI:  Departments Under the City Manager
   
Article XVII:  Etowah City Board of Education
   
Article XVIII:  Etowah Utilities Board
   
Article XIX:  City Court
   
Article XX:  Construction of this Charter
   
Article XXI:  Effective Date of this Charter
Editor’s note:
   In 1964 the city of Etowah adopted “home rule” and became a home rule
municipality as authorized in article 11, section 9, of the constitution of
Tennessee. Ordinance No. 299, which provided for the submission to the voters
the question, “Shall this municipality adopt home rule?” was adopted by the
board of commissioners on January 2, 1964. On April 6, 1964, at the election
for the purpose of determining whether the city voters would ratify home rule,
the results were 432 “yes” and 413 “no” votes. From 1964 until 1984 the city
continued to operate under its private act charter, Chapter 116, Private Acts
of 1909, as amended. On August 2, 1984, the voters of the city, by a vote of
466 to 243, ratified ordinance No. 389 which provided the city with the
comprehensive new charter. On August 7, 2014, the voters of the City of Etowah,
by a vote of 399 to 125, ratified Ordinance No. 757, which provided the City of
Etowah with a new, revised charter which is set out herein. The table of
contents is unofficial.
ARTICLE I
SECTION 1. CORPORATION
   The city of Etowah, in McMinn County, Tennessee, is hereby constituted as a
municipal corporation and a body politic under the laws of the state of
Tennessee and is therefore entitled to all privileges and responsibilities
accorded municipalities under law.
SECTION 2. PROPERTY AND OBLIGATIONS
   The right, title interest and ownership of all property of said city of
Etowah, as heretofore constituted under any previous charter, and all its
uncollected taxes, assessments, dues, fines, costs, claims, judgments, choses
in actions, and all its rights of every kind and character whatsoever, as
vested in said city of Etowah under any previous charter, shall immediately
become, and are hereby vested in the municipal corporation created by this
charter, and said new corporation is hereby burdened and charged with and made
liable for all legally enforceable debts, contracts, bonds and obligations of
the old corporation which it succeeds, in the same manner and form and to the
same extent as the said prior municipal corporation was under existing laws.
SECTION 3. ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
   All laws, ordinances and resolution lawfully enacted by the governing body
of said city under any preceding charter or charters and not inconsistent with
this charter, shall remain in full force and effect under this new charter
until such time as the governing body of said city created under and by this
charter shall elect to amend, modify or repeal the same.
ARTICLE II
CORPORATE BOUNDARIES
SECTION 1. BOUNDARIES
   The boundaries of the city of Etowah created by this charter shall be
identical to those of the city of Etowah in effect at the time of the adoption
of this charter, together with all annexations and additions which may
hereafter expand said boundaries in accordance with law
Editor’s note:
   See Priv. Acts 1909, ch. 116, § 1, and Ords. #317, 369, 382, 394, 456, 481,
513, 559, 578, 579, and 588.
ARTICLE III
CORPORATE POWERS
SECTION 1. CORPORATE POWERS
   The city of Etowah, in addition to the powers, rights, and authority vested
in it by all other articles and sections of this charter shall have the power:
   1)   TAXES: To assess, levy and collect taxes for all general and special
purposes on all subjects or objects of taxation and privileges taxable by law
for city purposes.
   2)   CLASSIFICATIONS OF TAXATION: To adopt such classifications of the
subject and objects of taxation as are not contrary to law.
   3)   SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS: To make special assessments for local
improvements.
   4)   CONTRACTS: To contract and be contracted with.
   5)   BORROW MONEY: To incur debts by borrowing money or otherwise, and give
any appropriate evidence thereof, in the manner provided in this charter.
   6)   REFUNDING BONDS: To issue and give, sell, pledge or in any manner
dispose of negotiable or non-negotiable interest bearing or non-interest
bearing bonds, warrants, promissory notes or order of the city, upon the credit
of the city or solely upon the credit of income derived from any property used
in connection with any public utility owned or operated by the city, or solely
upon the credit of the proceeds of special assessments for local improvements,
or upon any two or more such credits.
   7)   MONEY EXPENDED: To expend the money of the city for all lawful
purposes.
   8)   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY: To acquire or receive and
hold, maintain, improve, sell, lease, mortgage, pledge or otherwise dispose of
property, real or personal, and any estate or interest therein, within or
without the city or state.
   9)   EMINENT DOMAIN: To condemn property, real or personal, or any easement,
interest, or estate or use therein, either within or without the city, for
present or future public use; such condemnation to be made and effected in
accordance with the terms and provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated Title 29,
Chapter 16 or in such other manner as may be provided by law.
   10)   ADMINISTRATION OF TRUSTS: To take and hold property within or without
the city or state upon trust; and to administer trusts for the public benefit.
   11)   PUBLIC UTILITIES: To acquire, construct, own, operate, and maintain,
or sell, lease, mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of public utilities or
any estate or interest therein, or any other utility that is of service to the
city, its inhabitants or any part thereof or to inhabitants in areas adjacent
to the city.
   12)   PUBLIC UTILITIES, GRANTS, FRANCHISES, REGULATIONS: To grant any
person, firm, association or corporation, franchises for public utilities and
public services to be furnished the city and those therein. Such power to grant
rights-of-way through the city streets, avenues, alleys, squares, ways, and
over the bridges and viaducts of the city for the use of public and quasi-
public utilities; provided further, that such new franchise shall not destroy
the terms of any existing franchise. The city commission may prescribe in each
grant of a franchise, the rates, fares, charges, and regulations that may be
made by the grantee of the franchise. Franchises may be granted for a period of
twenty-five years or less, but no longer. Franchises may, by their terms, apply
to the territory within the corporate limits of the city as of the date of the
franchise, and as the corporate limits thereafter may be enlarged; and to the
then existing streets, alleys, and other thoroughfares that thereafter may be
opened.
   13)   CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE: To make contracts with any
person, firm, association or corporation, for public utilities and public
services to be furnished the city and those therein. Such power to make
contracts shall embrace the power, expressly conferred, to make exclusive
contracts. When an exclusive contract is entered into, it shall be exclusive
not only against any other person, firm, association or corporation, but also
as against the city itself. Such contracts may be entered into for the period
of twenty-five years or less, but not longer. The city commission may prescribe
in each such contract entered into the rates, fares, charges, and regulations
that may be made by the person, firm, association, or corporation with whom the
contract is made. Such contracts may, by their terms, apply to the territory
within the corporate limits of the city at the date of the contract, and as the
corporate limits thereafter may be enlarged; and to the then existing streets,
alleys, and other thoroughfares that thereafter may be opened.
   14)   REGULATIONS OF PUBLIC UTILITIES: To prescribe reasonable regulations
regarding the construction, maintenance, equipment, operation and service of
public utilities, and compel from time to time reasonable extension of
facilities for such service, but nothing in this subdivision (14) shall be
construed to permit the alteration or impairment of any of the terms or
provisions of any exclusive franchise granted or of any exclusive contract
entered into under subdivisions (12) and (13);.
   15)   HIGHWAYS, STREETS, PARKS: To establish, open, relocate, vacate, alter,
widen, extend, grade, improve, repair, construct, reconstruct, maintain, light,
sprinkle and clean public highways, streets, boulevards, parkways, sidewalks,
alleys, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, squares, wharves, bridges, viaducts,
subways, tunnels, sewers, and drains within the corporate limits and to
regulate the use thereof within or without the corporate limits, and property
may be taken and appropriated therefor under Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 7-31-
107 - 7-31-111 and 29-116-114, or in such other manner as may be provided by
general laws.
   16)   ABUTTING PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT: To construct, improve, reconstruct, and
reimprove by opening, extending, widening, grading, curbing, guttering, paving,
graveling, macadamizing, draining, or otherwise improving any streets,
highways, avenues, alleys, or other public places within the corporate limits,
and to assess a portion of the cost of such improvements upon the property
abutting upon or adjacent to such streets, highways, or alleys as provided by
Tennessee Code Annotated Title 7, Chapters 32 and 33.
   17)   CHARGES AGAINST ABUTTING PROPERTY: To assess against abutting property
within the corporate limits the cost of planting shade trees, removing from
sidewalks all accumulations of snow, ice, and earth, cutting and removing
obnoxious weeds and rubbish; street lighting; street sweeping; street
sprinkling; street flushing and street oiling; the cleaning and rendering
sanitary, or removal, abolishing, and prohibiting of closets and privies, in
such manner as may be provided by general law or by ordinance of the city
commission.
   18)   MARKET PLACES, PUBLIC BUILDINGS, BRIDGES. ETC.: To acquire, purchase,
provide for, construct, regulate and maintain and do all things relating to all
market places, public buildings, bridges, sewers, cemeteries, and other
structures, works, and improvements.
   19)   DRAINAGE, SEWAGE, ASHES, ETC.: To collect and dispose of drainage,
sewage, ashes, garbage, refuse or other waste, or to license and regulate such
collection and disposal, and the cost of such collection, regulation or
disposal may be funded by taxation or special assessment to the property owner.
   20)   LICENSE AND REGULATE: License and regulate all persons, firms,
corporations, companies and associations engaged in any business, occupation,
calling, profession, or trade not forbidden by law;
   21)   LICENSE TAX: To impose a license tax upon any animal, thing, business,
vocation, pursuit, privilege, or calling not prohibited by law.
   22)   REGULATION OF BUSINESS, CALLINGS, ETC.: To define, prohibit, abate,
suppress, prevent, and regulate all acts, practices, conduct, businesses,
occupations, callings, trades, uses of property and all other things whatsoever
detrimental, or liable to be detrimental, to the health, morals, comfort,
safety, convenience, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and to exercise
general police powers.
   23)   LIMIT OCCUPATIONS LIKELY TO BECOME A NUISANCE: To prescribe limits
within which business, occupations and practices liable to be nuisances or
detrimental to the health, morals, security or general welfare of the people
may lawfully be established, conducted, or maintained.
   24)   BUILDINGS, REGULATED AND INSPECTED: To regulate the bulk, occupancy,
area, lot, location, height, construction and materials of all buildings and
structures in accordance with general law, and to inspect all buildings, lands,
and places as to their condition for health, cleanliness, and safety, and when
necessary, prevent the use thereof and require any alteration or changes
necessary to make them healthful, clean and safe.
   25)   CHARITABLE, EDUCATIONAL, CORRECTIVE INSTITUTIONS: To provide and
maintain charitable, educational, recreative, curative, corrective, detentive,
or penal institutions, departments, functions, facilities, instrumentalities,
conveniences and services.
   26)   ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES - FINES AND IMPRISONMENT: To enforce any
ordinance, rule or regulation by fines, forfeitures and penalties, and by other
actions or proceedings in any court of competent.
   27)   SCHOOLS: To establish schools, to the extent authorized pursuant to
general law, determine the necessary boards and officers required therefor; to
purchase or otherwise acquire land for schoolhouses, playgrounds and other
purposes connected with the schools; to purchase or erect all necessary
buildings and to do all other acts necessary to establish, maintain, and
operate a complete educational system within the city.
   28)   ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE - TO SUPPRESS: To regulate, tax, license, or
suppress the keeping or running at large of animals within the city; to impound
the same and in default of redemption, to provide by ordinance, resolution,
regulation or otherwise, for the disposition, by sale, gift, or humane killing.
   29)   GENERAL POWERS: To have and exercise all powers that now or hereafter
it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate, as fully and
completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this section.
   The enumeration of particular powers in this charter is not exclusive of
others, nor restrictive of general words or phrases granting powers, nor shall
a grant or failure to grant power in this chapter impair a power granted in any
other part of this charter, and whether powers, objects, or purposes are
expressed, conjunctively or disjunctively, they shall be construed so as to
permit the city to exercise freely any one or more such powers as to any one or
more such objects for any one or more such purposes.
ARTICLE IV
ELECTIONS
SECTION 1. ELECTION LAWS
   The election of commissioners under this charter shall be held under the
election laws of the state of Tennessee.
SECTION 2. ELECTIONS REGULATED, VOTER ELIGIBILITY
   All city elections, including all elections respecting bond issues, shall be
held under the supervision of the McMinn County Election Commission, and in
accordance with the law governing state elections. All persons living within
the limits of said corporation who shall be qualified to vote for members of
the legislature of this state, and who shall have been a resident of said city
for six months preceding said elections, shall be entitled to vote and to have
his vote counted in said elections.
SECTION 3. TERMS OF COMMISSIONERS
   The terms of all five city commissioners shall begin with them taking their
oath of office at the first regular commission meeting following the
certification of their election by the McMinn County Election Commission, and
they shall serve for four (4) years or until their successors are elected and
qualified. It is further the intent of this charter to continue the existing
pattern of staggered four year terms precisely.
SECTION 4. ELECTION OF COMMISSIONERS
   A non-partisan municipal election shall be held in the city on the first
Thursday in August of each even-numbered year. Ties will be resolved by a vote
of the members of the certified elected board members at the first regularly
scheduled meeting following the election.
SECTION 5. ELECTION INVALIDATION
   No informalities in conducting any election held under this charter shall
invalidate it if such election is conducted fairly and in substantial
conformity with the requirements of this article.
SECTION 6. RECALL PROVISIONS
   Any person holding an elective office of the city, whether by election,
succession, or appointment to fill a vacancy, shall be subject to removal from
office at a recall election in the manner provided herein.
   1)   A recall of an incumbent of an elective office shall be initiated upon
petition signed by registered voters. All commissioners and school board
members are subject to recall and a recall petition shall contain signatures
equal in number to at least fifteen (15%) percent of the registered voters in
the city of Etowah. Every recall petition shall name the officer against whom
it is directed.
   2)   Each elector signing a recall petition shall add to his signature, his
residence, and the date of signing. Signatures on a recall petition may be on
separate sheets but each sheet shall have appended to it the affidavit of some
person, not necessarily a signer of the petition, that to the best of the
affiant’s knowledge and belief the persons whose signatures appear on the sheet
are registered voters of the city of Etowah, Tennessee.
   3)   A recall petition shall be tendered for filing with the McMinn County
Election Commission. Said election commission shall examine it to see whether
it contains a sufficient number of apparently genuine signatures. The election
commission may question the genuineness of any signature or signatures
appearing on the recall petition and if it shall find that any such signature
or signatures are not genuine, it shall disregard them in determining whether
the petition contains a sufficient number of signatures. It shall also
disregard any signature dated more than thirty (30) days before the date the
petition was tendered for filing. The election commission shall eliminate any
sheet of the petition which is not accompanied by the required affidavit. The
invalidity of the petition if a sufficient number of signatures remains after
eliminating such an invalid sheet. The election commission shall complete its
examination of the petition as soon as practical and shall thereupon file the
petition if valid or reject it if invalid.
   4)   As soon as the McMinn County Election Commission has accepted a recall
petition for filing, the chairman of the McMinn County Election Commission
shall notify the incumbent named in the petition that the petition has been
filed. Upon receipt of such notice, the incumbent may resign from his office
and thereupon the recall proceedings shall terminate.
   5)   If the incumbent against whom a recall petition is directed does not
resign from his office within eight (8) days after notice of the filing of such
petition shall have been given to him, the McMinn County Election Commission
shall arrange a recall election. If a regular or special election is to be held
not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days after the eight
(8) days have expired, the recall question shall be placed before the voters at
such an election. Otherwise, a special recall election shall be fixed for a
date not earlier than thirty (30) days nor later than ninety (90) days after
the eight (8) days have expired. The incumbent against whom a recall petition
is directed may resign at any time prior to the recall election and thereupon
the election shall not be held.
   6)   The following question shall be presented to each elector in a recall
election:
   “Shall (name of officer) be recalled and removed from the office of (name of
office)”. The above question shall appear as to every officer whose recall is
to be voted upon and provision shall be made for the elector to vote “Yes” or
“No” on the question.
   7)   If a majority of the voters who vote on the question at a recall
election shall vote “Yes”, the incumbent shall be deemed recalled and removed
from office, but if a majority of the voters who vote on the question at a
recall election shall vote “No”, he shall remain in office.
   8)   No person who has been removed from an elective office by a recall
election or who has resigned from such an office after a recall petition
directed against him has been filed, shall be eligible for election or
appointment to any office of the city of Etowah within two years after his
removal or resignation.
ARTICLE V
CITY COMMISSION
SECTION 1. ELECTION OF MAYOR
   The commissioners shall, at the first regular meeting (or as soon thereafter
as practical) after each biennial city election in August, elect one of their
number as mayor for a term of two years, and thus organized, the body shall be
known as the city commission.
SECTION 2. COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP ELIGIBILITY
   No person who has been convicted of a felony is eligible for the election to
the office of commissioner. Otherwise, any qualified voter of the city shall be
eligible for the election to the office of commissioner, provided that his
office shall automatically be vacated if he ceases to reside in the city of
Etowah, Tennessee.
SECTION 3. COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP LIMITED
   No person shall become a commissioner who has been convicted of malfeasance
in office, bribery, or other corrupt practice or crime. If any commissioner
shall be so convicted, he shall forfeit his office. No candidate for any office
nor any other person shall, directly or indirectly, give or promise any person
or persons any office, employment, money, benefit, or anything of value for the
purpose of influencing or obtaining political support, aid, or vote for any
candidate. Any person violating this section shall be punished by fine not
exceeding state authorized maximum limits.
SECTION 4. COMMISSION SALARIES
   The salary of the mayor and each commissioner may be set by ordinance and
may be increased or decreased provided that no such increase or decrease in
salary shall take effect until after the expiration of the terms of office of
the mayor and all commissioners in office at the time of the adoption of such
ordinance.
SECTION 5. COMMISSION POWERS
   The legislative and all other powers of the city except as otherwise
provided in this charter are delegated to and vested in the city commission;
and the city commission may, by ordinance or resolution not inconsistent with
this charter, prescribe the manner in which any powers of the city shall be
exercised, provided all means necessary or proper therefore, and do all things
needful within or without the city or state to protect the rights of the city.
SECTION 6. EXERCISE OF POWERS
   The city commission shall exercise its powers in session duly assembled, and
no member or group of members thereof, shall exercise or attempt to exercise
the powers conferred upon the city commission except through proceedings
adopted at some regular or special session.
SECTION 7. COMMISSION MEETINGS
   The city commission shall, by ordinance, fix the time and place at which the
regular meetings of said board shall be held.
SECTION 8. SPECIAL MEETINGS
   Whenever, in the opinion of the mayor, city manager, or of any two
commissioners, the welfare of the city demands it, the mayor or the recorder
shall call special meetings of the city commission upon at least three calendar
days written notice to the public and each commissioner, the city manager,
recorder and city attorney, served personally, or left at his usual place of
residence. Each call for special meeting shall set forth the character of the
business to be discussed at such meeting and no other business shall be
considered at such meeting.
SECTION 9. COMMISSION VACANCIES
   When any vacancy in the city commission shall occur, such vacancy shall be
filled by the remaining commissioners. The newly appointed member shall serve
for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any.
SECTION 10. VICE-MAYOR
   At the first meeting of the commission, and thereafter at the first meeting
after a general city election, said commission shall choose from its membership
a vice-mayor to act in the absence or inability of the mayor.
SECTION 11. VICE-MAYOR DUTIES
   The vice-mayor shall act as mayor during any temporary absence or inability
of the mayor, and whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, such member
shall become mayor and hold office as such for the unexpired term.
SECTION 12. QUORUM
   A majority of all the members of the city commission constitutes a quorum,
but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and may compel the attendance
of the absentees in such manner and under such penalties as the city commission
may provide. Unless otherwise provided in this charter, a majority vote of all
members of the city commission shall be required to pass an ordinance,
resolution, or motion, to appoint or discharge the city manager and members of
any board.
SECTION 13. COMMISSION RULES, ETC.
   The city commission may determine the rules of its proceedings, subject to
this charter, and may arrest and punish by fine any member or other person
guilty of disorderly or contemptuous behavior in its presence. The board has
the power and may delegate it to any committee, to subpoena witnesses, and
order the production of books and papers relating to any subject within its
jurisdiction; to call upon its own officers or the chief of police to execute
its process, and to arrest and punish by fine any person refusing to obey such
subpoena or order.
   No fine for any one offense under this section shall exceed state authorized
maximum limits, exclusive of court costs, but each day’s continuance in any
refusal as aforesaid shall be a separate offense. The presiding officer of the
city commission or the chairman of any committee may administer oaths to
witnesses. The city commission shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and the
yeas and nays on all questions shall be entered thereon.
SECTION 14. PUBLIC MEETINGS
   All sessions of the commission shall be public; and subject to change of
time and/or place in case of emergency.
SECTION 15. APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL AND SUPERVISION OF CITY EMPLOYEES
   Neither the commission nor any of its members shall request, propose, direct
or otherwise attempt to influence the city manager, or any of his subordinates
in the selection, promotion, or demotion, or removal of an employee in any
administrative service or activity, or office of the city government. Neither
the commission nor the members thereof shall give any orders to any subordinate
of the city manager, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly.
ARTICLE VI
ORDINANCES
SECTION 1. BEGINNING
   All ordinances shall begin by an enacting clause, as follows: “Be it
ordained by the city commission of the city of Etowah”.
SECTION 2. READINGS, EFFECT
   Every ordinance shall be read two different days in open session before its
adoption and not less than seven calendar days shall elapse between the first
and second readings. Any ordinance not so read shall be null and void. The
commission may establish by ordinance a procedure to read only the caption of
an ordinance, instead of the entire ordinance, on both readings. Copies of such
ordinances shall be available during regular business hours at the office of
the city recorder and during session in which the ordinance has its second
reading. An ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage.
   In case of an emergency ordinance, one day shall elapse between first and
second readings. An emergency ordinance becomes effective upon the day of its
final passage, provided it shall contain the statement that an emergency exists
and shall specify with distinctness the facts and reasons constituting such an
emergency. The unanimous vote of all members of the board present shall be
required to pass an emergency ordinance. No ordinance making a grant, renewal,
or extension of a franchise or other special privilege shall ever be passed as
an emergency ordinance.
   No ordinance shall be amended except by a new ordinance.
SECTION 3. ORDINANCE BOOK REQUIRED
   Every ordinance shall be immediately taken charge of by the city recorder
and by him be numbered, copied in an ordinance book, filed and preserved in his
office.
SECTION 4. PUBLICATION REQUIRED
   Each ordinance of a penal nature, or the caption of each ordinance of a
penal nature, may be published after its final passage in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city.
ARTICLE VII
MAYOR
SECTION 1. DUTIES OF MAYOR
   The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city commission and perform
such other duties consistent with his office as may be imposed by it and he
shall have a seat, a voice, and a vote, but no veto. He shall sign the journal
of the city commission and all ordinances on their final passage, execute all
deeds, bonds, and contracts made in the name of the city, and he may introduce
ordinances and resolutions and make motions in any meeting of the city
commission.
ARTICLE VIII
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION 1. APPOINTMENT OF CITY MANAGER
   The board of commissioners shall appoint and fix the salary of the city
manager, who shall serve at the will of the board.
   The city manager may not be removed within twelve (12) months from the date
on which the city manager assumed the duties of the city manager, except for
incompetence, malfeasance, misfeasance, or neglect of duty.
   In case of the city manager’s removal within that period, the city manager
may demand written charges and a public hearing thereon before the board prior
to the date on which final removal shall take effect. The decision and action
of the board on such hearing shall be final, and pending such hearing, the
board may suspend the city manager from duty.
   No member of the City Commission shall, at any time, be chosen during the
term for which he is elected, as City Manager, nor for two years after having
last served as a City Commissioner.
SECTION 2. APPOINTMENT AND SALARIES OF CITY EMPLOYEES
   The city manager may appoint, promote, suspend, transfer and remove any
officer or employee of the city responsible to the city manager; or the city
manager may, in the city manager’s discretion, authorize the head of a
department or office responsible to the city manager to take such actions
regarding subordinates in such department or office. The city manager shall
appoint such heads of administrative offices or organizational units as the
city manager deems necessary. The city manager may combine, or personally hold,
any such administrative offices established pursuant to this subsection or
otherwise established or may delegate parts of the duties of the city manager’s
office to designated subordinates.
   Except for the Etowah Utility Board and its employees, the Etowah City Board
of Education and its employees, the city judge and the city attorney, or as
otherwise provided in this charter, the compensation of all officers and
employees of the city shall be fixed by the city manager within the limits of
the appropriations ordinance and in accordance with a comprehensive pay plan
adopted by the board of commissioners.
SECTION 3. OATH REQUIRED
   Every officer, agent, and employee holding a position upon an annual salary
shall, before entering upon his duties, take and subscribe and file with the
city recorder, an oath or affirmation that he has all the qualifications named
in this charter for the office or employment he is about to assume; that he
will support the constitutions of the United States and of this state and the
charter and ordinances of the city, and that he will faithfully discharge the
duties of his office or employment.
SECTION 4. BONDS REQUIRED
   The city manager and every officer, agent and employee having duties
embracing the receipt, disbursement, custody, or handling of money shall,
before entering upon his duties execute a fidelity bond with some surety
company authorized to do business in the state of Tennessee, as surety, except
that bonds for five hundred ($500) or less may be given with personal surety,
in such amount as shall be prescribed by ordinance of the city commission,
except where the amount is prescribed in this charter. All such bonds and
sureties thereto shall be subject to the approval of the city commission. The
cost of making such bonds shall be paid by the city.
SECTION 5. ADDITIONAL BOND
   If at any time it appears to the mayor, city manager or recorder that the
surety or sureties on any official bond are insufficient, the officer or
employee shall be required by the city commission to give additional bond, and
if such officer or employee fails to give additional bond within twenty (20)
days after being notified, the officer or employee’s office shall be declared
vacant.
ARTICLE IX
CITY MANAGER
SECTION 1. ADMINISTRATIVE HEAD
   In addition to all other powers conferred upon the city manager, he shall be
administrative head of the municipal government under the supervision of the
city commission. The city manager shall be required to give his full time to
the duties of his office.
   During the absence or disability of the city manager, the city commission
may designate some properly qualified person to temporarily perform the
functions of the city manager.
SECTION 2. POWERS AND DUTIES
   The powers and duties of the city manager are:
   1)   To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced, and upon knowledge or
information of any violation thereof, to see that prosecutions are instituted
in the city court.
   2)   Except as otherwise provided by this charter, to appoint, promote,
demote, suspend, transfer and remove and otherwise discipline all department
heads and all subordinate officers and employees at any time, subject only to
any personnel rules and regulations adopted by ordinance or resolution by the
commission. Any hearings on, or appeals from, the city manager’s personnel
decisions provided for in the personnel rules and regulations shall be
exclusively before the city manager or a hearing officer designated by the city
manager.
   3)   To supervise and control the work of all employees of the city except
the city judge, city attorneys and employees under the supervision of the
Etowah City Board of Education and the Etowah Utilities Board.
   4)   To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or
its inhabitants in any public utility or franchise are faithfully done, kept
and performed, and upon knowledge or information of any violation thereof, to
call the same to the attention of the city attorney who is hereby required to
take such steps as are necessary to enforce the same.
   5)   To attend all meetings of the city commission, with the right to take
part in the discussion, but not to vote.
   6)   To recommend to the city commission such measures as he may deem
necessary or expedient.
   7)   To act as budget officer and to keep the city commission fully advised
as to the financial condition and needs of the city.
   8)   Act as purchasing agent for the city (excluding the Etowah City Board
of Education and the Etowah Utilities Board) and purchase all material,
supplies and equipment for the proper conduct of the city’s business in
compliance with general state laws and local ordinances.
   9)   The city commission shall prescribe by ordinance the maximum
expenditure which the city manager may make without specific authorization of
the commission, and shall prescribe rules for competitive bidding.
   10)   Execute contracts on behalf of the city when this authority is
delegated to the city manager by ordinance.
   11)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or
required of the city manager by resolution or ordinance of the board.
SECTION 3. SPECIAL AUDIT
   In the event of the death, resignation or removal of the city manager, as
soon as practicable thereafter, the city commission may cause an audit to be
made of the city books by a certified public accountant.
ARTICLE X
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION 1. QUALIFICATIONS
   The city attorney shall be an attorney at law entitled to practice in the
courts of the state.
SECTION 2. DUTIES AND COMPENSATION
   The city attorney shall:
   1)   Direct the management of all litigation in which the city is a party,
including the functions of prosecuting attorney in the city courts;
   2)   Represent the city in all legal matters and proceedings in which the
city is a party or interested, or in which any of its officers are officially
interested;
   3)   Attend any meetings of the board of commissioners when required by the
board;
   4)   Advise the board and committees or members thereof, the city manager,
and the heads of all departments and divisions, as to all legal questions
affecting the city’s interest; and
   5)   Approve as to form all contracts, deeds, bonds, ordinances, resolutions
and other documents to be signed in the name of or made by or with the city.
   The city attorney shall receive a salary to be fixed by the board.
ARTICLE XI
TAXATION
SECTION 1. TAX ROLLS
   It is the duty of the finance director, in each year, as soon as the
assessment roll for the city is complete, to submit to the city commission a
certified statement of the total amount of the valuation or assessment of the
taxable property for the year within the city limits (including the assessment
of all railroads, telephone, telegraph and other public utilities properties),
together with a certified statement of the revenue derived by the city from
privilege taxes, merchants’ ad valorem taxes, street labor taxes, fines for the
preceding fiscal year, and miscellaneous revenue. Upon the presentation of such
statements by the finance director, the city commission shall proceed by
ordinance to make the proper levy to meet the expenses of the city for the
current fiscal year.
SECTION 2. TAX BOOK PREPARATION
   It is the duty of the finance director, immediately after the levy of taxes
by the city commission, to cause the levy to be extended upon the tax book
prepared by the finance director in the same manner that extensions are made
upon the tax books in the hands of the county trustee.
SECTION 3. TAXES DUE AND PAYABLE
   All taxes due the city, except privilege and merchant’s ad valorem taxes and
street labor taxes, shall, until otherwise provided by ordinance, be due and
payable by the deadline of the year for which the taxes are assessed. The
finance director is the custodian of the tax books and shall be the tax
collector of the city.
   Distress warrants may issue for the collection of taxes and any such
distress warrant shall be executed by the chief of police or any police
officers of the city by a levy upon, and sale of goods and chattels under the
same provisions as prescribed by law for the execution of such process of
courts of general sessions.
SECTION 4. ASSESSMENTS
   All municipal taxes on real estate in the city, and all penalties and costs
accruing thereon, are hereby declared to be a lien on such realty from and
after the deadline of the year for which same are assessed, superior to all
other liens, except the liens of the United States, the state of Tennessee and
the county, for taxes legally assessed thereon, with which it shall be a lien
of equal dignity. No assessment shall be invalid because the size and
dimensions of any tract, lot or parcel of land shall not have been precisely
named nor the amount of the valuation or tax not correctly given, nor because
the property has been assessed in the name of a person who did not own the
same, nor because the same was assessed to unknown owners, nor on account of
any objection or informality merely technical, but all such assessments shall
be good and valid. The city commission shall have power to correct any errors
in the tax assessments upon a certificate filed by the assessor of property or
assessing body.
SECTION 5. TAX SALE
   The finance director shall, under the provision of the state law for the
collection of delinquent taxes, certify to the city attorney, or other
attorneys designated by the city commission, a list of all real estate upon
which municipal taxes remain due and unpaid, or that is liable for sale for
other taxes, and the same shall be sold in like manner and upon the same terms
and conditions as real estate is sold for delinquent state and county taxes.
SECTION 6. COURT PROCESS
   The city commission shall has the power, and is hereby given authority, to
file complaints in the chancery court in the name of the city for the
collection of assessments and levies made for payment for improvements or
service in the city, such as paving, sidewalks, curbing, guttering, sewers and
other improvements, or services for which assessments may be made, under this
charter, or by any other acts of the general assembly, and the cost of which is
made a charge on property owners abutting the improvements and a lien on
abutting property. The suits commenced by such complaints shall be conducted as
other suits in chancery for the enforcement of like liens and under the rules
of law and practice provided for the same. The complaints shall not be
objectionable because the owners of different parcels or lots of land are made
parties thereto, it being the intention that all persons in the same
improvement district, or liable for portions of the same assessment or levy is
a lien, shall be made parties defendant to one complaint.
ARTICLE XII
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
SECTION 1. HEAD OF DEPARTMENT
   The city manager or an officer appointed by the city manager shall serve as
finance director.
SECTION 2. DUTIES OF FINANCE DIRECTOR
   The finance director exercises a general supervision over the fiscal affairs
of the city, and general accounting supervision over all the city’s property,
assets and claims and the disposition of such property, assets, and claims. The
finance director shall be the general accountant and auditor of the city; he
shall have custody of all records, paper and vouchers relating to the fiscal
affairs of the city, and the records in the city manager’s office shall show
the financial operations and conditions, property, assets, claims and
liabilities of the city, all expenditures authorized and all contracts in which
the city is interested, require proper fiscal accounts, records, settlements,
and reports to be kept, made and rendered to the city manager, by the several
departments and officers of the city, including all deputies or employees of
the city manager’s department charged with the collection or expenditures of
money, and shall control and audit the same; and at least monthly, adjust the
settlements of officers engaged in the collection of the revenue.
   The finance director, with the approval of the city manager, shall cause an
efficient system of accounting for the city to be installed and maintained.
   The city manager shall appoint a finance director. It is the duty of the
finance director to collect, receive and receipt for the taxes and all other
revenue and bonds of the city, and the proceeds of its bond issues, and to
disburse the same. The city manager may appoint the recorder as finance
director.
   The finance director shall also perform any other duties imposed upon him by
this charter, ordinance, or by the city manager.
SECTION 3. INTERNAL AUDITOR
   Except as by this charter or by law or ordinance otherwise provide, the
finance director shall prescribe and regulate the manner of paying creditors,
officers, and employees of the city. The finance director shall audit all
payrolls, accounts and claims against the city, and certify thereon the balance
as stated by the finance director, but no payroll, account or claim, or any
part thereof, shall be audited against the city or paid unless authorized by
law or ordinance and approved and certified by the city manager and the head of
the department for which the indebtedness was incurred, and the amount required
for payment of the same appropriated for that purpose by ordinance and in the
treasury. Whenever any claim is presented to the finance director, he shall
have power to require evidence that the amount claimed is justly due, and is in
conformity to law and ordinance, and for that purpose may summon before him any
officer, agent or employee of any department of the municipality, or any other
person, and examine the officer, agency or employee upon oath or affirmation
relative thereto. The city manager, the finance director, and the head of the
department concerned, and their sureties, shall be liable to the municipality
for all loss or damage sustained by the municipality by reason of the corrupt
approval of any claim against the municipality.
SECTION 4. SIGNING OF CHECKS
   Subject to the provisions of the foregoing section, all warrants shall be
issued by the finance director.
   Each warrant shall specify the particular departmental fund against which it
is drawn and shall be payable out of no other fund.
   Any officer or employee in the finance director’s office may be designated
by such finance director to draw warrants with the same effect as if signed by
the finance director, such designation to be in writing, in duplicate, filed
with the city manager. The city manager may make such designation if the
finance director is absent or disabled and there is no one in the finance
director’s office designated to act. Any such designation may be revoked by the
finance director while acting as such by filing the revocation in duplicate
with the city manager and the treasury division.
   All checks shall be countersigned by the mayor, or in the absence or
disability of the mayor, by the vice-mayor.
SECTION 5. PROPER FORMS
   The finance director shall cause all forms used in connection with either
the receipt or disbursement of city funds to be numbered consecutively, and
shall account for all spoiled or unused forms.
ARTICLE XIII
TAXATION AND REVENUES
SECTION 1. COLLECTION OF TAXES
   The assessment, levy and collection of taxes and special assessments shall
be in charge of the department of finance, subject to the limitations elsewhere
found in this charter.
SECTION 2. TAXES MAY BE LEVIED
   All property, real, personal, and mixed, subject to state, county, and city
taxes and all privileges taxable by law, shall be taxed and taxes thereon
collected by the city for municipal purposes as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 3. AD VALOREM TAXES
   The ad valorem tax upon merchants’ stock, accounts and equipment may be
assessed and collected in like manner as state and county merchants’ ad valorem
tax is assessed upon the same property. It is the duty of the county assessor
of property and the comptroller of the treasury to prepare a separate
assessment book or roll showing real, personal and mixed property assessable by
the county assessor of property or the comptroller of the treasury lying within
the limits of the city.
SECTION 4. TAXES BASED ON ASSESSMENTS
   The city commission of the city shall have full power to levy and collect
taxes.
SECTION 5. TAX ROLLS
   As soon as practicable in each year after the assessment books for the state
and county are complete (which shall be after equalization boards provided for
by general law shall have finished their work), it shall be the duty of the
city manager to prepare or cause to be prepared from the said assessment books
of the county, a tax book similar in form to that required by laws of the state
to be made out for the county trustee, embracing, however, only such property
and persons as are liable for taxes within the city.
   Such tax books, when certified to be true, correct and complete by the city
manager shall be the assessment for taxes in said city for all municipal
purposes’ provided, that there may be an assessment by the city manager at any
time, of any property subject to taxation found to have been omitted, and such
assessment shall be duly noted and entered on the assessment books of the city.
Instead of the assessment made by county and state officials as provided in
this section, the city may, by ordinance insofar as not prohibited by general
laws, provide for and regulate an assessment to be made by its own assessor of
property.
ARTICLE XIV
CITY BONDS
SECTION 1. BONDS AUTHORIZED
   Pursuant to Article III, Section 1 (5) and (6), the city may borrow money
and do so in accordance with state regulations.
ARTICLE XV
BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS
SECTION 1. BUDGET OFFICER
   The city manager shall be the budget officer. The fiscal year of the city
shall begin the first day of July of each year.
   The city manager shall, on or before the first Monday in May of each year,
submit to the city commission an estimate of the expenditures and revenue of
the city for the ensuing fiscal year. This estimate shall be compiled from
detailed information obtained from the several departments, on uniform blanks
to be furnished by the city manager.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, the
governing body shall publish the annual operating budget and budgetary
comparisons of the proposed budget with the prior year’s actual figures and the
current year’s estimated figures, which information shall include the
following:
   1)   Revenues and expenditures for the following governmental funds:
general, streets/public works, general purpose school and debt service;
   2)   Revenues for each fund shall be listed separately by local taxes, state
of Tennessee, federal government and other sources;
   3)   Expenditures for each fund shall be listed separately by salaries and
other costs;
   4)   Beginning and ending fund balances shall be shown for each fund; and
   5)   The number of full-time equivalent employee positions shall be shown
for each fund.
   The publication shall be in a newspaper of general circulation and shall be
published not less than ten (10) days prior to the meeting where the governing
body will consider final passage of the budget.
   In addition, the city will comply with the Municipal Budget Law of 1982.
SECTION 2. BALANCE REVERTS TO SURPLUS
   At the end of each year, all unencumbered balances or appropriations in the
treasury shall revert to the general fund and be subject to further
appropriations. Such balances shall be considered unencumbered only when the
city manager shall certify in writing that the purposes for which they were
appropriated have been completely accomplished and that no further expenditure
in connection with them is necessary.
SECTION 3. CERTIFICATION OF AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS TO MEET CONTRACT OBLIGATIONS
   No contract, agreement, or other obligation involving the expenditure of
money shall be entered into, nor shall any ordinance, resolution or order for
the expenditure of money be passed by the board of commissioners or be
authorized by any officer of the city, unless the finance director shall first
certify to the board or the proper officer, as the case may be, that the money
required for such contract, agreement, obligation or expenditure, is in the
treasury or safely assured to be forthcoming and available in time to comply
with, or meet such contract, agreement, obligation or expenditures; and no
contract, agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of money
payable from the proceeds of bonds of the city shall be entered into until the
issuance and sale of such bonds have been duly authorized in accordance with
the provisions of this charter in reference to city bonds.
SECTION 4. CITY MANAGER RESPONSIBLE
   The city manager shall be responsible for limiting expenditures and
obligations to the amounts of appropriations for all departments. He shall
present a monthly budget statement to the city commission, comparing amounts of
receipts and of expense allotted to the elapsed portion of the fiscal year with
the receipts actually realized and the expense actually incurred, and in
general disclosing the condition of the budget.
ARTICLE XVI
DEPARTMENTS UNDER THE CITY MANAGER
SECTION 1. DEPARTMENTS CREATED
   That the work and affairs of the city may be classified and arranged
conveniently and conducted efficiently, there are hereby established the
following departments and boards:
   1)   Department of City Administration
   2)   Department of Finance;
   3)   Department of Fire;
   4)   Department of Public Works/Streets/Sanitation;
   5)   Department of Police;
   6)   Department of Parks and Recreation;
   7)   Department of Community Development
   8)   Department of Human Resources/Risk Management
SECTION 2. SALARIES, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS; DEPARTMENTS ABOLISHED OR CREATED
   The city commission shall fix all salaries, not fixed by this charter, in
all departments except the Etowah City Board of Education and the Etowah
Utilities Board, prescribe the duties and functions of all departments except
as fixed by this charter, and may, create new departments, combine or abolish
existing departments, or establish temporary departments for special work.
SECTION 3. SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENTS
   Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city manager shall
supervise and control the work of all departments, now or hereafter created,
other than the Etowah City Board of Education and the Etowah Utilities Board.
SECTION 4. DEPARTMENT OF CITY ADMINISTRATION
   The city manager’s position and duties are described in Article IX. The city
manager may appoint such other employees of the department of city
administration as may be authorized by appropriate ordinance.
SECTION 5. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
   The city manager shall appoint a finance director and such other employees
of the department of finance as may be authorized by appropriate ordinance.
   It shall be the duty of the finance director to be present at all meetings
of the city commission and to keep a full accurate record of all business
transacted by the commission, which record shall be preserved in permanent book
form.
   The finance director may also serve as the city recorder and in such
capacity shall have custody of and preserve in his office, the city seal, the
public records, original rolls of ordinances, ordinance books, certificates and
papers, all official indemnity or surety bonds, and all other bonds, oaths and
affirmations, and he shall register them by numbers, dates, and contents, and
keep an accurate and modern index thereof. The finance director shall provide a
bond of such surety and in such amount as the commission may require by
ordinance, said bond to be filed with the mayor. The failure of the finance
director as city recorder to perform any duty required by this paragraph shall
not void any ordinance otherwise valid.
   When required by an officer or citizen, the finance director shall provide
certified copies of records, papers, and documents in his office, and charge
thereof, for the use of the city, such fees as may be provided by ordinance;
and he shall cause copies of ordinances to be duplicated as may be directed by
the city commission and keep them in his office for distribution.
SECTION 6. DEPARTMENT OF FIRE
   The city manager may appoint a chief of the fire department and such other
members of said department as may be authorized by appropriate ordinance.
   It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department and the members
thereof, to take all proper steps for fire prevention and suppression, and
elimination of conditions which create fire hazards.
   The chief of the fire department or any assistant of such chief in charge at
any fire shall have the same police powers at such fire as the chief of police.
When any fire department or company recognized as duly constituted by the
commissioner of commerce and insurance pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated §
68-102-108 is requested to respond to a fire, hazardous materials incident,
natural disaster, service call, or other emergency, it may, regardless of where
the emergency exists, proceed to the emergency site by the most direct route at
the maximum speed consistent with safety. While responding to, operating at, or
returning from such emergency, the chief of the responding fire department or
company, or any member serving in capacity of fire officer-in-charge, shall
also have the authority to:
   1)   Control and direct the activities at the scene of the emergency;
   2)   Order any person or persons to leave any building or place in the
vicinity of such scene for the purpose of protecting such person or persons
from injury;
   3)   Blockade any public highway, street or private right-of-way temporarily
while at such scene;
   4)   Trespass at any time of the day or night without liability while at
such scene;
   5)   Enter any building or premises, including private dwellings, where a
fire is in progress, or where there is reasonable cause to believe a fire is in
progress, for the purpose of extinguishing the fire;
   6)   Enter any building or premises, including private dwellings, near the
scene of the fire for the purpose of protecting the building or premises, or
for the purpose of extinguishing the fire that is in progress in another
building or premises;
   7)   Inspect for preplanning all buildings, structures, or other places in
the chiefs fire district, except the interior of a private dwelling, where any
combustible material, including waste paper, rags, shavings, waste, leather,
rubber, crates, boxes, barrels, rubbish, or other combustible material that is
or may become dangerous as a fire menace to such buildings, structures, or
other places has been allowed to accumulate, or where such chief or the chiefs
designated representative has reason to believe that such combustible material
has accumulated or is likely to accumulate;
   8)   Direct without liability the removal or destruction of any fence,
house, motor vehicle, or other thing, if such person deems such action
necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire;
   9)   Request and be furnished with additional materials or special equipment
at the expense of the owner of the property on which the emergency occurs, if
deemed necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire or hazardous
condition; and
   10)   Order disengagement or discouplement of any convoy, caravan, or train
of vehicles, craft, or railway cars, if deemed necessary in the interest of
safety of persons or property.
   When any fire department or company responds to any emergency outside its
fire district, however, it shall at all times be subject to the control of the
fire chief or designated representative in whose district the emergency occurs.
   The city manager may appoint a member of the fire department whose duty
shall be, subject to the chief of the fire department, to investigate the
cause, origin, and circumstances of fires and the loss occasioned thereby, and
assist in the prevention of arson.
SECTION 7. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS/STREETS/SANITATION
   The city manager may appoint a director of public works and such other
employees of the department of public works/streets/sanitation as the city
commission as may be authorized by appropriate ordinance. The city commission
may by ordinance, however, provide for a supervisor of sanitation and a
supervisor of streets in lieu of, or in addition to, a director of public
works/streets/sanitation.
   It is the duty of the director of public works/streets/sanitation and
members of the department to collect, remove and dispose of solid waste. The
department shall also be responsible for keeping the streets, alleys, sidewalks
and drainageways of the city of Etowah in good repair.
SECTION 8. DEPARTMENT OF POLICE
   The city manager may appoint a chief of police and such patrolmen and other
members of the police force as may be authorized by appropriate ordinance.
   It is the duty of the chief of police and the members of the police force to
preserve order in the city; protect the inhabitants and property owners therein
from violence, crime, and all criminal acts; prevent the commission of crime,
violations of law and of the city ordinances, and perform a general police
duty, execute and return all processes, notices, and orders of the city
manager, city attorney and city recorder, and all other processes, notices, and
orders as provided in this charter, or by ordinances.
   In time of riot or other emergency, the mayor or the city manager shall have
power to summon any number of inhabitants to assist the police force.
   Members of the police force, whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing
the ordinances of the city, shall procure the issuance of warrants, and
citations, serve the same, and appear in the city courts as prosecutors,
relieving complainant citizens, insofar as practicable, of the burden of
instituting cases involving the violation of city ordinances, but this section
shall not be construed to relieve any person from the duty of appearing in
court and testifying in any case.
SECTION 9. DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
   The city manager may appoint a director of parks and recreation and such
other employees for the department of parks and recreation as may be authorized
by appropriate ordinance.
   It is the duty of the director of parks and recreation to be responsible for
the recreation programs for the city of Etowah and for the upkeep and
maintenance of parklands.
SECTION 10. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
   The city manager may appoint a director of community development and such
other employees for the department of community development as may be
authorized by appropriate ordinance.
   It is the duty of the director of community development to be responsible
for all building codes enforcement/inspections/permits and city ordinance codes
enforcement/letters/visits/ citations and as well as be responsible for retail
development projects, retiree recruitment projects, public art projects, grant
writing, website development, expanding the network of social media outlets and
projects/tasks/assignments related to revitalizing the city and community.
SECTION 11. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES/RISK MANAGEMENT
   The city manager may appoint a director of human resources/risk management
and such other employees for the department of human resources/risk management
as may be authorized by appropriate ordinance.
   It is the duty of the director of human resources/risk management to oversee
personnel issues of the city, adherence to human resource policies, recommend
policies and/or policy changes to the city commission regarding human
resources, negotiate benefit packages, manage payroll, and minimize risk
exposures.
ARTICLE XVII
ETOWAH CITY BOARD OF EDUCATION
SECTION 1. SEPARATE SCHOOL DISTRICT CREATED
   The Etowah City Board of Education is hereby constituted as a separate
school district. There is hereby created a board of education of and for the
city of Etowah, to be known as the Etowah City Board of Education, which shall
be a body corporate and may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with,
in its own name. The general school laws of the state in regard to common
schools shall apply to the city of Etowah so far as the same are not modified
herein, and the said district shall be entitled to all sums of money from the
public school fund that it would be entitled to receive if the district were
organized under the general laws of the state.
SECTION 2. SCHOOL BOARD TO CONTROL SCHOOLS
   Except as herein otherwise provided, the Etowah City Board of Education has
full and exclusive power and authority as trustees or directors, to manage,
control and regulate the city schools, to maintain and adequately insure all
school property and prescribe all rules and regulations for the government,
control and operation of said schools and the teachers and superintendent
thereof. The board of education shall also adopt and prescribe all necessary
rules and regulations for its own conduct, and the dispatch of its business.
SECTION 3. QUALIFICATIONS FOR SCHOOL BOARD MEMBERS
   The qualifications of the members of the Etowah City Board of Education
shall be the same as the qualifications of city commissioners as provided in
Article V, sections two and three of this charter, and no person shall be
eligible as a member of the board of education who is a member of the city
commission of the city of Etowah. The members of the board are elected as
herein provided, and are subject to the same recall provisions as the city
commissioners.
SECTION 4. MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION - ELECTION, TERMS, SALARY, AND
VACANCIES
   The Etowah City Board of Education consists of five (5) members who shall
serve staggered four year terms. Members of the Etowah City Board of Education
shall be elected on the first Thursday in August of each even-numbered year to
coincide with the municipal elections. Those persons elected in the election
shall take office at the first meeting following the certification of such
election by the McMinn County Election Commission.
   Ties will be resolved by a vote of the members of the city commission at
their first regularly scheduled meeting following the election. The Etowah City
Board of Education is elected according to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 49-2-201
or any other general law, if any, governing the election of boards of education
in effect on that date.
   The salary of each member of the Etowah City Board of Education may be set
by ordinance and may be increased or decreased provided that no such increase
or decrease in salary shall take effect until after the expiration of the terms
of office of all members of the board of education in office at the time of the
adoption of such ordinance. Any vacancies occurring in the membership of the
Etowah City Board of Education shall be filled by appointment by the city
commission for the remainder of the term.
SECTION 5. BOARD OFFICERS
   The board of education shall, at their first meeting after each general city
election, elect from their number for a two-year term, a chairman, a vice-
chairman, and a secretary. Said board of education shall keep minutes of all
its proceedings in a well bound book, signed by the chairman, and attested by
the secretary. Said book to constitute a permanent and public record. The
superintendent shall receive and hold all school money for the city of Etowah,
from whatever source until disbursed on checks signed by himself and
countersigned by the chairman; provided, however, the chairman and
superintendent shall, before entering upon the duties of their office, file
with the finance director of the city of Etowah performance bonds conditioned
upon the faithful discharge of their duties, which bonds shall be approved by
the board of education, and which bonds shall name the city of Etowah as the
obligee with a responsible indemnity corporation, qualified to do business in
the state of Tennessee, being the surety on said bonds. The minimum principal
sum of said performance bonds shall be set by the Etowah City Board of
Education. The cost for said bonds shall be paid by the board of education.
   Checks shall be issued only when adequate funds are available for the stated
purpose and upon proper authorization by the board of education and
appropriation ordinance. The superintendent shall submit a monthly financial
statement to the city commission and the board of education on or before the
fourth Monday of the next succeeding month for which the report covers.
SECTION 6. REVENUES
   The county trustee, the county clerk of McMinn County, or any other tax
collector shall pay over to the Etowah City Board of Education out of all
moneys collected by them for school purposes from any sources such portion as
by law is applicable to the schools of the city of Etowah.
SECTION 7. SALARIES OF EMPLOYEES
   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the compensation of all
officers and employees of the Etowah City Board of Education shall be fixed by
the superintendent within the limits of the appropriations ordinance and in
accordance with a comprehensive pay plan adopted by the board of education.
SECTION 8. APPROPRIATIONS
   The board of education shall keep within and shall not at any time exceed
the appropriations provided and authorized by the city commission of the city,
with respect to the expense of the operation of the city school system. The
board of education shall each year prepare and submit to the city manager a
proposed budget for the ensuing year. Said budget shall be prepared on forms as
prescribed in Article XV, Section 1, and contain information consistent with
that required by the state Department of Education, including a detailed
estimate of revenue and proposed expenditures. Whenever the funds required for
the operation of schools shall exceed the estimated revenues from all other
sources, such as state and federal aid, then the city commission may provide
such funds by the tax levy.
SECTION 9. CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
   Whenever the board of education deems it advisable to construct new school
buildings or to purchase real estate for school purposes, it shall present to
the city commission the plans for said buildings and/or a description of said
real estate, together with the estimated cost. The city commission may provide
the necessary funds by the issuance of bonds as authorized by this charter or
as otherwise authorized by law, or from other available funds, or may reject
the request.
SECTION 10. PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS
   The board of education shall establish purchasing policies that comply with
state laws and cover at least the following: a dollar limit over which
competitive bidding is required, a dollar limit over which the school system
need not advertise but must, when possible, obtain three (3) competitive bids
and below which no advertisement or competitive bidding is required; procedures
for public advertising, securing, and opening bids; and any exemptions from
competitive bidding.
ARTICLE XVIII
ETOWAH UTILITIES BOARD
SECTION 1. UTILITIES BOARD CREATED
   Except as otherwise provided in this charter and in general law, the
purchase, production and distribution of electricity, gas, water, and sewer by
the city of Etowah, both within and without the limits of the city, and the
agencies and facilities used for such purposes, shall be under the
jurisdiction, control, and management of a board to be known as the “Etowah
Utilities Board,” to be constituted as hereinafter set forth.
SECTION 2. DEFINITION OF TERMS
   The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this article shall have
the following respective meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context:
   1)   “Board” shall mean the Etowah Utilities Board.
   2)   “Board member” shall mean an individual member of the board.
   3)   “System” shall mean and shall include the water system, sewer system,
the gas system, and the electric distribution system.
   4)   “Division” means the part of the system that includes all of one branch
of the operation of the system.
SECTION 3. PROPERTY AND OBLIGATIONS
   The right, title, interest, and ownership of all property of the utilities
department for the city of Etowah, as heretofore constituted under any previous
charter, and all its rights of every kind and character whatsoever, as vested
in the utilities department of the city of Etowah, under any previous charter,
shall immediately become, and are hereby vested in the Etowah Utilities Board
created by this charter, and said Etowah Utilities Board is hereby burdened and
charged with and made liable for all legally enforceable debts, contracts,
bonds, and obligations.
SECTION 4. QUALIFICATIONS OF THE BOARD
   No person shall serve as a board member unless at the time of his
appointment and at all times during his term as a board member he satisfies the
requirements and qualifications of a commissioner, including that he has not
been convicted of a malfeasance in office, bribery, or other corrupt practice,
or crime. If any commissioner shall be so convicted, he shall forfeit his
office. No candidate for any office nor any other person shall, directly or
indirectly, give or promise any person or persons any office, employment,
money, benefit, or anything of value for the purpose of influencing or
obtaining political support, aid, or vote for any candidate. Any person
violating this section shall be punished by fine not exceeding state authorized
maximum limits.
SECTION 5. BOARD MEMBERS
   The Etowah Utilities Board consists of five (5) members who may be the same
five (5) persons as the city commissioners, and whose terms run concurrently
with those of the city commissioners. The city commission has the power to
change the membership of the Etowah Utilities Board by ordinance; provided,
however, that in the event of the adoption of an ordinance providing for the
appointment of noncommissioners to the board, no more than two (2)
commissioners may be appointed to the board.
SECTION 6. SALARIES OF BOARD MEMBERS
   The salary of each member of the Etowah Utilities Board may be set by
ordinance and may be increased or decreased provided that no such increase or
decrease in salary shall take effect until after the expiration of the terms of
office of all members of the utilities board in office at the time of the
adoption of such ordinance
SECTION 7. DIVISIONS CREATED
   The system is divided into a division of water, a division of power, a
division of gas, and a division of sewer. Each division is responsible for the
control of its operation and management. The detailed division of duties
between these respective divisions, the subdivisions of divisions, and the
creation of other staff positions and subordinate offices, shall be subject to
the rules and regulations prescribed by the utilities board.
SECTION 8. ORGANIZATIONS AND MEETINGS OF BOARD
   At the first meeting after a general municipal election, the board shall
elect from among its members a chairman who presides over the meetings of the
board, and a vice-chairman who shall act for the chairman during his absence,
inability or failure to act as chairman. The board shall also elect a secretary
who shall be either a board member or a full time employee of the system. The
secretary shall keep the minutes of the meetings of the board and shall perform
such other duties as the board may prescribe. Officers provided for in this
paragraph receive no additional salaries for their service; however, the board
may provide for the payment of a reasonable salary to the secretary if the
secretary is not a board member.
   If the secretary is not a board member he shall hold office at the will of
the board. The board shall have the right to adopt bylaws, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this charter. These by-laws may provide the time, place
and manner of holding both regular and special meetings of the board. All such
meetings shall be public, except when permissible by state law, and no action
shall be taken by the board except by the affirmative vote of at least three
board members. Three board members shall constitute a quorum of the board, but
a smaller number may adjourn from day to day. The general manager and the
division superintendent, if there be any, attend meetings of the board, and
have a seat and voice but no vote in such meetings. Except as otherwise
expressly provided herein, action by the utilities board may be by motion or by
resolution passed on a single reading, and may be made effective immediately
upon passage.
SECTION 9. POWERS OF BOARD
   1)   Independent Control. Except as expressly provided in this section, the
board exercises and is hereby granted all the powers and duties possessed by
the city of Etowah to construct, acquire, expand or operate the utility system.
The board, either by itself or by its duly authorized officers and employees,
has and maintains full control and complete jurisdiction over the management
and operation of the system and may make all contracts and do any and all acts
and things that are necessary, convenient or desirable in order to operate,
maintain, enlarge, extend, preserve and promote an orderly, economic and
businesslike administration of the system. The general manager and every
officer, agent and employee having duties embracing the receipt, disbursement,
custody, or handling of money shall, before entering upon his duties execute a
surety fidelity bond with some surety company authorized to do business in the
state of Tennessee, as surety in such amount as shall be prescribed by
resolution of the Etowah Utilities Board, except where the amount is prescribed
in this charter. All such bonds and sureties thereto shall be subject to the
approval of the Etowah Utilities Board. The cost of making such bonds shall be
paid by the utility system.
   2)   Fix Rates. The utility board recommends to the city commission
sufficient rates to be charged for services rendered by the water and sewer
systems. Such rates shall be fair, reasonable and uniform for all customers in
the same class, but different rate schedules may be applied to different
classes of customers, as determined by the utility board. Rates within the city
may be less but not greater than rates for the same class of service outside
the city.
   3)   Contract, Lease, and Agreements. The utility board has the authority to
make contracts with any person, firm, association or corporation, for public
utilities and public services to be furnished the utility system and those
therein. Such power to make contracts shall embrace the power, expressly
conferred, to make exclusive contracts. When an exclusive contract is entered
into, it shall be exclusive not only against any other person, firm,
association or corporation, but also as against the utility system itself. Such
contracts may be entered into for the period of twenty-five years or less, but
not longer. The utility board may prescribe in each such contract entered into
the rates, fares, charges, and regulations that may be made by the person,
firm, association, or corporation with whom the contract is made. Such
contracts may, by their terms, apply to the territory within the service area
of the utility system as of the date of the contract, and as said the service
area thereafter may be enlarged; and to the then existing any other streets,
alleys, and other thoroughfares that thereafter may be opened.
   All contracts whereby the system agrees to supply electric service, gas,
service, water service, or sewer service, or two or more of the foregoing
services, for a longer period than one year from the time if the execution of
such contract, shall be subject to the condition that the rates at which such
service is to be provided after the expiration of one year from the date of the
contract, shall conform to the rates being charged other customers for similar
service or services. The time limit prescribed in this paragraph for the
duration of contracts and agreements shall not apply to bond issues.
   4)   Sale of Utility. The authority given the board by this section shall
not be construed to give the board authority to sell or lease all or a major
portion of any division of the system, unless such transaction is approved by
the city commission by ordinance, which ordinance shall not be passed as an
emergency ordinance.
   5)   Short Term Loans. The utility board is hereby authorized to borrow
money in accordance with the general statutes of the state of Tennessee and the
regulations of the comptroller of the state of Tennessee.
   6)   Improvement Bonds. The utility board may recommend for the issuance of
bonds for additions, extensions or other permanent improvements to any one or
more of the systems under the jurisdiction and control of the board, but such
bonds shall be payable exclusively from the revenues of the system or systems
so improved. The issuance of such bonds shall be authorized by a resolution of
the board and submitted to the city commission for approval. Said bonds shall
be issued under the general statutes of the state of Tennessee and the
regulations of the comptroller of the state of Tennessee.
   7)   Joint Use of Poles and Other Property. The utility board has the power
to make agreements or contracts with any person, firm or public or private
corporation for the joint use of poles and other property, belonging either to
the system or such other person, firm or corporation or belonging jointly to
both parties.
   8)   Eminent Domain. The utility board may recommend to the city commission
that the city exercise its right of eminent domain on behalf of the system.
   9)   Investment of Surplus Funds. The utility board has power to invest its
surplus funds in state authorized investments, as found in Tennessee Code
Annotated § 6-56-106.
   10)   To Employ Attorney. The utility board has the power to appoint an
attorney or attorneys, to prescribe his qualifications, duties, and fix his
compensation.
   11)   Salaries. The utility board has the power to fix the salaries of all
officers and employees of the system. This power may be delegated by the board
to the general manager.
SECTION 10. FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS
   1)   Separate Accounts for Separate Divisions of the System. To the end that
each division is self-sustaining, the board requires that separate books and
accounts be kept on the electric, gas, sewer, and water operations so that the
books and accounts will reflect the financial condition of each division.
   Each of the divisions is operated independently of the others, except as
herein otherwise provided and except as the board may be of the opinion that
joint operations shall be advisable and economical, in which event the expenses
incurred, including the compensation of the board members, and other executives
and attorneys, in such joint operation, shall be prorated between the four
divisions in such manner as the board determines to be equitable.
   2)   Auditing. An independent certified public accountant, not an employee
of the city or the system, may be retained by the utility board to make such
audits and reports as the board may deem necessary. Before any independent
accountant maybe retained by the board in accordance with the provisions of
this paragraph, the accountant to be retained shall be approved by the city
commission.
   3)   Reports to City Commission. It is the duty of the utility board to
furnish to the city commission, through the city manager, monthly and annual
reports of the operation of the system, which reports shall be kept on file in
the Finance Director’s office and open to public inspection during regular
office hours.
   4)   Payments in Lieu of Taxes on Electric, Water. Sewer, and Gas
Properties. The city commission may impose payments of lieu of taxes on any or
all of the divisions within the utility system pursuant to state law.
SECTION 11. APPOINTMENT OF GENERAL MANAGER
   The utility board shall appoint a general manager of the system who shall
have executive ability and experience sufficient to qualify him for the
management of the system, who shall be responsible to the board and who shall
serve at the pleasure of the board.
SECTION 12. PURCHASING
   The utility board shall establish purchasing policies that comply with state
laws and cover at least the following: a dollar limit over which competitive
bidding is required, a dollar limit over which the utility system need not
advertise but must, when possible, obtain three (3) competitive bids and below
which no advertisement or competitive bidding is required; procedures for
public advertising, securing, and opening bids; and any exemptions from
competitive bidding.
ARTICLE XIX
CITY COURT
SECTION 1. APPOINTMENT OF CITY JUDGE
   There shall be a city court presided over by a city judge. The board of
commissioners may appoint a city judge who shall serve at the will of the
board. The city judge shall have such qualifications and receive such
compensation as the board may provide by ordinance.
   If a city judge is unable to preside over city court for any reason, then,
to the extent a general sessions court judge agrees to serve temporarily as
city judge, the judge shall appoint a general sessions judge of the county
within which the city lies to sit in the city judge’s stead. If there is not a
general sessions judge available, then the city judge shall appoint an
attorney, meeting the same qualifications as a general sessions judge, to sit
temporarily.
SECTION 2. JURISDICTION
   The city judge has the power and authority to impose fines, costs, and
forfeitures, and to punish by fine, for violation of city ordinances; to
preserve and enforce order in his court; to enforce the collection of all such
fines, costs, and forfeitures imposed by him; and in default of payment, or of
good and sufficient security given for the payment of such fines, costs or
forfeitures imposed by such city judge.
   The city judge is authorized to enter an order for contempt of court for the
payment of the fine in the amount established pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated § 16-18-306.
   Fines may be paid in installments in the manner provided by ordinance or in
accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated § 40-24-104. Any court is authorized
to enforce the collection of unpaid fines or forfeitures as a judgment in a
civil action in any court with competent jurisdiction in accordance with § 40-
24-105. The city judge may remit, with or without condition, fines and costs
imposed for violation of any ordinance provision.
   The city judge may remit with or without condition, fines and costs imposed
for violation of any ordinance or charter provision.
SECTION 3. RIGHT OF APPEAL
   Any person dissatisfied with the judgment of the city judge in any case or
cases heard and determined by the city judge may appeal in accordance with the
general statutes of the state of Tennessee.
SECTION 4. FINES REMITTED
   All fines imposed by the city judge for violation of the city ordinances
shall belong to and be paid into the treasury of the city. Any labor performed
in the execution of a workhouse or prison sentence for such violation or
violations shall be performed for the city under the direction of the city
manager.
SECTION 5. COURT COSTS
   The city judge, in all cases heard or determined by such city judge for
offenses against the corporate laws and ordinances, shall collect municipal
court costs in accordance with the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated § 16-
18-304, shall levy and collect the litigation tax in accordance with the
provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated § 16-18-305 and, in addition, shall add
thereto the state privilege tax on litigation for municipal violations
governing use of a public parking space. The city judge shall certify to the
chief of police for collection, all fines, costs, and forfeitures imposed by
the city judge for offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city. Costs
in favor of any person paid a fixed salary by the city shall belong to the city
and be paid into its treasury. It is the duty of the city judge to collect and
receipt for all fines imposed by the city judge, and the city judge shall
render a monthly report to the board of commissioners of all costs and fines
collected and of all assessed and uncollected.
   It is unlawful for any other person or officer to collect or receipt for
such fines, costs, and recoveries, but the city judge may authorize the chief
of police to collect and receipt for fines and costs.
SECTION 6. DOCKET
   The city judge shall keep or cause to be kept a court docket or dockets
embodying complete detailed records of all cases handled by him.
ARTICLE XX
CONSTRUCTION OF THIS CHARTER
SECTION 1. CONSTRUCTION
   This charter shall be construed to cover the entire field of the chartered
powers, limitations and restrictions of said city.
SECTION 2. SEVERABILITY
   If any section, sub-section, sentence, clause or phrase of this charter is
for any reason found and held to be invalid or unconstitutional, that fact
shall not impair the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of
the charter. Each separate power created by any section, sub-section, sentence,
clause or phrase of this charter is declared to be severable, and the
invalidity or unconstitutionality of any such part shall not affect any other
portion of this charter.
ARTICLE XXI
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS CHARTER
SECTION 1. EFFECTIVE DATE
   This charter and all sections thereof shall be effective sixty (60) days
after the passage of this charter.
SECTION 2. PUBLIC NOTICE
   It is the duty of the city commission to publish notice of this ordinance
and submit the ordinance to the qualified voters of the city at a general state
election. The city attorney shall draft and submit to the McMinn County
Election Commission appropriate wording for charter proposals.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.15   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature, as revised, codified,
rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters
and sections, shall be known and designated as the “The Code of Etowah,
Tennessee”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified ordinances”
or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04  CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted, or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered
by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section unless otherwise provided.
§ 10.05  RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical  words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning
in law shall be understood according to  their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Etowah, Tennessee.
      CITY COMMISSION. The Commission of Mayor and Commissioners of the City of
Etowah.
      COUNTY. McMinn County, Tennessee.
      HIGHWAY. Bridges, roads and streets unless otherwise expressly provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, any form of legal entity, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or
WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to legal entities, the officers or agents
thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that in which
the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      STATE.The State of Tennessee.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING.
         (a)   Printing, lithographing or other modes of representing words and
letters; and
         (b)   Where the written signature of a person is required, the terms
mean the proper handwriting of the person or the person’s mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
non-severability provision, each division or part of every section is
severable. If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof,
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the city exercising the
powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the
Commission refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name
designation is incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date of that
ordinance or subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities
placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the
named board, bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its
effective date or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to
which the duties, liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10  REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under
the section unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or
liability.
§ 10.12  LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, to the
prosecution of offenses or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code shall not be affected by
the repeal and reenactment. All suits, proceedings and prosecutions for causes
arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may be
commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (Tenn. Code Ann. § 50-18-70)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.02  PUBLIC RECORDS.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-503
§ 10.15  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   (A)   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code.
   (B)   (1)   The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued.
      (2)   Punishments, penalties or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed
as if this code had not been enacted.
      (3)   In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers
shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity violating
any of the ordinances of the city shall be fined not more than $50 or the
maximum amount permitted by state law, whichever is greater, for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of violation.
Cross-reference:
   Imposition of fines, penalties and costs, see §
32.03
   Municipal Court, see
Ch. 32
Statutory reference:
   Maximum fine, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-306
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COMMISSION
      
31.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
33.   INMATE LABOR
      
34.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
      
35.   PERSONNEL
      
36.   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER
CHAPTER 30:  CITY COMMISSION
Section
   
30.01   Time and place of regular meetings
   
30.02   Order of business
   
30.03   General rules of order
   
30.04   Training for Board of Commissioners
§ 30.01  TIME AND PLACE OF REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The regular meetings of the City Commission shall be held on the fourth
Monday of each month beginning at 6:30 p.m. in the Social Hall of the Carnegie
Library Building on Ohio Avenue.
(1994 Code, § 1-101)  (Ord. 390, passed - -; Ord. 573, passed 3-22-1999; Ord.
719, passed 8-22-2011)
§ 30.02  ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   At each meeting of the City Commission, the following regular order of
business shall be observed, unless dispensed with by a majority vote of the
members present:
   (A)   Call to order by the Mayor;
   (B)   Roll call;
   (C)   Reading of minutes of the previous meeting and approval or correction;
   (D)   Grievances from citizens;
   (E)   Communications from the Mayor;
   (F)   Reports from committees, members of the City Commission and other
officers;
   (G)   Old business;
   (H)   New business; and
   (I)   Adjournment.
(1994 Code, § 1-102)
§ 30.03  GENERAL RULES OF ORDER.
   The rules of order and parliamentary procedure contained in Robert’s Rules
of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the transaction of business by and before
the City Commission at its meetings in all cases to which they are applicable
and in which they are not inconsistent with provisions of the charter or this
code.
(1994 Code, § 1-103)
§ 30.04  TRAINING FOR BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   The Board of Commissioners encourage each member of the governing body to
attend Level I of the Elected Officials Academy as presented by the University
of Tennessee’s Municipal Technical Advisory Service (UT-MTAS), and encourages
its members to attend Level II of the Elected Officials Academy and also
encourages attendance of an additional four hours of continuing education each
year.
(Res. 1106, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 31:  ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
31.01   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
31.02   Recreation Advisory Board
   
31.03   Planning Commission
Cross-reference:
   Department of Community Development, see
Charter Art. XVI, § 10
   Department of Finance, see
Charter Art. XII and
Charter Art. XVI, § 5
   Department of Fire, see
Charter Art. XVI, § 6
   Department of Human Resources/Risk Management, see
Charter Art. XVI, § 11
   Department of Parks and Recreation, see
Charter Art. XVI, § 9
   Department of Police, see
Charter Art. XVI, § 8
   Department of Public Works/Streets/Sanitation, see
Charter Art. XVI, § 7
   Etowah Utilities Board, see
Charter Art. XVIII
§ 31.01  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   The City Regional Planning Commission be designated as the City Board of
Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 406, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 710, passed 10-11-2010)
§ 31.02  RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Creation and terms of Board. The Etowah Recreation Board will from
this time forward be known as the “Etowah Recreation Advisory Board.” The
Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of five members. Each member will serve
a staggered four year term. Beginning with the reappointment of the current
(2018) Board members will start with a three year term and any and all new or
replacement members appointed shall serve a four year term.
(1994 Code, § 2-101)
   (B)   Appointment to Board. Appointments to the Recreation Advisory Board
will be made by nominations from citizens, staff, and City Commission. However,
the following will apply: one shall be the Etowah Recreation Manager, one shall
be appointed from the membership of the Senior Citizen Center, and the
remaining three should have experience in youth sports, adult sports and/or
recreational activities.
   (C)   Duties and responsibilities. The members of the Recreation Advisory
Board shall serve in an advisory capacity only to the city on matters relating
to recreation including capital improvements, youth and adult sporting events
and programming, concerns as to maintenance and repairs, future planning and
development, parks and recreation ten year plan/goals. All matters and/or
reports shall be presented to the Recreation Manager and/or the City Manager
for presentation to the City Commission. Members of the Recreation Advisory
Board are not authorized to take any action on the city’s behalf unless
directly requested by the City Manager and/or City Commission.
(1994 Code, § 2-102)
   (D)   Meetings. The Recreation Advisory Board shall meet no less than every
three months. Meetings will be held at the Community Center. The time of said
meetings will vary as to members’ needs. A Chairman, Vice-Chairman and
Secretary shall be appointed at the first meeting after each reappointment.
Minutes shall be taken at every meeting by the Secretary and submitted to the
Advisory Board for approval at each and every following meeting. A copy of
approved minutes will be stored at City Hall by the City Recorder.
(1994 Code, § 2-103) (Ord. 400, passed 7-22-1985; Ord. 827, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 31.03  PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Creation and membership. Pursuant to the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann.
§ 13-4-101, there is hereby created a municipal planning commission,
hereinafter referred to as the “Planning Commission”. The Planning Commission
shall consist of seven members; two of these shall be the Mayor and another
member of the City Commission selected by the City Commission; the other five
members shall be appointed by the Mayor. All members of the Planning Commission
shall serve as such without compensation. Except for the initial appointments,
the terms of the five members appointed by the Mayor shall be for three years
each. The three members first appointed shall be appointed as follows: one for
a term of one year, two for a term of two years and two for a term of three
years. The terms of the Mayor and the member selected by the City Commission
shall run concurrently their terms of office. Any vacancy in an appointive
membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor, who shall also
have the authority to remove any appointive member at his or her pleasure.
(1994 Code, § 14-101)
   (B)   Organization, rules, staff and finances. The Planning Commission shall
elect its Chairperson from among its appointive members. The term of
Chairperson shall be for one year with eligibility for re-election. The
Planning Commission shall adopt rules for its transactions, findings and
determinations, which record shall be a public record. The Planning Commission
may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and
may contract with city planners and other consultants for such services as it
may require. The expenditures of the Planning Commission, exclusive of gifts,
shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the City
Commission.
(1994 Code, § 14-102)
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall carry out its powers,
functions and duties in accordance with all applicable provisions of Tenn. Code
Ann. Title 13.
(1994 Code, § 14-103)
CHAPTER 32:  MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   City Judge
   
32.02   Maintenance of docket
   
32.03   Imposition of fines, penalties and costs
   
32.04   Disposition and report of civil penalties and costs
   
32.05   Contempt of court
   
32.06   Trial and disposition of cases
   
32.07   Collection of fines, costs and litigation taxes
Warrants, Summonses and Subpoenas
   
32.20   Issuance of summonses
   
32.21   Issuance of subpoenas
Bonds and Appeals
   
32.35   Appeals
   
32.36   Bond amounts, conditions and forms
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01  CITY JUDGE.
   The officer designated by the charter to handle judicial matters within the
city shall preside over the City Court and shall be known as the City Judge.
(1994 Code, § 3-101)
§ 32.02  MAINTENANCE OF DOCKET.
   The City Judge, or person designated, shall keep a complete docket of all
matters coming before him or her in his or her judicial capacity. The docket
shall include for each defendant such information as his or her name, warrant
and/or summons numbers, alleged offense, disposition, civil penalties and costs
imposed and whether collected, and all other information that may be relevant.
(1994 Code, § 3-201)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 671, passed 5-29-2007)
§ 32.03  IMPOSITION OF FINES, PENALTIES AND COSTS.
   (A)   All civil penalties and costs shall be imposed and recorded by the
City Judge on the City Court docket in open court.
   (B)   In all cases heard or determined by him or her, the City Judge shall
tax in the bill of costs the following schedule:
 
Court costs                                       $90
State litigation tax                              $13.75
Local litigation tax                              $13.75
Litigation tax for public parking space violation $1
 
   (C)   Unless modified by state law, $1 of the court costs in each case shall
be forwarded by the Court Clerk to the State Treasurer to be used by the
administrative office of the courts for training and continuing education
courses for municipal court judges and municipal court clerks.
(1994 Code, § 3-202)  (Ord. 393, passed 4-8-1985; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993;
Ord. 671, passed 5-29-2007; Ord. 791, passed 9-26-2016)
§ 32.04  DISPOSITION AND REPORT OF CIVIL PENALTIES AND COSTS.
   All funds coming into the hands of the City Judge in the form of civil
penalties, costs and forfeitures shall be recorded by him or her and paid over
daily to the city. At the end of each month, he or she shall submit to the City
Commission a report accounting for the collection or non-collection of all
civil penalties and costs imposed by his or her Court during the current month
and to date for the current fiscal year.
(1994 Code, § 3-203)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 671, passed 5-29-2007)
§ 32.05  CONTEMPT OF COURT.
   Contempt of court is punishable by a fine of $50, or such lesser amount as
may be imposed in the Judge’s discretion.
(1994 Code, § 3-204)  (Ord. 671, passed 5-29-2007)
§ 32.06  TRIAL AND DISPOSITION OF CASES.
   Every person charged with violating a municipal ordinance shall be entitled
to an immediate trial and disposition of his or her case; provided, the City
Court is in session or the City Judge is reasonably available. However, the
provisions of this section shall not apply when the alleged offender, by reason
of drunkenness or other incapacity, is not in a proper condition or is not able
to appear before the Court.
(1994 Code, § 3-205)  (Ord. 671, passed 5-29-2007)
§ 32.07  COLLECTION OF FINES, COSTS AND LITIGATION TAXES.
   (A)   Manner of collection.
      (1)   Unless discharged by payment, fines, costs, penalties and
litigation taxes due may be collected in the same manner as a judgment in a
civil action, but shall not be deemed part of the penalty, and no person shall
be imprisoned for being in default solely of payment of costs and/or litigation
taxes.
      (2)   The following shall be the allocation formula for moneys paid into
Court: the first moneys paid in any case shall first be credited toward payment
of litigation taxes and, once litigation taxes have been paid, the next moneys
shall be credited toward payment of costs; then, additional moneys shall be
credited toward payment of the fine.
   (B)   Methods of collection. The City Attorney may, in such person’s
discretion, and shall, upon order of the Court, institute proceedings to
collect the debt as a civil judgment. In addition to all other remedies for
collecting amounts owed to the city, the City Clerk is authorized to employ the
services of a collection agency to collect amounts owed to the City Court. The
contract between the municipality and the collection agency must be put out for
bid annually and the contract must be in writing. The written contract shall
include a provision specifying whether the agency may institute an action to
collect fines and costs in a judicial proceeding.
      (1)   If an amount owed to the city is not paid in full within 60 days of
the date on which the amount becomes due, the Clerk shall send written notice,
by regular or certified mail return receipt requested, to the debtor at the
debtor’s last known address according to the city’s records. The notice shall
state the amount owed in fines, costs and litigation taxes, if any. The right
to receive such notice shall be waived by a debtor if the debtor signs an
agreement requesting additional time to pay.
      (2)   If the amount owed to the city is not paid in full within 30 days
of the date of the notice or the date stated in the request for additional
time, the city may refer the debt to a collection agency to collect the
outstanding amount owed to the city and the collection agency services fee.
      (3)   The collection agency may be paid an amount not exceeding 40% of
the sums collected as consideration for collecting the fines and costs,
pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 40-24-105(d)(2).
   (C)   Penalties for non-payment of checks or money orders. If any check or
money order so received is not duly paid, in addition to other penalties
provided by law, the person who tendered such check or money order shall pay a
penalty, upon written notice and demand by the Clerk, in an amount permitted by
law.
   (D)   Payment by credit or debit card; processing fees.
      (1)   As used in this division (D), unless the context otherwise
requires, CREDIT CARD has the same meaning as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 47-
22-101, and DEBIT CARD has the same meaning as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-
14-102(3).
      (2)   The Clerk is authorized to receive payment by credit card or debit
card for any public fines, fees or other moneys collected.
      (3)   Processing fees are 3%.
      (4)   (a)   If a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit card
company issuing the card or, if a payment by a debit card is not honored by the
entity on which the funds are drawn, the Clerk may collect a service charge
from the person who owes the fee, fine, penalty, interest or other charge, for
processing the transaction.
         (b)   The amount of the service charge shall be the same amount as the
processing fee charged in division (D)(3) above.
(Ord. 671, passed 5-29-2007)
WARRANTS, SUMMONSES AND SUBPOENAS
§ 32.20  ISSUANCE OF SUMMONSES.
   When a complaint of an alleged ordinance violation is made to the City
Judge, the Judge may, in his or her discretion, in lieu of issuing an arrest
warrant, issue a summons, ordering the alleged offender personally to appear
before the City Court at a time specified therein to answer to the charges
against him or her. The summons shall contain a brief description of the
offense charged, but need not set out verbatim the provisions of the ordinance
alleged to have been violated. Upon failure of any person to appear before the
City Court as commanded in a summons lawfully served on him or her, the cause
may be proceeded with ex parte, and the judgment of the Court shall be valid
and binding subject to the defendant’s right of appeal.
(1994 Code, § 3-302)
§ 32.21  ISSUANCE OF SUBPOENAS.
   The City Judge may subpoena as witnesses all persons whose testimony he or
she believes will be relevant and material to matters coming before his or her
Court, and it shall be unlawful for any person lawfully served with such a
subpoena to fail or neglect to comply therewith.
(1994 Code, § 3-303)  Penalty, see §
10.99
BONDS AND APPEALS
§ 32.35  APPEALS.
   Any defendant who is dissatisfied with any judgment of the City Court
against him or her may, within ten days next after such judgment is rendered
appeal to the next term of the Circuit Court upon posting a proper appeal bond.
(1994 Code, § 3-402)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 27-5-101
§ 32.36  BOND AMOUNTS, CONDITIONS AND FORMS.
   An appearance bond in any case before the City Court shall be in such amount
as the City Judge shall prescribe and shall be conditioned that the defendant
shall appear for trial before the City Court at the stated time and place. An
appeal bond in any case shall be the current fee as set by the McMinn County
Clerk and shall be conditioned that, if the Circuit Court shall find against
the appellant, the fine or penalty and all costs of the trial and appeal shall
be promptly paid by the defendant and/or his or her sureties. An appearance or
appeal bond in any case may be made in the form of a cash deposit or by any
corporate surety company authorized to do business in the state or by two
private persons who individually own real property located within the county.
No other type bond shall be acceptable.
(1994 Code, § 3-403)
CHAPTER 33:  INMATE LABOR
Section
Workhouse
   
33.01   County workhouse to be used
   
33.02   Inmates to be worked
   
33.03   Compensation of inmates
WORKHOUSE
§ 33.01  COUNTY WORKHOUSE TO BE USED.
   The county workhouse is hereby designated as the municipal workhouse,
subject to such contractual arrangement as may be worked out with the county.
(1994 Code, § 6-101)
§ 33.02  INMATES TO BE WORKED.
   All persons committed to the workhouse, to the extent that their physical
condition shall permit, shall be required to perform such public work or labor
as may be lawfully prescribed for the county prisoners.
(1994 Code, § 6-102)
§ 33.03  COMPENSATION OF INMATES.
   Each workhouse inmate shall be allowed as credit the current fee as set by
the McMinn County Sheriff’s Department toward payment of the civil penalties
assessed against him or her.
(1994 Code, § 6-103)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)
CHAPTER 34:  FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Fiscal year period
   
34.02   Tax collection period
Specific Taxes
   
34.15   Privilege taxes generally
   
34.16   Wholesale beer tax
   
34.17   Lodging tax
Purchases and Contracts
   
34.30   Manager designated as purchasing officer
   
34.31   Supplies, equipment and the like acquired by purchasing officer;
exception
   
34.32   General procedure
   
34.33   Purchase of emergency replacement parts for existing equipment
   
34.34   When formal sealed bids required
   
34.35   Newspaper notice inviting bids
   
34.36   Advertising purchases on bulletin board in the city hall and on the
city website
   
34.37   Bid deposits
   
34.38   Submission, identification, opening and tabulation of bids
   
34.39   Rejection of bids
   
34.40   Bids not to be accepted from person in default on payments due city
   
34.41   Considerations in determining lowest responsible bidder
   
34.42   Statement when award not given low bidder
   
34.43   Award in case of tie bids
   
34.44   Performance bond
   
34.45   Records of bids
   
34.46   Division of purchases or contracts to avoid requirements of subchapter
   
34.47   Officers and employees not to have financial interest
Cost Recovery
   
34.60   Purpose
   
34.61   Definitions
   
34.62   Liability for cost
   
34.63   Collection and disbursement of funds
   
34.64   Methods of enforcement
   
34.65   Conflict with other laws
Cross-reference:
   Collection of fines, costs and litigation taxes, see §
32.07
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01  FISCAL YEAR PERIOD.
   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on
June 30 of the following year.
(1994 Code, § 5-101)
§ 34.02  TAX COLLECTION PERIOD.
   The due date for the city’s property taxes is October 1, with the collection
period running through February 28. The taxes will become delinquent on March
1.
(Ord. 715, passed 6-13-2011)
SPECIFIC TAXES
§ 34.15  PRIVILEGE TAXES GENERALLY.
   (A)   Tax levied. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code,
there is hereby levied on all vocations, occupations and businesses declared by
the general laws of the state to be privileges taxable by municipalities, an
annual privilege tax in the maximum amount allowed by state laws. The taxes
provided for in the state’s Business Tax Act (Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-4-701 et
seq.) are hereby expressly enacted, ordained and levied on the businesses,
business activities, vocations and occupations carried on within the city at
the rates and in the manner prescribed by the said Act. The proceeds of the
privilege taxes herein levied shall accrue to the General Fund.
(1994 Code, § 5-201)
   (B)   License required. No person shall exercise any such privilege within
the city without a currently effective privilege license, which shall be issued
by the Finance Director to each applicant therefor upon the applicant’s payment
of the appropriate privilege tax.
(1994 Code, § 5-202)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 34.16  WHOLESALE BEER TAX.
   The Finance Director is hereby directed to take appropriate action to assure
payment to the city of the wholesale beer tax levied by the Wholesale Beer Tax
Act, as set out in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 6.
(1994 Code, § 5-301)
Statutory reference:
   Providing for a tax of 17% on the sale of beer at wholesale; every
wholesaler is required to remit to each municipality the amount of the net tax
on beer wholesale sales to retailers and other persons within the corporate
limits of the municipality, see Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 6
§ 34.17  LODGING TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONSIDERATION. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for
the occupancy in a hotel valued in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including
all receipts, cash, credits, property and services of any kind or nature
without any deduction there from whatsoever.
      HOTEL. Any structure or space, or any portion thereof, which is occupied
or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin,
motel or any place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are furnished to
transients for a consideration.
      OCCUPANCY. The use or possession of, or the right to use or possess, any
room, lodgings or accommodations in any hotel.
      OPERATOR. The person operating the hotel whether as owner, lessee or
otherwise.
      PERSONS. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination
acting as a unit.
      TRANSIENT. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy
of any rooms, lodgings or accommodations in a hotel for a period of less than
30 continuous days.
   (B)   Permit required. No person will conduct, keep, manage, operate or
cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated, either as owner, lessor,
agent or attorney, any hotel in the city without having obtained a permit from
the City Manager or his or her designee to do so.
   (C)   Fee. The fee for each hotel permit will be $25.
   (D)   Not transferable. No permit issued under this section shall be
transferred or assigned.
   (E)   Duration. Hotel permits shall be issued annually and shall expire on
December 31 of each year.
   (F)   Register required; availability for inspection.
      (1)   Every person to whom a permit is issued under this section shall at
all times keep a standard hotel register, in which shall be inscribed the names
of all guests renting or occupying rooms in his or her hotel.
      (2)   Such register shall be signed in every case by the persons renting
a room or by someone under his or her direction, and after registration is made
and the name of the guest is inscribed as herein provided, the manager shall
write the number of the room which guest is to occupy, together with the time
such room is rented, before such person is permitted to occupy such room.
      (3)   The register shall be open to inspection at all times to the City
Manager or his or her designee.
   (G)   Rooms to be numbered. Each sleeping room and apartment in every hotel
in the city shall be numbered in a plain and conspicuous manner. The number of
each room shall be placed on the outside of the door of such room, and no two
doors shall bear the same number.
   (H)   Privilege tax levied; use.
      (1)   Pursuant to the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-4-1401 through
67-4-1425, there is hereby levied a privilege of occupancy in any hotel of each
transient. From and after the operative date of this section, the rate of the
levy shall be 5% of the consideration charged by the operator. This privilege
tax shall be collected pursuant to and subject to the provisions of these
statutory provisions. The City Manager shall be designed as the authorized
collector to administer and enforce this section and these statutory
provisions.
      (2)   The proceeds received from this tax shall be available for the
city’s General Fund. Proceeds of this tax may not be used to provide a subsidy
in any form to any hotel or motel.
   (I)   Payment of the tax. Payment of the tax by the motel to the city shall
be no later than the twentieth day of each month for the preceding month.
   (J)   Interest and penalty for late payment. The hotel operator is
responsible for paying interest on delinquent taxes, 8% per annum, plus a
penalty of 1% per month.
   (K)   Records requirement. The hotel operator must keep records for three
years, with the right of inspection by the city.
(Ord. 694, passed 6-22-2009)  Penalty, see §
10.99
PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
Statutory reference:
   Authorization to use competitive sealed proposals, see Tenn Code Ann. § 12-
3-1207
   Contracts for professional services, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 12-4-106
   Municipal Purchasing Law of 1983, see Tenn Code Ann. §§ 6-56-301 through 6-
56-307
   Purchase of secondhand articles or equipment by municipalities or counties,
see Tenn Code Ann. § 12-3-1202
   Purchases for local governmental units, see Tenn Code Ann. § 12-3-1201
   Requirements of professional persons or groups providing legal services,
fiscal agent, financial advisor, advisory or consultant services, see Tenn.
Code Ann. § 12-3-1209
   Reverse auctions by local governmental units, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 12-3-
1208
§ 34.30  MANAGER DESIGNATED AS PURCHASING OFFICER.
   The City Manager is hereby designated as the purchasing officer of the city.
(1994 Code, § 5-401)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.31  SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND THE LIKE ACQUIRED BY PURCHASING OFFICER;
EXCEPTION.
   All supplies, materials, equipment and services of any nature whatsoever
shall be acquired by the purchasing officer or his or her authorized
representative, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
(1994 Code, § 5-402)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.32  GENERAL PROCEDURE.
   Competitive bids on all supplies, equipment and services, except those
specified elsewhere in this subchapter, and contracts for public improvements
shall be obtained, whenever practicable, and the purchase or contract awarded
to the lowest responsible bidder, provided that any or all bids may be rejected
as prescribed in this subchapter.
(1994 Code, § 5-403)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.33  PURCHASE OF EMERGENCY REPLACEMENT PARTS FOR EXISTING EQUIPMENT.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the purchase of
emergency replacement parts or existing equipment shall not require competitive
bidding. When such emergency purchase amounts to $2,500 or more, a full report
of the emergency purchase shall be filed by the City Manager with the City
Commission at the next Commission meeting for approval.
(1994 Code, § 5-404)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.34  WHEN FORMAL SEALED BIDS REQUIRED.
   Formal sealed bids shall be obtained for all materials, equipment and
supplies which are purchased by the city and for all services and public
improvements, except such services as are provided for elsewhere in this
subchapter, which involves and expenditure of $2,500 or more.
(1994 Code, § 5-405)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.35  NEWSPAPER NOTICE INVITING BIDS.
   Notice inviting bids shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation, and at least five days preceding the last day set for the receipt
of proposals. The newspaper notice shall include a general description of the
articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and written
specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids.
(1994 Code, § 5-406)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.36  ADVERTISING PURCHASES ON BULLETIN BOARD IN THE CITY HALL AND ON THE
CITY WEBSITE.
   In addition to the notice provided for in §
34.35, the purchasing officer shall advertise all pending purchases amounting
to $2,500 or more by a notice on the public bulletin board in city hall and on
the city website.
(1994 Code, § 5-407)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.37  BID DEPOSITS.
   (A)   When deemed necessary, bid deposits may be required, the deposit shall
be in such amount as the City Manager shall determine and unsuccessful bidders
shall be entitled a return of the deposits where such has been required.
   (B)   A successful bidder shall forfeit any required deposit upon failure on
his or her part to enter a contract within five days after the award.
(1994 Code, § 5-408)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.38  SUBMISSION, IDENTIFICATION, OPENING AND TABULATION OF BIDS.
   Bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing officer and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope. Such bids shall be opened in public at the
time and place stated in the public notices, and a tabulation of all bids so
received shall be posted on the bulletin board in city hall for public
inspection.
(1994 Code, § 5-409)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.39  REJECTION OF BIDS.
   The purchasing officer shall have and hereby is granted the authority to
reject or award any or all bids, parts of all bids or all bids for any one or
more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when
the public interest will be served thereby, except that the award of any bid in
excess of $5,000 must be submitted to the City Commission for approval.
(1994 Code, § 5-410)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.40  BIDS NOT TO BE ACCEPTED FROM PERSON IN DEFAULT ON PAYMENTS DUE CITY.
   The purchasing officer shall not accept the bid of any vendor or contractor
who is in default on the payment of any taxes, licenses, fees or other moneys
of whatever nature that may be due the city by such vendor or contractor.
(1994 Code, § 5-411)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.41  CONSIDERATIONS IN DETERMINING LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
   In determining the lowest responsible bidder, as referred to in §
34.32, the purchasing officer shall consider:
   (A)   The ability, capacity and skill of bidder to perform the contract or
provide the services required;
   (B)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
   (C)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
   (D)   The quality of performance of previous contracts or services;
   (E)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract of service;
   (F)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide the service;
   (G)   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
   (H)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract; and
   (I)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
(1994 Code, § 5-412)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.42  STATEMENT WHEN AWARD NOT GIVEN LOW BIDDER.
   When the award for a bid item of less than $5,000 is not given to the lowest
bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order
elsewhere shall be prepared by the purchasing officer and shall be given to the
City Commission.
(1994 Code, § 5-413)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.43  AWARD IN CASE OF TIE BIDS.
   (A)   If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price,
quality and service being equal, the contract or purchase order shall be
awarded to a local bidder.
   (B)   Where a local vendor has not bid or where his or her bid is not one of
the lowest tie bids, the purchasing officer shall award the contract to one of
the tie bidders by drawing lots in public.
(1994 Code, § 5-414)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.44  PERFORMANCE BOND.
   The purchasing officer may and hereby is granted authority to require a
performance bond, before entering a contract, in such amount as he or she shall
find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city.
(1994 Code, § 5-415)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.45  RECORDS OF BIDS.
   The purchasing officer shall keep a record of all open market orders and the
bids submitted in competition thereon, including a list of the bidders, the
amounts bid by each, and the method of solicitation and bidding, and such
records shall be open to public inspection.
(1994 Code, § 5-416)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.46  DIVISION OF PURCHASES OR CONTRACTS TO AVOID REQUIREMENTS OF
SUBCHAPTER.
   In determining the amount of a purchase or contract for the purposes of this
subchapter, the entire purchase price of the goods bought and the total amount
of charges for work done under a contract shall be considered. No contract or
purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this subchapter
pertaining to purchases or contracts of $2,500 or more.
(1994 Code, § 5-417)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 34.47  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES NOT TO HAVE FINANCIAL INTEREST.
   No purchase shall be made from nor any contract for purchase of services
made with any officer or employee of the city or any firm or corporation in
which any officer or employee of the city is financially interested. No officer
or employee of the city shall accept, directly or indirectly, any fee, rebate,
money or other thing of value from any person employed by or doing business
with the city, except on behalf of and for the use of the city.
(1994 Code, § 5-418)  (Ord. 404, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 457, passed 10-4-1990;
Ord. 775, passed 6-22-2015)
COST RECOVERY
§ 34.60  PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is intended to provide for recovery by the city, a body
politic and corporate and a political subdivision of the state, its agencies or
agents, of unbudgeted costs incurred in mitigation and recovery efforts related
to motor vehicle accidents and fire incidents, disasters and other large-scale
events or accidents. In addition, it is intended to provide for cost recovery
for damages to natural resources and government owned properties.
(Ord. 721, passed 4-23-2012)
§ 34.61  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COSTS. Includes, but is not limited to, those expenses incurred responding
to each incident that would not have been incurred if there was no incident.
These COSTS shall include equipment and operating costs of the fire department
including salaries, consumables, training, apparatus and equipment, both direct
and indirect; including those for which funds are not provided in the city’s
annual budget:
      (1)   All costs incurred for mitigation at a motor vehicle accident or
fire incident;
      (2)   All costs incurred for mitigation, containment and/or removal and
disposal of hazardous materials or remedial actions to include costs associated
with transportation and temporary storage of hazardous materials;
      (3)   All costs incurred for ensuring the safety of the public to include
costs incurred for hazard mitigation actions taken at the site of the motor
vehicle accident or fire incident;
      (4)   Damages for injury to, destruction of or loss of natural resources,
as determined by the appropriate local, state or federal agency, including the
reasonable costs of assessing such injury, destruction or loss resulting from a
motor vehicle accident, fire incident or hazardous material incident;
      (5)   Health care costs for persons injured from a motor vehicle accident
or fire incident, including all medical assessment and treatment provided by
first responders, EMTs and paramedics at the scene prior to ambulance
transport, if necessary;
      (6)   Health care costs for persons or animals injured from a hazardous
material incident or costs of any health effects study carried out as a
necessity resulting from a hazardous material incident;
      (7)   All costs incurred for response and remedial actions to disasters
and large-scale accidents or events to include, but not limited to, cost
associated with capture, transport and housing of animals; medical treatment of
injured animals and the like;
      (8)   Labor including benefits, overtime and administrative overhead for
government employees;
      (9)   The hourly costs of operating equipment, the costs of maintaining,
leasing, repairing and replacing equipment, and any and all damage to
equipment;
      (10)   Contract labor and equipment;
      (11)   Labor and equipment obtained by city, its agencies or agents;
      (12)   Materials, including, but not limited to, medical supplies such as
“C” collars, drug administration by trained first responders, EMTs and/or
paramedics;
      (13)   Materials, including, but not limited to, absorbents, foams,
dispersants, neutralization agents, over pack drums or containers, dart
tranquilizers, euthanasia solutions and the like; and
      (14)   Supervision of response.
   FIRE. A state, process or instance of combustion in which fuel or other
material that is ignited and combined with oxygen, giving off light, heat and
flame.
   FIRE INCIDENT. A situation in which a structure, vehicle, equipment or grass
is on fire.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material defined, listed,
characterized or classified as a hazardous material, hazardous substance,
hazardous waste or toxic substance according to any or all of the following: 40
C.F.R. part 261 (Identification and Listing of Hazardous Wastes); 40 C.F.R. §§
302.1 through 302.4 (Designation of Hazardous Substances); 40 C.F.R. part 355,
App. A and B (List of Extremely Hazardous Substances and their Threshold
Planning Qualities); 49 C.F.R. parts 172.101 and 172.102 (Hazardous Materials
Table); as amended.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT. Actual or threatened release of hazardous
substances or material, including hazardous waste, which pose an imminent
threat to the environment and to health, safety or welfare of the population.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Includes any solution, mixture or formulation
containing hazardous material, or any material which, due to its chemical or
physical characteristics, is determined by the county to pose a substantial
threat to the life, health or safety of persons or property or the environment.
The term includes, but is not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum products, gases poisons, biologic agents, flammables and corrosives.
   MITIGATION. The provision of emergency and non-emergency assistance during
and following an incident and to reduce the likelihood of secondary damage
facilitating and enabling emergency services (both medical and non-medical) to
be performed in a safe environment for all involved and uninvolved parties as
is medical directive standard operating procedure requirements per the State
Committee of Public Health.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled vehicle which is designed for use upon a
highway, including trailers and semi-trailers designed for use with such
vehicles, trains and any other mobile equipment.
   MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT. A situation in which a motor vehicle collides with
another motor vehicle, cargo, pedestrian, animal or geographical or
architectural obstacle or other hazard.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Etowah within or outside of specified response
area.
   NATURAL RESOURCES. Land, fish, wildlife, biota, water, ground water,
drinking water supplies and other such resources belonging to, managed by, held
in trust by, appertaining to or otherwise controlled by the county, its
agencies or agents and the municipalities.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, governmental entity or any other
legal entity.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The person(s) whose act or omission causes an incident;
or the person(s) who owned or had custody or control of the motor vehicle,
structure or hazardous substance or waste at the time of such incident or
proximate cause; or the person(s) who owned or had custody or control of the
container which held the hazardous substance at the time or immediately prior
to such release (as determined by the involved party(ies), the involved parties
insurance carrier(s) or the court of competent jurisdiction).
(Ord. 721, passed 4-23-2012)
§ 34.62  LIABILITY FOR COST.
   (A)   General. Any responsible party who causes a motor vehicle accident,
fire incident, hazardous materials incident or any disaster or large-scale
accident or event shall be liable for the payment of all reasonable and
necessary costs incurred by the city for response to and remediation of such an
incident.
   (B)   Remedies at law. The city will seek all available remedies at law, to
include provisions of this subchapter, against any parties responsible for any
motor vehicle accident, fire incident, hazardous materials incident or any
disaster or large-scale accident or event, to include those actions and
remedies available under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code relating to such matters.
(Ord. 721, passed 4-23-2012)
§ 34.63  COLLECTION AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   General. There shall be selected from time to time as necessary by the
City Manager a cost recovery agent for the city, who shall serve as the city’s
agent for billing the responsible party for costs incurred.
   (B)   Procedure for submitting invoices. An invoice identifying eligible
costs under this subchapter shall be submitted by the agent of the city within
the statute of limitations after the cost was incurred or identified. Submitted
invoices must include sufficient itemization (i.e., itemized materials used or
procured, hourly equipment costs, procedures as rendered; equipment repair
costs and the like).
   (C)   Method of payment. The City Finance Department shall submit one or a
series of consolidated invoices to the responsible party, for the city’s
specific costs and reimbursements as detailed above. The responsible party
shall issue a check made payable to the city. The checks shall be sent to the
city within 30 days of the date of the consolidated invoice.
(Ord. 721, passed 4-23-2012)
§ 34.64  METHODS OF ENFORCEMENT.
   This subchapter shall not prohibit the city from pursing any other remedy,
whether civil or criminal, or from instituting any appropriate action or
proceedings, including injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction. Nor
shall the recovery of expenses under this subchapter in any way release the
various parties, or limit them, from legal liability incurred as a result of
mitigation, cleanup or abatement as defined under any local, state of federal
rule or regulation.
(Ord. 721, passed 4-23-2012)
§ 34.65  CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Whenever the requirements or provisions of this subchapter are in conflict
with the requirements or provisions of any other lawfully adopted ordinance,
the more restrictive requirements shall apply. Further, this subchapter shall
not restrict or replace cost recovery from funding sources available under
state and federal regulations.
(Ord. 721, passed 4-23-2012)
CHAPTER 35:  PERSONNEL
Section
General Provisions
   
35.001   General provisions
   
35.002   Personnel regulations
   
35.003   Definitions
   
35.004   Coverage
   
35.005   Administration
   
35.006   City Manager’s duties
   
35.007   Personnel rules
   
35.008   Classification
   
35.009   Compensation
   
35.010   Appointments
   
35.011   Promotions
   
35.012   Veteran’s preference
   
35.013   Probationary period
   
35.014   Eligible list
   
35.015   Demotions, suspensions and dismissals
   
35.016   Appeals
   
35.017   Discrimination
   
35.018   Absences, hours of work
   
35.019   Political activity
   
35.020   Status of present employees
   
35.021   Records
   
35.022   Right to contract for special services
Social Security for Officers and Employees
   
35.035   Policy and purpose as to coverage
   
35.036   Necessary agreements to be executed
   
35.037   Withholdings from salaries or wages
   
35.038   Appropriations for employer’s contributions
   
35.039   Records to be kept and reports made
   
35.040   Exclusion of coverage due to another retirement system
   
35.041   Exclusion of coverage due to lack of authorization
Occupational Safety and Health Program
   
35.055   Title
   
35.056   Purpose
   
35.057   Coverage
   
35.058   Standards authorized
   
35.059   Variances from standards authorized
   
35.060   Administration
   
35.061   Funding the program
Travel Administrative Procedures
   
35.075   Travel requests
   
35.076   Travel documentation
   
35.077   Transportation
   
35.078   Lodging
   
35.079   Meals and incidentals
   
35.080   Miscellaneous expenses
   
35.081   Entertainment
   
35.082   Travel reconciliation
   
35.083   Disciplinary action
Substance Abuse Policy
   
35.095   Purpose of drug testing program; notice
   
35.096   General rules
   
35.097   Drugs to be tested for
   
35.098   Prior notice of testing policy
   
35.099   Consent
   
35.100   Employee testing; general standard
   
35.101   Refusal to consent
   
35.102   Confirmation of test results
   
35.103   Consequences of a confirming positive test result
   
35.104   Right to hearing
   
35.105   Mandatory employee assistance program; referral
   
35.106   Confidentiality of test results
   
35.107   Laboratory testing requirements
   
35.108   Drug/alcohol screening consent form
Code of Ethics
   
35.120   Applicability
   
35.121   Definitions
   
35.122   Disclosure of personal interest of official with vote
   
35.123   Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters
   
35.124   Acceptance of gratuities and the like
   
35.125   Use of information
   
35.126   Use of municipal time, facilities and the like
   
35.127   Use of position or authority
   
35.128   Outside employment
   
35.129   Ethics complaints
   
35.130   Violations
Officials
   
35.145   Clerk certifications
   
35.146   City Manager; annual performance evaluation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.001  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Personnel Subchapter”.
(1994 Code, § 4-201)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.002  PERSONNEL REGULATIONS.
   It is hereby the declared personnel policy of the city that:
   (A)   Employment in the city government shall be based on merit and free of
personal and political considerations;
   (B)   Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be
established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation
of the municipal government;
   (C)   Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be
classified and compensated for on a uniform basis;
   (D)   Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions requiring the
application of the merit principle shall be based on systematic tests and
evaluation;
   (E)   Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair
administration of this subchapter and by every consideration of the rights and
interests of employees, consistent with the best interests of the public and
the city; and
   (F)   Tenure of employees covered by this subchapter shall be subject to
good behavior, satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the performance
of work and availability of funds.
(1994 Code, § 4-202)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.003  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GOVERNING BODY. The commission vested with power to enact chapters and
resolutions for the city.
      MUNICIPALITY or CITY. The City of Etowah.
   (B)   All those definitions as listed in Rule 11 of the personnel rules and
regulations are adopted.
(1994 Code, § 4-203)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.004  COVERAGE.
   (A)   All offices and positions of the city are divided into the classified
service and the exempt service.
   (B)   The exempt service shall include the following:
      (1)   All elected officials and persons appointed to fill vacancies in
elective offices;
      (2)   The City Manager and utility manager;
      (3)   Members of appointive boards, commissions or committees;
      (4)   Department heads unless their inclusion is provided by resolution
of the governing body;
      (5)   Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional,
technical or other services;
      (6)   Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firefighters, and all other
personnel appointed to serve without compensation;
      (7)   City Attorney and Assistant City Attorneys;
      (8)   Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate
requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or
earthquake which threatens life or property;
      (9)   Seasonal employees who work less than six months in the year, or
who are expected to and do work part-time for less than 1,000 hours in a year;
and
      (10)   Persons jointly employed by the city and some other governmental
agency.
   (C)   The classified service shall include all other full-time positions in
the city service which are not specifically placed in the exempt service by
this subchapter.
   (D)   The following sections of this subchapter apply only to the classified
service unless otherwise specifically provided.
(1994 Code, § 4-204)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.005  ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The City Manager, or a personnel officer he or she may designate,
shall have the basic responsibility for the personnel program as set forth in
this subchapter.
   (B)   He or she specifically shall:
      (1)   Be responsible for effective personnel administration and technical
direction of the city’s personnel program;
      (2)   Appoint, remove, suspend and discipline all officers and employees
of the city subject to the policies set forth in this subchapter, provisions of
the charter, and those in state law;
      (3)   Fix and establish the number of employees in the various city
departments and offices and determine the duties and compensation in accordance
with the policies set forth in this subchapter and subject to the approval of
the governing body and budget limitations; and
      (4)   Perform such other duties and exercise such other power in
personnel administration as may be prescribed by law and this subchapter.
(1994 Code, § 4-205)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.006  CITY MANAGER’S DUTIES.
   The City Manager shall:
   (A)   Administer the personnel program as set forth in this subchapter and
the personnel rules and regulations;
   (B)   Perform all lawful and necessary duties essential to the effective
administration of the personnel system;
   (C)   Recommend rules and revisions and amendments thereto for the
consideration of the governing body;
   (D)   Recommend a position classification plan for approval by the governing
body and install and maintain such a plan;
   (E)   Prepare and recommend a pay plan for all city employees for the
governing body approval;
   (F)   Establish and maintain a roster of all persons in the municipal
service setting forth each officer and employee, class title of his or her
position, salary, any changes in class title, status and such other data as may
be deemed desirable or useful;
   (G)   Develop and administer such recruiting and examining programs as may
be necessary to obtain an adequate supply of competent applicants to meet the
needs of the city;
   (H)   Be responsible for certification of all payrolls;
   (I)   Develop and coordinate training and educational programs for city
employees;
   (J)   Investigate periodically the operation and effect of the personnel
provisions of this subchapter and the rules and at least annually reveal his or
her findings and recommendations; and
   (K)   Perform such other duties as may be assigned not inconsistent with
this subchapter.
(1994 Code, § 4-206)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.007  PERSONNEL RULES.
   (A)   The City Manager shall draft such personnel rules as may be necessary
to carry out the provisions of this subchapter to be adopted by the governing
body after public hearing. Such adoption shall be by resolution and the rules
shall have the force and effect of law. Amendments to the personnel rules shall
be made in accordance with the above procedure.
   (B)   The personnel rules shall cover specific procedure and policies to
govern the following phases of the personnel program:
      (1)   Administration of a position classification plan;
      (2)   Administration of pay plan;
      (3)   The announcement of vacancies and the acceptance of applications
for employment;
      (4)   Preparation and conduct of examinations;
      (5)   Establishment and use of employment lists containing name of
persons eligible for employment;
      (6)   Establishment of promotional policies;
      (7)   Certification of employment of persons from employment lists to
fill vacancies and the making of temporary and emergency appointments;
      (8)   Evaluation of the work of employees including those serving a
probationary period;
      (9)   Transfer, promotion and reinstatement of employees in the
competitive service;
      (10)   Separation from the service of employees by resignation, layoff,
suspension, dismissal and for incapacity to perform required duties;
      (11)   Establishment of hours of work attendance and leave regulations
and working conditions;
      (12)   Development of employee morale, welfare and training programs;
      (13)   Rules governing the outside employment of municipal employees;
      (14)   Maintenance and use of necessary records and forms;
      (15)   A uniform system of handling all grievances; and
      (16)   Such other matters as may be necessary and proper to carry out the
intent and purpose of this subchapter.
(1994 Code, § 4-207)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.008  CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   The City Manager shall make an analysis of the duties, authority and
responsibility of all positions in the classified service and shall recommend
to the governing body a position classification plan. Each position in the
classified service shall be assigned to a job classification on the basis of
its kind and level of its duties and responsibilities, to the end that all
positions in the same class shall be sufficiently alike to permit use for a
single descriptive class title, the same qualifications, requirements of the
same test of competence and the same pay scale. A job class may contain one
position or more than one position.
   (B)   Within 60 days after the recommendation of the initial classification
plan by the City Manager, the governing body shall by resolution, after public
hearing, approve a classification plan and the City Manager shall thereafter
allocate each position to its appropriate class.
   (C)   The class to which each position is initially allocated following
adoption of this subchapter shall be the class in which the employee shall have
status conferred on him or her by Art. 18.
   (D)   The initial class plan shall be revised from time to time as changing
conditions require, upon recommendation of the City Manager and with the
approval of the governing body. Such revisions may consist of the adoption of
new classes or the abolishment, consolidation, division or amendment of
existing classes.
(1994 Code, § 4-208)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.009  COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The City Manager, in consultation with the Finance Director, shall
develop a uniform and equitable pay plan consisting of minimum, intermediate
and maximum rates of pay for each class of positions. Salary ranges for each
class shall be coordinated with the position classification plan and shall be
based on the ranges of pay for comparable work in other public and private
employment in the area, cost of living data, suggestions of department heads
and employees, maintenance or other benefits received by employees, the
financial policy of the city and other economic considerations.
   (B)   The pay plan and the rules for its administration shall then be
submitted to the governing body for adoption by resolution.
   (C)   After the pay plan and the rules for the administration have been
adopted by the governing body, the City Manager shall assign each job class to
one of the pay ranges provided in the pay plan.
   (D)   The pay plan may be amended from time to time as circumstances
require, either through adjustment of rates or by reassignment of job classes
to different pay ranges or both.
   (E)   On the effective date of a new or revised plan, the pay of employees
receiving less than the minimum rate for their class shall be increased to the
minimum rate of the salary range. Employees receiving more than the maximum
rate of their class shall continue to receive that higher rate. Employees whose
salary rates fall at any step in the range for the position shall continue at
that rate. Rates at other than an established step of the salary range shall be
increased to the next higher step as revenues are identified.
(1994 Code, § 4-209)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.010  APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   The personnel rules and regulations shall provide procedures for the
employment of persons on the basis of merit in conformity with this subchapter.
   (B)   Such procedures shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   An orderly and systematic method of recruitment to insure that all
those employed will be hired on a merit basis, and to provide for the
establishment of qualified lists for employment purposes;
      (2)   Provisional appointments in the absence of appropriate employment
lists; provided, however, that, employment lists shall be established for any
such position within six months and that no person shall be employed by the
city under provisional appointment for a total of more than six months, with
the provision that during the period of suspension of an employee or pending
final action of proceedings to review the suspension, demotion or dismissal of
an employee, the vacancy created may be filled by the employing authority only
by provisional appointment; and
      (3)   In the event of emergency, the appointing authority may appoint
such persons as are required to meet the situation but such appointments shall
not exceed 90 working days in any 12-month period.
(1994 Code, § 4-210)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.011  PROMOTIONS.
   Vacancies in positions above the entrance shall be filled by promotions
whenever, in the judgment of the City Manager, it is in the best interest of
the city to do so, and promotions shall be on a competitive basis and shall
give appropriate consideration to the applicants, qualifications and seniority.
(1994 Code, § 4-211)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.012  VETERAN’S PREFERENCE.
   All local or state regulations shall apply.
(1994 Code, § 4-212)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.013  PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   The personnel rules and regulations shall provide that all regular
appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary
period to six months. (One year for entrance level uniformed police and fire
personnel.) During the probationary period, an employee may be dismissed at any
time without right of appeal or hearing in any manner. The employee dismissed
during the probationary period for a position to which he or she has been
promoted may be reinstated to the position from which he or she had been
promoted unless he or she is discharged as provided in this subchapter and the
personnel rules and regulations.
(1994 Code, § 4-213)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.014  ELIGIBLE LIST.
   (A)   Eligible lists, in the order of their priority shall be re-employment
lists, promotional eligible lists and original appointment eligible lists.
      (1)   Re-employment lists shall contain the names of permanent employees
laid off in good standing for lack of funds or work.
      (2)   Promotional eligible lists and original appointment eligible lists
shall be created as provided in Art. 8 and Art. 9.
      (3)   Probationary employees laid off for lack of work or lack of funds,
and probationary employees who resign and whose resignations are withdrawn
within one year, with the approval of the appointing authority, may have their
names restored to the eligible list from which their appointment was originally
made.
   (B)   When an appointment is to be made to fill a vacancy, the City Manager
shall make the selection from the names of three persons ranked highest on the
appropriate list who have indicated willingness to accept appointment (“rule of
three”). When more than one vacancy is to be filled, the number of names
submitted shall equal the number of vacancies, plus two.
   (C)   Policies and procedures for administering eligible lists shall be
provided in the personnel rules, covering the duration, cancellation,
replacement and consolidation of such lists and the removal or suspension of
the names of eligibles therefrom.
(1994 Code, § 4-214)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.015  DEMOTIONS, SUSPENSIONS AND DISMISSALS.
   (A)   The City Manager, or a department head with the City Manager
concurrence, may suspend an employee without pay for disciplinary purposes. No
employee shall be suspended for more than 30 days in any calendar year; except
that, extensions may be made pending any investigation and hearing. The City
Manager or a department head with City Manager concurrence may suspend, demote
or dismiss an employee whose work is unsatisfactory and for any reason listed
in the personnel rules and regulations.
   (B)   Written notice of the action shall be served upon the employee
affected and filed in the personnel file before it shall become effective
subject to appeal action, if any.
(1994 Code, § 4-215)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.016  APPEALS.
   (A)   Any regular employee in the classified service who is suspended,
demoted or dismissed may appeal to the City Manager within 30 days after such
action is taken.
   (B)   The personnel rules and regulations shall establish the appeal
procedure.
(1994 Code, § 4-216)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.017  DISCRIMINATION.
   No person in the classified service or seeking admission thereto shall be
employed, promoted, demoted or discharged, or in any way favored or
discriminated against, because of political opinions or affiliations or because
of race, religion, national origin, sex or age.
(1994 Code, § 4-217)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.018  ABSENCES, HOURS OF WORK.
   Personnel rules and regulations will prescribe the hours of work and the
conditions and length of time for which leaves of absence, with and without
pay, may be granted. These shall cover, among others, holidays, vacations, sick
leaves and leaves for military service.
(1994 Code, § 4-218)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.019  POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   Persons holding a position in the classified service shall not:
   (A)   Seek or accept election, nomination or appointment as an officer of
any county or municipal political club or organization;
   (B)   Take an active part in, or make any contribution or donation to, any
county or municipal political campaign, or serve as a member of a committee of
any county or municipal organization; or
   (C)   Seek signatures to any petition provided for by any law, or act as a
worker at the polls, or distribute badges, pamphlets or handbills of any kind
favoring or opposing any candidate for election, or for nomination to a local
public office, whether county or municipal. Nothing in this subchapter,
however, shall be construed to prevent any such employee from becoming and/or
continuing to be a member of a political organization, or from attending any
political meeting, or from enjoying entire freedom from all interference in
casting his or her vote. Any employee who wishes to accept or seek election or
appointment to political office shall resign from the service upon indicating
such intention by formal declaration or other evidence of candidacy. Any
willful violation, or violation through culpable negligence, of any of the
above prohibitions shall be sufficient grounds for the discharge of any
employee guilty of such violation.
(1994 Code, § 4-219)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.020  STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES.
   Any person holding a position included in the classified service who, on the
date that this subchapter becomes operational, shall have served continuously
in such position, or in some other position in the classified service, for a
period of six months (uniformed police and fire personnel shall serve one year)
shall assume regular status in the classified service in the position held on
such effective date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in
all respects to the provisions of this subchapter and the personnel rules and
regulations. Other persons holding positions in the classified service shall be
regarded as probationers and may be certified in the same manner when they
satisfactorily complete the regular work test period from the date of original
appointment.
(1994 Code, § 4-220)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.021  RECORDS.
   The City Manager shall maintain, as a minimum, adequate records of the
proceedings of all personnel affairs, of official chapters and resolutions
affecting personnel administration, of personnel rules and regulations, of the
examination record of every applicant, and of the employment record of every
employee.
(1994 Code, § 4-221)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
§ 35.022  RIGHT TO CONTRACT FOR SPECIAL SERVICES.
   (A)   The governing body may contract with any competent agency for the
performance by such agency of such technical services in connection with the
establishment of the personnel system or with its operations as may be desired.
Said contract may include the delegation to such an agency of the duties herein
imposed upon the City Manager, but shall not include the delegation of the
powers and duties herein vested in the governing body.
   (B)   The governing body may contract with any qualified person or agency
for the performance of the following responsibilities and duties:
      (1)   The preparation  of personnel  rules  and regulations and
subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;
      (2)   The preparation of a position classification plan and subsequent
revisions and amendments thereof;
      (3)   The preparation of a compensation plan and subsequent revisions and
amendments thereof;
      (4)   The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive examinations;
and
      (5)   Special and technical service of advisory or informational
character on matters relating to personnel administration.
(1994 Code, § 4-222)  (Ord. 407, passed 11-25-1985)
SOCIAL SECURITY FOR OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 35.035  POLICY AND PURPOSE AS TO COVERAGE.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to
extend, as of 1-1-1952, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by
law or this subchapter, and whether employed in connection with a governmental
or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of Federal Old Age and
Survivors Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act.
   (B)   In pursuance of said policy and for that purpose, the city shall take
such action as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations.
(1994 Code, § 4-101)
Editor’s note:
   See Ord. 519, passed 11-28-1994, on record in the city offices for
amendments to the Social Security Agreement by and between the City of Etowah
and the State Old Age and Survivors Insurance Agency.
§ 35.036  NECESSARY AGREEMENTS TO BE EXECUTED.
   The Mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all
necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the State Executive Director
of Old Age Insurance, as agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and
officials as provided in the preceding section.
(1994 Code, § 4-102)
§ 35.037  WITHHOLDINGS FROM SALARIES OR WAGES.
   Withholdings from the salaries or wages of employees and officials for the
purpose provided by §
35.035 of this chapter are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at
such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated
by said laws or regulations.
(1994 Code, § 4-103)
§ 35.038  APPROPRIATIONS FOR EMPLOYER’S CONTRIBUTIONS.
   There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times
as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for
employer’s contributions, which shall be paid over to the state or federal
agency designated by said laws or regulations.
(1994 Code, § 4-104)
§ 35.039  RECORDS TO BE KEPT AND REPORTS MADE.
   The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by
applicable state and federal laws or regulations.
(1994 Code, § 4-105)
§ 35.040  EXCLUSION OF COVERAGE DUE TO ANOTHER RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   There is hereby excluded from this subchapter any authority to make any
agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered
or authorized to be covered by any other chapter creating any retirement system
for any employee or official of the city.
(1994 Code, § 4-106)
§ 35.041  EXCLUSION OF COVERAGE DUE TO LACK OF AUTHORIZATION.
   There is hereby excluded from this subchapter any authority to make any
agreement with respect to any positions or any employee or official not
authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(1994 Code, § 4-107)
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 350 is replaced with the following occupational safety and health
regulations
§ 35.055  TITLE.
   This section shall provide authority for establishing and administering the
occupational safety and health program plan for employees of the city.
(1994 Code, § 4-301)  (Ord. 631, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 35.056  PURPOSE.
   The city, in electing to update its established program plan, will maintain
an effective occupational safety and health program for its employees and
shall:
   (A)   Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of employment that
includes:
      (1)   Top management commitment and employee involvement;
      (2)   Continually analyze the worksite to identify all hazards and
potential hazards;
      (3)   Develop and maintain methods for preventing or controlling existing
or potential hazards; and
      (4)   Train managers, supervisors and employees to understand and deal
with worksite hazards.
   (B)   Acquire, maintain and require the use of safety equipment, personal
protective equipment and devices reasonably necessary to protect employees;
   (C)   Make, keep, preserve and make available to the Commissioner of Labor
and Workforce Development of the state, his or her designated representatives,
or persons within the State Department of Labor and Workforce Development to
whom such responsibilities have been delegated, adequate records of all
occupational accidents and illnesses and personal injuries for proper
evaluation and necessary corrective action as required;
   (D)   Consult with the State Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development
with regard to the adequacy of the form and content of records;
   (E)   Consult with the State Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development, as appropriate, regarding safety and health problems which are
considered to be unusual or peculiar and are such that they cannot be achieved
under a standard promulgated by the state;
   (F)   Provide reasonable opportunity for the participation of employees in
the effectuation of the objectives of this program, including the opportunity
to make anonymous complaints concerning conditions or practices injurious to
employee safety and health; and
   (G)   Provide for education and training of personnel for the fair and
efficient administration of occupational safety and health standards, and
provide for education and notification of all employees of the existence of
this program.
(1994 Code, § 4-302)  (Ord. 631, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 35.057  COVERAGE.
   The provisions of the occupational safety and health program plan of the
employees of the city shall apply to all employees of each administrative
department, commission, board, division or other agency of the city whether
part-time or full-time, seasonal or permanent.
(1994 Code, § 4-303)  (Ord. 631, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 35.058  STANDARDS AUTHORIZED.
   The occupational safety and health standards adopted by the city are the
same as, but not limited to, the state’s occupational safety and health
standards promulgated, or which may be promulgated, in accordance with § 6 of
the State Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 (Tenn. Code Ann. Title 50,
Ch. 3).
(1994 Code, § 4-304)  (Ord. 631, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 35.059  VARIANCES FROM STANDARDS AUTHORIZED.
   The city may, upon written application to the Commissioner of Labor and
Workforce Development of the state, request an order granting a temporary
variance from any approved standards. Applications for variances shall be in
accordance with rules of the State Department of Labor and Workforce
Development, Occupational Safety, Ch. 0800-01-02, as authorized by Tenn. Code
Ann. Title 50. Prior to requesting such temporary variance, the city shall
notify or serve notice to employees, their designated representatives or
interested parties and present them with an opportunity for a hearing. The
posting of notice on the main bulletin board as designated by the city shall be
deemed sufficient notice to employees.
(1994 Code, § 4-305)  (Ord. 631, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 35.060  ADMINISTRATION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the Personnel Director is designated as
the Director of Occupational Safety and Health to perform duties and to
exercise powers assigned so as to plan, develop and administer the occupational
safety and health program. The Director shall develop a plan of operation for
the program and said plan shall become a part of this subchapter when it
satisfies all applicable sections of the State Occupational Safety and Health
Act of 1972 and Part IV of the State Occupational Safety and Health Plan.
(1994 Code, § 4-306)  (Ord. 631, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 35.061  FUNDING THE PROGRAM.
   Sufficient funds for administering and staffing the program pursuant to this
subchapter shall be made available as authorized by the City Commission.
(1994 Code, § 4-307)  (Ord. 631, passed 7-28-2003)
TRAVEL ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
§ 35.075  TRAVEL REQUESTS.
   To ensure reimbursement for official travel, an approved travel
authorization form is required. Lack of pre-approval doesn’t prohibit
reimbursement, but it does assure reimbursement within the limits of the City
of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board travel policy. All costs associated with the
travel should be reasonably estimated and shown on the travel authorization
form before travel advances are authorized are authorized by supervisor or
director.
(1994 Code, § 4-401)  (Res. 591, passed - -; Ord. 676, passed 8-27-2007; Ord.
777, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 35.076  TRAVEL DOCUMENTATION.
   It is the responsibility of the authorized traveler to:
   (A)   Prepare the travel request and accurately describe the travel;
   (B)   Attach documentation such as meeting or conference agenda, brochure,
itinerary and the like;
   (C)   Certify the accuracy of the reimbursement request;
   (D)   Note on the reimbursement form all direct payments and travel advances
made by the City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board; and
   (E)   File the reimbursement form with the necessary supporting documents
and original receipts. The reimbursement form should be filed with the Finance
Department within five days of return.
(1994 Code, § 4-402)  (Ord. 777, passed 6-12-2015)
§ 35.077  TRANSPORTATION.
   (A)   Generally. All potential costs should be considered when selecting the
modes of transportation. For example, airline travel may be cheaper than
automobile when time away from work and increased meal and lodging costs is
considered. When time is important, or when the trip is so long that other
modes of transportation are not cost-beneficial, air travel is encouraged. If
the traveler goes outside the state by means other than air, the reimbursement
will be at federal mileage rates for personal vehicle, ordinary expenses during
the meeting dates and one day’s meal and motel before or after the meeting. The
traveler will be required to take annual leave for any additional time taken
beyond the day before or the day after the meeting dates.
   (B)   Exceptions. When the traveler extends the trip with personal time to
take advantage of discount fares, the reimbursement will be limited to the
lesser of the actual expenses incurred or the amount that would have been
incurred for the business portion only. The calculations for the business
portion of the trip must be made using the government rates. All expenses and
savings associated with extending the trip must be submitted with the expense
reimbursement form.
      (1)   Air travel. When possible, the traveler should make full use of
discounts for advance airline reservations and advance registration. The
traveler should request conference, or government rates, when making lodging or
rental car reservations. The City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board will pay for
tourist or economy class air travel. All reservations for airline flights will
be made by the Finance Department.
Mileage credits for frequent flyer programs accrued to the individual traveler.
However, the City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board will not reimburse for
additional expenses such as circuitous routing, extended stays, layovers to
schedule a particular carrier, upgrading from economy to first class - for
travelers to accumulate additional mileage or for other personal reasons. The
COE/Etowah Utility Board will not reimburse travel by private aircraft unless
authorized in advance by the City Manager/General Manager.
      (2)   Rail or bus. The City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board will pay for
actual cost of ticket.
      (3)   Vehicles. Automobile transportation may be used when a common
carrier can’t be scheduled, when it’s more economical, when a common carrier
isn’t practical, or when two or more City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board
employees traveling together can reduce expenses. Fines for traffic or parking
violations will not be reimbursed by the COE/Etowah Utility Board. Reasonable
tolls will be allowed when the most direct travel route requires them.
         (a)   Personal vehicles.
            1.   Employees should use City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board
vehicles when possible. Use of a private vehicle must be approved in advance by
the City Manager/General Manager. The City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board will
pay a mileage rate not to exceed the rate allowed by the federal schedule. The
miles for reimbursement shall be paid from origin to destination and back.
Necessary vicinity travel related to official City of Etowah/Etowah Utility
Board business will be reimbursed. If an indirect route is taken, the Google
Maps mileage calculation will be used to determine the mileage to be
reimbursed.
            2.   If two or more travelers on the same trip use a privately
owned automobile, only the traveler who owns or has custody of the automobile
will be reimbursed for mileage. It’s the responsibility of the traveler to
provide adequate insurance to hold harmless the City of Etowah/Utility Board
for any liability from the use of the private vehicle.
            3.   Travelers will not be reimbursed for automobile repair or
breakdowns when using their personal vehicle.
         (b)   City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board Vehicle. The City of Etowah/
Etowah Utility Board may require the employee to drive a City of Etowah/Etowah
Utility Board vehicle. If a City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board vehicle is
provided, the traveler is responsible for seeing that the vehicle is used
properly. The employee will be reimbursed for expenses directly related to the
actual and normal use of the utility vehicle when proper documentation is
provided.
         (c)   Rental cars. Use of a rental car is permitted when it is less
expensive or otherwise more practical than public transportation. A government
rate must be requested. Anyone who uses a rental car for out-of-state travel
must obtain liability coverage from the vendor.
         (d)   Taxi and other transportation fares. When an individual travels
by common carrier, reasonable fares will be allowed for necessary ground
transportation. Bus to and from airports should be used when available and
practical. The City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board will reimburse mileage for
travel to and from the local airport and parking fees. Receipts are required.
For travel between lodging quarters and meetings, conferences or meals,
reasonable taxi fares will be allowed. Original receipts are required for
claims of $5 or more. Reimbursement claims for taxis or other ground
transportation must be listed separately on the expense reimbursement form.
(1994 Code, § 4-403)  (Res. 591, passed - -; Ord. 629, passed 7-28-2003; Ord.
676, passed 8-27-2007; Ord. 777, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 35.078  LODGING.
   The amount allocated for lodging shall not ordinarily exceed the rate of the
officially designated hotel of the meeting. Exceptions must be approved by the
City Manager/General Manager. Original lodging receipts must be submitted with
the reimbursement form. If two or more City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board
employees travel together and share a room, the lodging reimbursement rate will
be the rate of a double at the officially designated hotel of the meeting. It
will be the traveler’s responsibility to provide documentation of the
“officially designated meeting site” room rates. If an employee shares a room,
with a non-employee, the actual cost will be allowed up to the rate for a room
at the officially designated hotel of the meeting. The receipt for the entire
amount must be submitted with the expense form.
(1994 Code, § 4-404)  (Res. 591, passed - -; Ord. 676, passed 8-27-2007; Ord.
777, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 35.079  MEALS AND INCIDENTALS.
   Per diem rates for meals and incidentals:
   (A)   The maximum per diem rates include a fixed allowance for meals and
incidental expenses (M & I). The M & I rate, or fraction thereof, is payable to
the traveler without itemization of expenses or receipts. Incidentals are
intended to include miscellaneous costs associated with travel such as tips for
baggage handling, phone calls to home and the like. Reimbursement is made only
when overnight travel is required. Generally, the applicable maximum per diem
rate for each calendar day of travel shall be determined by the location of
lodging for the traveler.
   (B)   The per diem rates for meals and incidentals are established on the
Reimbursement Rate Schedule. As with lodging, there is a standard rate for the
continental United States (gsa.gov), and a list of exceptions. Please note that
these rates may change effective October 1 of each year.
   (C)   Reimbursement for meals and incidentals for the day of departure shall
be three- fourths of the appropriate M & I rate (gsa.gov rate for out-of- state
travel) at the rate prescribed for the lodging location.
   (D)   Employees who receive maintenance in the form of meals provided by
their employing agency at their official work station shall be eligible for
reimbursement if they are away from their official work station on City of
Etowah/Etowah Utility Board business and do not receive the maintenance meal.
   (E)   Reimbursement for a single meal (or meals) for employees on one-day
travel status with no overnight stay is not permitted. While on travel status
if more than a single full meal is provided as part of a training session or
conference, the employee should deduct the cost of those meals from the per
diem for that day, using the schedule provided below. This also applies to the
day of departure and the day of return. In those instances where all meals are
provided, only the incidental rate should be claimed.
   (F)   Meals of a non-employee unless associated with business of the City of
Etowah/Etowah Utility Board are non-reimbursable. No meals for a spouse,
children, friends or relatives of employee are eligible for reimbursement
unless directly related to business of the City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board.
   (G)   The hour and date of departure and return must be shown on the expense
reimbursement form.
   (H)   The excess cost of an official banquet may be allowed, provided proper
documentation or explanation is submitted with the expense reimbursement form.
If a meal is included as part of a conference or seminar registration, then the
allowance for that meal should be subtracted from the total allowance for the
day. For example, if a dinner is included as part of the conference fee, the
maximum meal allowance for the day should be reduced by the allowed dinner
amount.
   (I)   The City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board reimburse mileage and meals at
the federal travel regulation rates. These rates will automatically change when
the selected agency rates are adjusted.
(1994 Code, § 4-405)  (Res. 591, passed - -; Ord. 676, passed 8-27-2007; Ord.
777, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 35.080  MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES.
   (A)   Registration fees for approved conferences, conventions, seminars,
meetings and other educational programs will be allowed and will generally
include the cost of official banquets, meals, lodging and registration fees.
Registration fees should be specified on the original travel authorization form
and can include a request for pre-registration fee payment.
   (B)   A $10 allowance will be reimbursable for hotel/motel check-in and
baggage handling expense.
(1994 Code, § 4-406)  (Res. 591, passed - -; Ord. 676, passed 8-27-2007; Ord.
777, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 35.081  ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   The City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board may pay for certain
entertainment expenses provided that:
      (1)   The entertainment is appropriate in the conduct of City of Etowah/
Etowah Utility Board business; the entertainment is approved by the City
Manager/General Manager; the group of individuals involved are identified; and
      (2)   Detailed documentation is attached to the expense form to support
the entertainment expense claims.
   (B)   To request reimbursement for authorized entertainment expenses, the
following must be included with the expense reimbursement form:
      (1)   Required receipts. All receipts must be supported by original
receipts from the vendor (restaurant, caterer, ticket office and the like).
Reasonable tips and gratuities included on the receipt by the vendor are
reimbursable; and
      (2)   A disclosure and explanation statement, explaining the purpose of
the entertainment and identifying the group and the number of people
entertained and the individual names.
(1994 Code, § 4-407)  (Res. 591, passed - -; Ord. 676, passed 8-27-2007; Ord.
777, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 35.082  TRAVEL RECONCILIATION.
   (A)   Within five days of return from travel, the traveler is expected to
complete and file the expense reimbursement form. It must be certified by the
traveler that the amount due is true and accurate. Original lodging, travel,
taxi, parking and other receipts must be attached.
   (B)   If the City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board provided a travel advance
or made advanced payment, the traveler should include that information on the
expense form. In the case of advances, the form should have a reconciliation
summary, reflecting total claimed expenses with advances and utility pre-
payments indicated. The balance due the traveler or the refund due the utility
should be clearly shown below the total claim on the form or in a cover memo
attached to the front of the form. If the traveler received a travel advance
and spent less than the advance, the traveler must return the difference to the
City of Etowah/Etowah Utility Board within five days. The City Manager/General
Manager will address special circumstances and issues not covered in this
resolution on a case-by-case basis.
(1994 Code, § 4-408)  (Res. 591, passed - -; Ord. 676, passed 8-27-2007; Ord.
777, passed 6-22-2015)
§ 35.083  DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   Violation of the travel rules can result in disciplinary action for
employees. Travel fraud can result in criminal prosecution of officials and/or
employees.
(1994 Code, § 4-409)  (Res. 591, passed - -; Ord. 676, passed 8-27-2007; Ord.
777, passed 6-22-2015)
SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY
§ 35.095  PURPOSE OF DRUG TESTING PROGRAM; NOTICE.
   (A)   The city has a legal responsibility and management obligation to
ensure a safe work environment, as well as paramount interest in protecting the
public by ensuring that its employees have the physical stamina and emotional
stability to perform their assigned duties. A requirement for employment must
be an employee who is free from drug or alcohol dependence, illegal drug use or
drug/alcohol abuse.
   (B)   Liability could be found against the city and the employee if the city
fails to ensure that employees can perform their duties without endangering
themselves or the public.
   (C)   There is sufficient evidence to conclude that the use of illegal
drugs/alcohol, drug/alcohol dependence and drug/alcohol abuse seriously impairs
an employee’s performance and general physical and mental health. The illegal
possession and use of drugs, alcohol and/or narcotics by employees of the city
is a crime in this jurisdiction and clearly unacceptable. Therefore, the city
has adopted this written policy to ensure drug tests are ordered as the result
of reasonable suspicion by supervisory personnel and based on observed behavior
or work performance; and whereby employees know testing is a requirement of
employment.
(1994 Code, § 4-501)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.096  GENERAL RULES.
   (A)   City employees shall not take or be under the influence of any
narcotics or dangerous substance unless prescribed by the employees’ licensed
physicians. Employees who are required to take prescription medicine shall
notify their department head of the medication prescribed and the nature of the
illness, injury or condition.
   (B)   City employees are prohibited from the use, possession and sale of
drugs, alcohol or any other controlled substance on city property or in city
vehicles.
   (C)   All property belonging to the city is subject to inspection at any
time without notice as there is not expectation of privacy.
      (1)   Property includes, but is not limited to, vehicles, desks,
containers, files and storage lockers.
      (2)   Employees assigned lockers (that are locked by the employee) are
also subject to inspection by the employee’s supervisor after reasonable
advance notice, (unless waived by the City Manager) and in the presence of the
employee.
   (D)   City employees who have reason to believe another employee is
illegally using drugs or narcotics shall report the facts and circumstances
immediately to the supervisor.
   (E)   Failure to comply with the intent or provisions of this general order
may be used as grounds for disciplinary action.
(1994 Code, § 4-502)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.097  DRUGS TO BE TESTED FOR.
   When drug and alcohol screening is required under the provisions of this
policy a urinalysis test will be given to detect the presence of the drug
groups listed below: (This list is not intended as an exhaustive inventory of
every drug for which an employee can be tested. The selection of drugs subject
to testing will be based upon known abuse in the community and the ability of
each drug to affect job performance.)
   (A)   Alcohol (Ethyl);
   (B)   Amphetamines (e.g., speed);
   (C)   Barbiturates (e.g., Amobarbital, Butabarbital, Phenobarbital,
Secobarbital);
   (D)   Cocaine;
   (E)   Methaqualone (e.g., Quaalude);
   (F)   Opiates (e.g., Codeine, Heroin, Morphine, Hydromorphine, Hydrocodone);
   (G)   Phencyclidine (PCP); and
   (H)   THC (Marijuana).
(1994 Code, § 4-503)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.098  PRIOR NOTICE OF TESTING POLICY.
   (A)   The city shall provide written notice of its drug and alcohol testing
policy to all employees.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The need for drug and alcohol testing;
      (2)   The circumstances under which testing may be required;
      (3)   The procedures for confirming an initial positive drug test result;
      (4)   The consequences of a confirmed positive test result;
      (5)   The consequences of refusing to undergo a drug and alcohol test;
      (6)   The right to explain a positive test result and the appeal
procedures available; and
      (7)   The availability of drug abuse counseling and referral service.
(1994 Code, § 4-504)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.099  CONSENT.
   (A)   Before a drug and alcohol test is administered, employees will be
asked to sign a consent form authorizing the test and permitting release of
test results to those city officials with a need to know. The consent form
shall provide space for employees to acknowledge that they have been notified
of the city’s drug testing policy and to indicate current or recent use of
prescription or over-the-counter medication.
   (B)   The consent form shall also set forth the following information:
      (1)   The procedure for confirming an initial positive test result;
      (2)   The consequences of a confirmed positive test result;
      (3)   The right to explain a confirmed positive test result and the
appeal procedures available; and
      (4)   The consequences of refusing to undergo a drug and alcohol test.
(1994 Code, § 4-505)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.100  EMPLOYEE TESTING; GENERAL STANDARD.
   (A)   The city may require a current city employee to undergo drug and
alcohol testing if there is reasonable suspicion that the employee is under the
influence of drugs or alcohol during working hours. REASONABLE SUSPICION means
an articulate belief based on specific facts and reasonable inferences drawn
from those facts, that an employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
   (B)   Circumstances which constitute a basis for determining reasonable
suspicion may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   A pattern of abnormal or erratic behavior;
      (2)   Information provided by a reliable and credible source;
      (3)   A work-related accident;
      (4)   Direct observation of drug or alcohol use; or
      (5)   Presence of the physical symptoms of drug or alcohol use (i.e.,
glassy or bloodshot eyes, alcohol odor on breath, slurred speech, poor
coordination and/or reflexes).
   (C)   Supervisors are required to detail in writing, the specific facts,
symptoms or observations which formed the basis for their determination that
reasonable suspicion existed to warrant the testing of an employee. This
documentation shall be forwarded to the appropriate department head or
designated alternate.
(1994 Code, § 4-506)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.101  REFUSAL TO CONSENT.
   An employee who refuses to consent to a drug and alcohol test when
reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use has been identified is subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination. The reason(s) for the
refusal shall be considered in determining the appropriate disciplinary action.
(1994 Code, § 4-507)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.102  CONFIRMATION OF TEST RESULTS.
   (A)   An employee whose drug test yields a positive result shall be given a
second test using a gas chromatography/mass spectrometry test. The second test
shall use a portion of the same test sample withdrawn from the employee for use
in the first test.
   (B)   If the second test confirms the positive test result, the employee
shall be notified of the results in writing by the appropriate department head
or designated alternate. The letter of notification shall identify the
particular substance found and its concentration level.
   (C)   An employee whose second test confirms the original positive test
results may, at the employee’s own expense, have a third test conducted on the
same sample at a laboratory selected by the city.
(1994 Code, § 4-508)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.103  CONSEQUENCES OF A CONFIRMING POSITIVE TEST RESULT.
   (A)   If an employee’s positive test result has been confirmed, the employee
is subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
   (B)   Factors to be considered in determining the appropriate disciplinary
response include the employee’s work history, length of employment, current job
performance and existence of past disciplinary actions. No disciplinary action
may be taken against employees who voluntarily identify themselves as drug
users, obtain counseling and rehabilitation through the city’s employee
assistance program or other program sanctioned by the city, and thereafter
refrain from violating the city’s policy on drug and alcohol abuse.
(1994 Code, § 4-509)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.104  RIGHT TO HEARING.
   (A)   If an employee’s positive test results have been confirmed, the
employee is entitled to a hearing before disciplinary action may be taken by
the city.
   (B)   The hearing shall be held in accordance with the appeal procedure as
stated in Rule XII of the city’s personnel rules and regulations.
(1994 Code, § 4-510)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.105  MANDATORY EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM; REFERRAL.
   Upon the first confirmed determination that an employee is under the
influence of drugs or alcohol, the city shall refer the employee to an Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) for assessment, counseling and rehabilitation. All
costs associated with the EAP shall be assumed by the employee. Participation
in an EAP is voluntary and no disciplinary action may be taken against an
employee for failure to begin or complete an EAP program. Disciplinary action
based on a violation of the city’s drug and alcohol policy is not automatically
suspended by an employee’s participation in an EAP and may be imposed when
warranted.
(1994 Code, § 4-511)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.106  CONFIDENTIALITY OF TEST RESULTS.
   All information from an employee’s drug and alcohol test is confidential and
only those individuals with a need to know are to be informed of test results.
Disclosure of test results to any other person, agency or organization is
prohibited, unless written authorization is obtained from the employee. The
results of a positive drug test shall not be released until the results are
confirmed. The records of unconfirmed positive test results and negative test
results shall be destroyed by the testing laboratory.
(1994 Code, § 4-512)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.107  LABORATORY TESTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All drug and alcohol testing of employees shall be conducted at
medical facilities or laboratories selected by the city. To be considered as a
testing site, a medical facility or laboratory must submit in writing, a
description of the procedures that will be used to maintain test samples. This
submission should be maintained by the City Manager’s office.
   (B)   Factors to be considered by the city in selecting a testing facility
include:
      (1)   Testing procedures which ensure privacy to employees consistent
with the prevention of tampering;
      (2)   Methods of analysis which ensure reliable test results, including
the use of gas chromatography/mass spectrometry to confirm positive test
results;
      (3)   Chain-of-custody procedures which ensure proper identification,
labeling and handling of test samples; and
      (4)   Retention and storage procedures which ensure reliable results on
confirmatory test or original samples.
(1994 Code, § 4-513)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
§ 35.108  DRUG/ALCOHOL SCREENING CONSENT FORM.
   Forms are available from the city.
(1994 Code, § 4-514)  (Ord. 527, passed 6-27-1995)
CODE OF ETHICS
§ 35.120  APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter is the code of ethics for personnel of the city. It applies
to all full-time and part-time elected or appointed officials and employees,
whether compensated or not, including those of any separate board, commission,
authority, corporation or other instrumentality appointed or created by the
city. The words “municipal” and “city” or “City of Etowah” include these
separate entities.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Statutes dictate many of the ethics provisions that apply to municipal
officials and employees.
     For provisions relative to the following, see the Tennessee Code Annotated
sections indicated:
   -Campaign finance, see Tenn. Code Ann. Title 2, Ch. 10
   -Conflict of interest, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-107, 6-54-108, 12-4-101
and 12-4-102
   -Conflict of interest’s disclosure statements, see  Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 8-50-
501 et seq.
   -Consulting fee prohibition for elected municipal officials, see Tenn. Code
Ann. §§ 2-10-122 and 2-10-124
   -Crimes involving public officials (bribery, soliciting unlawful
compensation, buying and selling in regard to office), see Tenn. Code Ann. §§
39-16-101 et seq.
   -Crimes of official misconduct, official oppression, misuse of official
information, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 39-16-401 et seq.
   -Ouster law, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 8-47-101 et seq.
§ 35.121  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYMENT INTEREST. Includes a situation in which an official or employee
or a designated family member is negotiating possible employment with a person
or organization that is the subject of the vote or that is to be regulated or
supervised.
   PERSONAL INTEREST.
      (1)   For purposes of §§
35.122 and
35.123, means:
         (a)   Any financial, ownership or employment interest in the subject
of a vote by a municipal board not otherwise regulated by state statues on
conflicts of interests;
         (b)   Any financial, ownership or employment interest in a matter to
be regulated or supervised; or
         (c)   Any such financial, ownership or employment interest of the
official’s or employee’s spouse, parent(s), stepparent(s), grandparent(s),
sibling(s), child(ren) or stepchild(ren).
      (2)   In any situation in which a PERSONAL INTEREST is also a conflict of
interest under state law, the provisions of the state law take precedence over
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 35.122  DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL INTEREST OF OFFICIAL WITH VOTE.
   (A)   An official with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall
disclose during the meeting at which the vote takes place, before the vote and
so it appears in the minutes, any personal interest that affects or that would
lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the official’s vote on the
measure.
   (B)   In addition, the official may recuse himself or herself from voting on
the measure.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 35.123  DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL INTEREST IN NON-VOTING MATTERS.
   (A)   An official or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any
matter, other than casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the
matter that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it
affects the exercise of the discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of
the discretion when possible, the interest on a form provided by and filed with
the city.
   (B)   In addition, the official or employee may, to the extent allowed by
law, charter, ordinance or policy, recuse himself or herself from the exercise
of discretion in the matter.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 35.124  ACCEPTANCE OF GRATUITIES AND THE LIKE.
   An official or employee may not accept, directly or indirectly, any money,
gift, gratuity or other consideration or favor of any kind from anyone other
than the city:
   (A)   For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of an
act, that he or she would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing,
in the regular course of his or her duties; or
   (B)   That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence his or
her action, or reward him or her for past action, in executing municipal
business.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 35.125  USE OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   An official or employee may not disclose any information obtained in
his or her official capacity or position of employment that is made
confidential under state or federal law, except as authorized by law.
   (B)   An official or employee may not use or disclose information obtained
in his or her official capacity of position of employment with the intent to
result in financial gain for himself or herself or an other person or entity.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 35.126  USE OF MUNICIPAL TIME, FACILITIES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal
time, facilities, equipment or supplies for private gain or advantage to
himself or herself.
   (B)   An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal
time, facilities, equipment or supplies for private gain or advantage to any
private person or entity, except as authorized by legitimate contract or lease
that is determined by the City Commission to be in the best interest of the
city.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 35.127  USE OF POSITION OR AUTHORITY.
   (A)   An official or employee may not make or attempt to make private
purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the name of the city.
   (B)   An official or employee may not use or attempt to use his or her
position to secure any privilege or exemption for himself or herself or others
that is not authorized by the charter, general law or ordinance or policy of
the city.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 35.128  OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   A full-time employee of the city may not accept any outside employment
without written authorization from the department head.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 35.129  ETHICS COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   The City Attorney is designated as the Ethics Officer of the city.
Upon the written request of an official or employee potentially affected by a
provision of this subchapter, the City Attorney may render an oral or written
advisory ethics opinion based upon this subchapter and other applicable law.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), the City
Attorney shall investigate any credible complaint against an appointed official
or employee charging any violation of this subchapter, or may undertake an
investigation on his or her own initiative when he or she acquires information
indicating a possible violation, and make recommendations for action to end or
seek retribution for any activity that, in the Attorney’s judgment, constitutes
a violation of this code of ethics.
      (2)   The City Attorney may request the City Commission to hire another
attorney, individual or entity to act as Ethics Officer when he or she has or
will have a conflict of interest in a particular matter.
      (3)   When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this subchapter
is lodged against a member of the city’s City Commission, the City Commission
shall either determine that the complaint has merit, determine that the
complaint does not have merit or determine that the complaint has sufficient
merit to warrant further investigation. If the City Commissioners determines
that a complaint warrants further investigation, it shall authorize an
investigation by the City Attorney or another individual or entity chosen by
the City Commission.
   (C)   The interpretation that a reasonable person in the circumstances would
apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics.
   (D)   When a violation of this code of ethics also constitutes a violation
of a personnel policy, rule or regulation or a civil service policy, rule or
regulation, the violation shall be dealt with as a violation of the personnel
or civil service provisions rather than as a violation of this code of ethics.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
§ 35.130  VIOLATIONS.
   An elected official or appointed member of a separate municipal board,
commission, committee, authority, corporation or other instrumentality who
violates any provision of this subchapter is subject to punishment as provided
by the municipality’s charter or other applicable law and, in addition, is
subject to censure by the City Commission. An appointed official or an employee
who violates any provision of this subchapter is subject to disciplinary
action.
(Ord. 669, passed 4-23-2007)
OFFICIALS
§ 35.145  CLERK CERTIFICATIONS.
   The city adopts by reference the requirements of Public Acts 1994, Ch. 648
(Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-120), which is attached to the ordinance codified
herein and made a part thereof as if it were fully set out in the text of this
section.
(Ord. 515, passed 8-22-1994)
§ 35.146  CITY MANAGER; ANNUAL PERFORMANCE EVALUATION.
   Annual performance evaluations of the City Manager will be conducted each
May. The City Commission and the City Manager shall agree as to the form and
content of the evaluation. The City Commission may enlist assistance from MTAS
to help with creating the form, tallying the results, and/or presenting a
summary report.
(Ord. 759, passed 5-6-2014)
CHAPTER 36:  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER
Section
   
36.01   Administrative Hearing Officer
§ 36.01  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   Office created.
      (1)   In accordance with Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-1001 et seq., there is
hereby created the Office of Administrative Hearing Officer to hear violations
of any of the provisions codified in the municipal code of the city relating to
building and property maintenance, including:
         (a)   Building codes found at §
150.25 of this code of ordinances;
         (b)   Plumbing codes found at §
150.26 of this code of ordinances;
         (c)   Electrical codes found at §
150.27 of this code of ordinances;
         (d)   Gas codes found at §
150.28 of this code of ordinances;
         (e)   Housing codes found at §
150.29 of this code of ordinances;
         (f)   Property maintenance regulations found at §§
150.01 through
150.12 of this code of ordinances; and
         (g)   Sections
150.25 and
150.29 of this code of ordinances and all other ordinances regulating any
subject matter commonly found in the above-described codes.
      (2)   There is hereby created the position of Administrative Hearing
Officer to be appointed pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-1006.
      (3)   The amount of compensation for the Administrative Hearing Officer
shall be approved by the City Commission.
      (4)   Clerical and administrative support for the Office of
Administrative Hearing Officer shall be provided as determined by the City
Manager.
      (5)   The Administrative Hearing Officer shall perform all of the duties
and abide by all of the requirements provided in Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-1001
et seq.
   (B)   Jurisdiction and procedure before the Administrative Hearing Officer.
The Administrative Hearing Officer’s jurisdiction shall be as set out in Tenn.
Code Ann. § 6-54-1002, and all matters before the Administrative Hearing
Officer shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann.
§§ 6-54-1001 et seq., which provisions are adopted and incorporated herein by
reference.
   (C)   Judicial review of final order. A person who is aggrieved by a final
decision in a contested case is entitled to judicial review pursuant to Tenn.
Code Ann. §§ 6-54-1001 et seq., which shall be the only available method of
judicial review.
(Ord. 727, passed 6-25-2012)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   REFUSE AND TRASH
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WATER
CHAPTER 50:  REFUSE AND TRASH
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Collection routes
   
50.03   Dumping
   
50.04   Disposal
   
50.05   Containers; unauthorized use
   
50.06   Construction and remodeling material; mobile collection trailers
   
50.07   Premises to be kept clean
   
50.08   Services fees
   
50.09   Collecting agent
   
50.10   Fee responsibility
   
50.11   Exempted refuse/garbage fees
   
50.12   Billing process
   
50.13   Screening of dumpsters
   
50.14   Municipal clean up
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MUNICIPAL CLEAN UP. The city will provide a municipal clean up service
referred to as “Spring and Fall Clean Up” for no charge once per every spring
season and once per every fall season. (See §
50.14)
   REFUSE or GARBAGE. All organic household waste, offal, animal and vegetable
matter, such as has been prepared or intended to be used as food, or shall have
arisen in the preparation of food and like matter, from restaurants, homes,
apartments, wholesale and retail groceries, stores and produce stands. Dead
animals or birds shall not be placed in garbage containers, but shall be
disposed of in a proper, lawful and humane manner by the owner or keeper.
   TRASH. All cold ashes, papers, cans, leaves, weeds, portions of trees,
branches, grass, old and worn out household machines, furniture and boxes;
provided, it is an accumulation from that property and no debris from contract
work (i.e., a store replaces a stove, the store removes the old stove; house
remodeled, the contractor removes all debris). If the owner has been verified
to have done the work, the city will help remove that debris. Dwelling unit is
one that has a semi-private bath, kitchen and bedroom as a minimum.
   UNLAWFUL CLUTTER. All waste or non-waste toys, tools, papers of every
description, auto parts, furniture, appliances, discarded sand, broken limbs,
discarded gravel, ashes, brick bats, tin cans, aluminum cans, empty glass
containers, trash, garbage, old firewood not neatly stacked, lumber,
upholstered indoor furniture, boxes, mattresses, building materials, yard
maintenance items, usable items left in the yard or porches for days at a time,
discarded materials of every kind, all of which is left in front, back or side
yards, or porches, more than one week; or waste or non-waste building material
left in front, back or side yards for more than 30 days.
(1994 Code, § 17-101)  (Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987; Ord. 744, passed 10-29-2013;
Ord. 826, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 50.02  COLLECTION ROUTES.
   (A)   The city shall collect all refuse and trash within the city. Private
contractors presently serving locations within the corporate limits shall be
allowed to fulfill the obligations of their current contracts but all future
contracts shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager.
   (B)   Collections will be made by the city at all existing pick-up points
and those that will be created in the future. Collection routes shall be
designated and the days and time of collections determined by the Public Works
Director and approved by the City Manager.
(1994 Code, § 17-102)  (Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987)
§ 50.03  DUMPING.
   It shall be unlawful to dump or place any refuse, garbage, trash or ashes on
any premises in the city, except as specified in this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 17-103)  (Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04  DISPOSAL.
   (A)   It shall be a civil offense to dispose of any refuse, garbage or ashes
anywhere in the city, except in a disposal device, properly constructed and
operated, or in a lawfully established garbage or refuse dump. Such materials
not so disposed of shall be placed in containers for collection as hereinafter
prescribed.
   (B)   It shall be a civil offense to place or permit to remain anywhere in
the city any refuse or other material that is subject to decay, other than
leaves, shrubbery, tree trimmings or grass in tightly-fitting and secured
plastic bags or metal containers. Such permitted material shall be removed from
the property within seven days by the city, private contractor or resident.
(1994 Code, § 17-104)  (Ord. 496, passed 9-23-1993)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05  CONTAINERS; UNAUTHORIZED USE.
   (A)   (1)   Any garbage, refuse or ashes, for collection by the city, shall
be placed at authorized collecting points and in:
         (a)   Metal or plastic containers equipped with a cover and handles,
so that they may be lifted and carried by one man; no such container shall have
a capacity of more than 30 gallons and shall weigh no more than 40 pounds; with
the exception of containers picked up mechanically (does not apply to
mechanically lifted containers) or containers that will be provided by that
person, firm or corporation; not the city; or
         (b)   Plastic bags, 30 gallons or less with a weight not exceeding 40
pounds per bag if all refuse, garbage or ashes is securely contained. However,
it is encouraged for resident to use metal or plastic covered containers.
Should the resident elect to use plastic bags, he or she shall be responsible
for major cleanup should dogs or other animals destroy the bags. If barrels or
drums are used, the sanitation persons will only remove bags of debris. For
liability reasons, they shall not lift any barrels or drums in excess of 30-
gallon capacity.
      (2)   Empty containers shall be removed to rear of premises the same day.
This does not affect two cubic yards or larger containers. Those containers
shall be located by the Public Works Director in such a place and manner not to
be a potential health hazard and to the rear of the premises wherever
practical.
(1994 Code, § 17-105)
   (B)   (1)   All refuse containers in use on the premises of any commercial
establishment shall be used solely and only by that establishment as a
receptacle for its commercial refuse.
      (2)   No person shall use a commercial establishment’s refuse container
unless specifically authorized by the commercial establishment.
      (3)   The City Manager shall cause to have signs printed stating that
such activity is a violation of this section and may be punished by a civil
penalty of up to $50 for each violation. Such signs are to be placed on the
containers by the owners or operators of the business or commercial
establishment.
(1994 Code, § 17-106)
(Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987; Ord. 496, passed 9-23-1993; Ord. 797, passed 11-28-
2016)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06  CONSTRUCTION AND REMODELING MATERIAL; MOBILE COLLECTION TRAILERS.
   (A)   (1)   All waste resulting from construction, remodeling, replacement
of appliances or demolition of a building shall be promptly removed from the
city, or to a business’s warehouse, in accordance with the law by the
contractor retained to do the work.
      (2)   The city will not pick up contractor materials. The collection and/
or transportation of garbage and/or trash, waste or refuse as provided for
herein by any person, firm or corporation, after the adoption of this chapter
is prohibited (except for industrial waste and waste from demolition, erection
or improvement of a building, collected and transported in accordance with the
provisions hereof). (Note § 50.02 of this chapter.)
(1994 Code, § 17-107)
   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         CONSTRUCTION WASTE. Any materials deemed to be from construction,
demolition, remodeling or construction-site preparation, including, but not
limited to, lumber, sheetrock, shingles, guttering and all other materials
related to construction and remodeling.
         CONTRACTOR. Any individual or group being paid to provide construction
or remodeling services on houses or properties that do not reside in the house
or property being constructed, remodeled or demolished, including, but not
limited to, private construction companies, landlords and carpenters.
         REMODELING/CLEAN OUT WASTE. Any materials associated with remodeling a
property, including, but not limited to, construction waste, materials left
behind by renters and other materials related to clearing and remodeling of
properties.
      (2)   The use of mobile sanitation collection trailers will be a “pay per
use” service provided to citizens and contractors working on houses and
properties inside the city limits. The “pay per use” fees:
         (a)   Residents: $75 use fee, plus the current landfill weighted cost
per ton of material; and
         (b)   Contractor: $125 use fee, plus the current landfill weighted
cost per ton of material.
      (3)   The customer will be asked to sign the community clean up service
information sheet and pay the per use fee at city hall. At this time, Public
Works is informed by city hall personnel that the service can be provided. The
trailers will then be placed on the roadway in front of the residence or in the
driveway of the residence only; trailers will not be placed in yards or on
soil. When the trailer has been collected and taken to the landfill a copy of
the weigh ticket will be mailed to the customer for payment of the collected
materials, which will be made at city hall.
      (4)   Construction waste and remodeling/clean out waste will no longer be
collected roadside. Collection waste is to be placed inside the mobile
sanitation trailers provided by the City Public Works Department. Determination
of construction waste on the roadside will be made by the Codes Enforcement
Officer, the City Manager and/or the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987; Ord. 720, passed 2-27-2012; Ord. 797, passed 11-28-
2016; Ord. 807, passed 8-28-2017)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07  PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   (A)   All persons within the city are required to keep their premises in a
clean and sanitary condition, free from accumulation of refuse except when
stored as provided in this chapter. Containers for a week’s storage of refuse
or more shall be strong, durable and rodent and insect proof.
   (B)   No person shall allow or leave any debris, rubbish or unlawful clutter
(as defined in §
50.01 of this chapter) on his or her property for longer than the defined time
periods. All yards, side, front and back and porches must be kept clean as
above outlined. No sheets, towels, foil, plastic, flags, loose screens or other
clutter shall be placed in windows. No “No Trespassing” signs shall be affixed
on houses or trees.
(1994 Code, § 17-108)  (Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987; Ord. 744, passed 10-29-
2013)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08  SERVICES FEES.
   (A)   The cost for residential refuse/garbage disposal service shall be
$13.75 per month per dwelling unit, payable monthly to the Utility Department.
   (B)   The fee for commercial and industrial establishments, places of public
entertainment and other businesses shall be such as set forth below.
      (1)   Fees shall be based on dumpster size and number of collections per
week. Dumpster size and collection frequency costs are as follows:
 
Dumpster      Collections per Week
Size          1      2       3       4       5
3.5 cubic yd. $26.96 $53.92  $80.88  $107.84 $134.80
4 cubic yd.   $37.12 $74.24  $111.36 $148.48 $185.60
6 cubic yd.   $48,18 $96.36  $144.54 $192.72 $240.90
8 cubic yd.   $64.24 $128.48 $192.72 $256.96 $321.20
 
      (2)   When no containers are present the commercial establishment will be
charged $8.03 per estimated cubic yard times the number of collections per week
until containers are purchased and placed.
(1994 Code, § 17-109)  (Ord. 492, passed 7-9-1993; meeting minutes of 2-28-
2011; Ord. 797, passed 11-28-2016; Ord. 807, passed 8-28-2017)
§ 50.09  COLLECTING AGENT.
   (A)   The Utility Department of the city is hereby designated as the agent
of the city to bill and collect the fees for collection and removal of refuse
(garbage) within the city. The fees so collected shall be delivered monthly to
the city’s General Fund. Full complete records of all transactions in
connection with billing and collection of refuse fees shall be maintained by
the City Utility Department.
   (B)   An administrative fee of $0.10 per paid bill will be retained by the
Utility Department for its services.
(1994 Code, § 17-110)  (Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987)
§ 50.10  FEE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of the premises on which a residential unit or commercial/
industrial establishment is located, and head of such unit or owner of such
establishment at the time of refuse and trash service is rendered thereto,
shall be liable for the refuse fees payable for service to such unit or
commercial/industrial establishment. Unpaid refuse service to such customers
shall constitute a lien on the premises and may be collected by the city in the
same manner as is provided by law for the collection of delinquent taxes. The
City Utility Department may elect to terminate water services to that unit for
a period of not more than 30 days should the fees be unpaid for a period of 60
days or more. The City Manager will be advised of any bills unpaid over 60 days
at that time.
(1994 Code, § 17-111)  (Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987)
§ 50.11  EXEMPTED REFUSE/GARBAGE FEES.
   Due to this mandatory fee, those customers that will experience extreme
hardship may be exempt from all or a part of the total required fee. The City
Manager will be the sole authority for any exemptions based upon evidence of
such hardship.
(1994 Code, § 17-112)  (Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987)
§ 50.12  BILLING PROCESS.
   (A)   When a dwelling unit, commercial or industrial establishment is billed
by the Utility Department for the city for utility services, collection fees
for refuse/garbage collection shall be incorporated by the City Utility
Department into the monthly bill for water and sewer service.
   (B)   In the event there may be premises in the city containing a
residential dwelling unit, commercial or industrial unit or units and receiving
neither water or sewer service, the bill for refuse/garbage and trash shall be
mailed or hand-carried to the owner or occupant of such premises.
(1994 Code, § 17-113)  (Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987)
§ 50.13  SCREENING OF DUMPSTERS.
   (A)   Dumpsters within the city for new development after the adoption of
this section shall have an enclosure around them which shall be maintained by
the property owner and be kept free of overflowing refuse at all times, except
at a scheduled pick-up date. Dumpsters shall be placed on a floor of impervious
material and screened on all sides.
   (B)   Screening material may be any combination of evergreen plantings,
wood, composite or masonry material.
   (C)   The screen shall incorporate access to the dumpster by using a wood
fence or other opaque device to serve as a gate.
   (D)   Screening shall be a minimum of six feet high.
(1994 Code, § 17-115)  (Ord. 595, passed 8-28-2000)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.14  MUNICIPAL CLEAN UP.
   (A)   This municipal clean up service shall be scheduled in advance no less
than 14 days by means of publication in a paper of local circulation and placed
on the city’s website.
   (B)   Pick up dates will be scheduled by a designated date range and route
schedule.
   (C)   Items that are not placed curbside during the designated clean up
schedule at City Hall will be picked up for a fee of no less than $10 per trip.
   (D)   Items that will be accepted: household furnishings, mattresses, small
household items, etc.
   (E)   Items that will not be accepted are as follows: chemicals, paint,
refrigerators, air conditioners, clothing, household waste/garbage or tires.
Mattresses with bed bugs will not be collected.
(Ord. 826, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 50.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   A complaint may be filed by no less than two property owners
regarding debris, rubbish or unlawful clutter and shall be addressed to the
City Codes Enforcement Officer for inspection and investigation. Further, the
Codes Enforcement Officer may conduct an investigation or inspection upon the
Officer’s own observation of debris, rubbish or unlawful clutter in violation
of this chapter.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation willfully violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $5, nor more than $50.
Each day such violation is committed shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   If materials are determined to be construction waste, per §
50.06(B), the homeowner can be fined up to $50 per each offense.
(1994 Code, § 17-114)  (Ord. 434, passed 1-7-1987; Ord. 720, passed 2-27-2012;
Ord. 744, passed 10-29-2013)
CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS
Section
General Wastewater Regulations
   
51.01   Purpose and policy
   
51.02   Administrative
   
51.03   Definitions
   
51.04   Proper waste disposal required
   
51.05   Private domestic wastewater disposal
   
51.06   Connection to public sewers
   
51.07   Septic tank effluent pump or grinder pump wastewater systems
   
51.08   Regulation of holding tank waste disposal or trucked in waste
   
51.09   Discharge regulations
   
51.10   Enforcement and abatement
Industrial/Commercial Wastewater Regulations Fats, Oil and Grease Control
Program
   
51.25   Industrial pretreatment
   
51.26   Discharge permits
   
51.27   Industrial user additional requirements
   
51.28   Reporting requirements
   
51.29   Enforcement response plan
   51.30   Enforcement response guide table
   
51.31   Fees and billing
   
51.32   Fats, Oil and Grease Control Program; fats, oils and grease traps and
interceptors
   
51.33   FOG Management Policy
   
51.34   Food Service Establishment Enforcement Response Guide
   
51.35   Validity
   
Appendix A:   Enforcement Response Guide Table
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 446 and amending ordinances 470, 473 and 484 are replaced by the
following wastewater regulations.
GENERAL WASTEWATER REGULATIONS
§ 51.01  PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the city
wastewater treatment system and enables the city to comply with the Federal
Clean Water Act and the State Water Quality Control Act and rules adopted
pursuant to these acts. The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To protect public health;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater treatment facility, which will interfere with the system operation;
      (3)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
treatment facility that will pass through the facility, inadequately treated,
into the receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the treatment
facility;
      (4)   To protect facility personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
      (5)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the facility;
      (6)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the facility; and
      (7)   To enable the city to comply with its National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge and bio-solids use and
disposal requirement, and any other federal or state industrial pretreatment
rules to which the facility is subject.
   (B)   In meeting these objectives, this chapter provides that all persons in
the service area of the city must have adequate wastewater treatment either in
the form of a connection to the municipal wastewater treatment system or, where
the system is not available, an appropriate private disposal system.
   (C)   This chapter shall apply to all users inside or outside the city who
are, by implied contract or written agreement with City Utilities Board,
dischargers of applicable wastewater to the wastewater treatment facility.
Sections
51.25 through
51.35 provide for the issuance of permits to system users, for monitoring,
compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures for industrial users or other users whose discharge can interfere
with or cause violations to occur at the wastewater treatment facility.
Sections
51.25 through
51.35 detail permitting requirements including the setting of fees for the full
and equitable distribution of costs resulting from the operation, maintenance
and capital recovery of the wastewater treatment system and from other
activities required by the enforcement and administrative program established
herein. Sections
51.25 through
51.35 also provides for the issuance of permits to food service establishments
and other system users whose discharge may contain fats, oils and grease.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.02  ADMINISTRATIVE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the local administrative officer of the
City Utilities Board shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended and found in 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation, Division of Water Pollution Control.
   AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental agency: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the governmental facility, or their
designee.
      (4)   The individual described in divisions (1) through (3) above, may
designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in §
51.09 of this chapter. BMPs also include treatment requirement, operating
procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for
five days at 20°C expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams
per liter (mg/l)).
   BUILDING SEWER. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to
the publicly owned sewer collection system.
   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
Pretreatment Standard as found in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405
through 471.
   CITY. The Board of Mayor and Commissioners, City of Etowah, Tennessee.
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of Environment and Conservation or the
Commissioner’s duly authorized representative and, in the event of the
Commissioner’s absence or a vacancy in the office of Commissioner, the Deputy
Commissioner.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. BOD, suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria and
such additional pollutants as are now or may in the future be specified and
controlled in the city’s NPDES permit for its wastewater treatment works where
sewer works have been designed and used to reduce or remove such pollutants.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample composed of two or more discrete samples. The
aggregate sample will reflect the average water quality covering the
compositing or sample period.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The approval authority, defined herein above; or the
local hearing authority if the city has an approved pretreatment program under
the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.11.
   COOLING WATER. The water discharge from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
   CUSTOMER. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or group who
receives sewer service from the city under either an express or implied
contract requiring payment to the city for such service.
   DAILY MAXIMUM. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant (except pH) collected during a calendar day. The daily maximum for pH
is the highest value tested during a 24 hour calendar day.
   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant
during a calendar day. Where the limit is expressed in units of mass, the limit
is the maximum amount of total mass of the pollutant that can be discharged
during the calendar day. Where the limit is expressed in concentration, it is
the arithmetic average of all concentration measurements taken during the
calendar day.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
to the waters of the state.
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Wastewater that is generated by a single-family,
apartment or other dwelling unit or dwelling unit equivalent or commercial
establishment containing sanitary facilities for the disposal of wastewater and
used for residential or commercial purposes only.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the administrator or other duly authorized official of the said agency.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes generated from any domestic, commercial or industrial
source.
   GRAB SAMPLE.
      (1)   A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one time basis
with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and is collected over a period
of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
      (2)   Grab sampling procedure: where composite sampling is not an
appropriate sampling technique, a grab sample(s) shall be taken to obtain
influent and effluent operational data. Collection of influent grab samples
should precede collection of effluent samples by approximately one detention
period. The detention period is to be based on a 24-hour average daily flow
value. The average daily flow used will be based upon the average of the daily
flows during the same month of the previous year. Grab samples will be
required, for example, where the parameters being evaluated are those, such as
cyanide and phenol, which may not be held for any extended period because of
biological, chemical or physical interactions which take place after sample
collection and affect the results.
   GREASE INTERCEPTOR. Grease control equipment identified as a large tank,
usually 1,000 gallons to 2,000 gallons in capacity with proper inlet and outlet
Ts, that provides fat oil and grease (FOG) control for a food services
establishment (FSE). GREASE INTERCEPTORS will be located outside the FSE,
unless a variance request has been granted.
   GREASE TRAP. Grease control equipment identified as an “under the sink”
trap, a small container with baffles, or a floor trap. For a FSE approved to
install a grease trap, the minimum size requirement is the equivalent of a 20-
gallon per minute/ 40 pound capacity trap. All GREASE TRAPS will have a flow
control restrictor and vent pipe.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as
defined in this section.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the WWF from any
nondomestic source.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a
discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any liquid, solid or gaseous substance, or combination
thereof, or form of energy including heat, resulting from any process of
industry, manufacture, trade, food processing or preparation, or business or
from the development of any natural resource.
   INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
   INTERCEPTOR. A device designed and installed to separate and retain for
removal, by automatic or manual means, deleterious, hazardous or undesirable
matter from normal wastes, while permitting normal sewage or waste to discharge
into the drainage system by gravity.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the WWF, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or exceeds
the design capacity of the treatment works or collection system.
   LOCAL ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The chief administrative officer of the local
hearing authority.
   LOCAL HEARING AUTHORITY. The General Manager of the City Utilities Board,
board members and city utilities employees or such person(s) appointed by the
Board to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and conduct
hearings pursuant to §
51.29.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STAN- DARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies
to a specific category of industrial users.
   NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS). A system of
industrial classification jointly agreed upon by Canada, Mexico and the United
States. It replaces the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) System.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of division (1)(b) or (1)(c) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including cleaning,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this definition.
   NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM). The program for
issuing, conditioning, and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from
point sources into navigable waters, the contiguous zone, and the oceans
pursuant to § 402 of the Clean Water Act, as amended.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the wastewater facility (WWF) into
waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the WWF’s NPDES permit including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
   POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor discharge into
water).
   PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction
or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, biological processes or
process changes or other means, except through dilution as prohibited by 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(d).
   PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR. The person designated by the local administrative
officer or his or her authorized representative to supervise the operation of
the pretreatment program.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an
industrial user.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR STANDARDS. A prohibited discharge standard,
categorical pretreatment standard and local limit.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by § 212
of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned in this instance by the
municipality (as defined by § 502(4) of the Act). This definition includes any
devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes
sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW
treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in § 502(4) of
the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the
discharges from such a treatment works. See WWF, WASTEWATER FACILITY defined
below.
   SHALL. Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, subchapter N; and
      (2)   Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the WWF (excluding sanitary,
non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process
wastestream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the
control authority as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(a) on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WWF’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6)).
   SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE. Per 1200-4-14-.08(6)(b)8:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for each parameter
taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limit;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter
taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits multiplied
by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2
for all other pollutants except pH). TRC calculations for pH are not required.
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
(daily maximum or longer-term average, instantaneous limit or narrative
standard) that the WWF determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the
health of WWF personnel or the general public).
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the WWF’s
exercise of it emergency authority under §
51.29(A)(2)(a)4., Emergency Order, to halt or prevent such a discharge.
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance.
      (6)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after their due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules.
      (7)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance.
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the WWF determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
      (9)   Continuously monitored pH violations that exceed limits for a time
period greater than 50 minutes or exceed limits by more than 0.5 s.u. more than
eight times in four hours.
   SLUG. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not
limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a
reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way
violate the WWF’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
   STATE. The State of Tennessee.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A pipe or conduit which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes. It may,
however, carry cooling waters and unpolluted waters, upon approval of the
Superintendent.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The local administrative officer or person designated by him
or her to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who
is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, and or his
or her duly authorized representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids and that is removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations published by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency under the provision of CWA § 307(a) or other Acts.
   TWENTY-FOUR HOUR FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample consisting of
several sample portions collected during a 24-hour period in which the portions
of a sample are proportioned to the flow and combined to form a representative
sample.
   USER. The owner, tenant or occupant of any lot or parcel of land connected
to a sanitary sewer, or for which a sanitary sewer line is available if a
municipality levies a sewer charge on the basis of such availability.
(Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-221-201)
   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter
the WWF.
   WASTEWATER FACILITY. Any or all of the following: the collection/
transmission system, treatment plant, and the reuse or disposal system, which
is owned by any person. This definition includes any devices and systems used
in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or
industrial waste of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other
conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a WWF treatment plant. The term
also means the municipality as defined in § 502(4) of the Federal Clean Water
Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges
from such a treatment works. WWF was formally known as a POTW, or publicly
owned treatment works.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and other bodies of accumulation of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, that are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
   1200-4-14. Chapter 1200-4-14 of the Rules and Regulations of the State of
Tennessee, Pretreatment Requirements.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009; Ord. 784, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 51.04  PROPER WASTE DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
service area of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any waters of the state within
the service area of the city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this
chapter or city or state regulations.
   (C)   Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   Except as provided in division (F) below, the owner of all houses,
buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or
other purposes situated within the service area in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer, is hereby required at
his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper private or public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. Where public sewer is
available property owners shall within 60 days after date of official notice to
do so, connect to the public sewer. Service is considered “available” when a
public sewer main is located in an easement, right-of-way, road or public
access way which abuts the property.
   (E)   The owner of deed of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, commerce, employment, recreation or any other purpose,
connected to the public sewer is hereby required at his or her expense to
maintain his or her service connection in accordance with all current and
future federal, state and local regulations. Where current or future
regulations require repair or improvements the owner shall within 60 days after
date of official notice to do so, make the required repair or improvement to
their private service connecting to the public sewer. A regulation is
considered “effective” once approved and implemented by any regulatory
authority, agency, board or other entity having jurisdiction.
   (F)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
division (E) above, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of §
51.05 of this chapter.
   (G)   The owner of a manufacturing facility may discharge wastewater to the
waters of the state provided that he or she obtains an NPDES permit and meets
all requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, the NPDES permit and any other
applicable local, state or federal statutes and regulations.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.05  PRIVATE DOMESTIC WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Availability.
      (1)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions
of §
51.04(D), the building sewer shall be connected, until the public sewer is
available, to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the
provisions of the applicable local and state regulations.
      (2)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. When
it becomes necessary to clean septic tanks, the sludge may be disposed of only
according to applicable federal and state regulations.
      (3)   Where a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 60 days after date of official notice from the
city to do so.
   (B)   Requirements.
      (1)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewerage
disposal system shall comply with all local or state regulations. Before
commencement of construction of a private sewerage disposal system, the owner
shall first obtain a written approval from the County Health Department. The
application for such approval shall be made on a form furnished by the County
Health Department which the applicant shall supplement with any plans or
specifications that the Department has requested.
      (2)   Approval for a private sewerage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the local
and state authorities, who shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction.
      (3)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department
of Environment and Conservation, and the County Health Department. No septic
tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to waters of the state.
      (4)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional or future requirements that may be imposed by the
city and the County Health Department.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.06  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   Application for service.
      (1)   (a)   There shall be two classifications of service:
            1.   Residential; and
            2.   Service to commercial, industrial and other non-residential
establishments.
         (b)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application for connection on a special form furnished by the city. Applicants
for service to commercial and industrial establishments
shall be required to furnish information about all waste producing activities,
wastewater characteristics and constituents. The application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. Details regarding commercial
and industrial permits include, but are not limited to, those required by this
chapter. Service connection fees for establishing new sewer service are paid to
the city. Industrial user discharge permit fees may also apply. The receipt by
the city of a prospective customer’s application for connection shall not
obligate the city to render the connection. If the service applied for cannot
be supplied in accordance with this subchapter and the city’s rules and
regulations and general practice, or state and federal requirement, the
connection charge will be refunded in full, and there shall be no liability of
the city to the applicant for such service.
      (2)   Users shall notify the city of any proposed new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any proposed change in the volume or character of
the wastewater being discharged to the system a minimum of 60 days prior to the
change. The city may deny or limit this new introduction or change based upon
the information submitted in the notification.
   (B)   Prohibited connections.
      (1)   No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, sump pumps,
basement wall seepage or floor seepage, exterior foundation drains, area way
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer
or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer. Any such connections which already exist on the effective date
of this chapter shall be completely and permanently disconnected within 60 days
of the effective day of this chapter. The owners of any building sewer having
such connections, leaks or defects shall bear all of the costs incidental to
removal of such sources. Pipes, sumps and pumps for such sources of ground
water shall be separate from the sanitary sewer.
      (2)   Missing or damaged sewer cleanout covers, or any rainfall inflow to
city sewer:
 
Impact              Action Taken
First notification  NCN - 60 days
Second notification NOV - cutoff of water supply
 
   (C)   Physical connection to public sewer.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof. The city
shall make all connections to the public sewer upon the property owner first
submitting a connection application to the city.
         (b)   The connection application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent. A service connection fee shall be paid to the city at the time
the application is filed.
         (c)   The applicant is responsible for excavation and installation of
the building sewer which is located on private property. The city will inspect
the installation prior to backfilling and make the connection to the public
sewer.
      (2)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
inspection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner including all
service and connection fees. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of
the building sewer.
      (3)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer. Where property is subdivided and
buildings use a common building sewer are now located on separate properties,
the building sewers must be separated within 60 days.
      (4)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and tested by the Superintendent to
meet all requirements of this subchapter. All others may be sealed to the
specifications of the Superintendent.
      (5)   Building sewers shall conform to the following requirements:
         (a)   The minimum size of a building sewer shall be as follows:
conventional sewer system, four inches;
         (b)   The minimum depth of a building sewer shall be 18 inches;
         (c)   Building sewers shall be laid on the following grades: four-inch
sewers, one-eighth inch per foot. Larger building sewers shall be laid on a
grade that will produce a velocity when flowing full of at least two feet per
second;
         (d)   Building sewers shall be installed in uniform alignment at
uniform slopes;
         (e)   Building sewers shall be constructed only of polyvinyl chloride
pipe Schedule 40 or better. Joints shall be solvent welded or compression
gaskets designed for the type of pipe used. No other joints shall be
acceptable;
         (f)   Cleanouts shall be provided to allow cleaning in the direction
of flow. A cleanout shall be located five feet outside of the building, as it
crosses the property line and one at each change of direction of the building
sewer which is greater than 45 degrees. Additional cleanouts shall be placed
not more than 75 feet apart in horizontal building sewers of six-inch nominal
diameter and not more than 100 feet apart for larger pipes. Cleanouts shall be
extended to or above the finished grade level directly above the place where
the cleanout is installed and protected from damage. A “Y” (wye) and one-eighth
bend shall be used for the cleanout base. Cleanouts shall not be smaller than
four inches. Blockages on the property owner’s side of the property line
cleanout are the responsibility of the property owner;
         (g)   Connections of building sewers to the public sewer system shall
be made only by the city and shall be made at the appropriate existing wyes or
tee branch using compression type couplings or collar type rubber joint with
stainless steel bands. Where existing wye or tee branches are not available,
connections of building services shall be made by either removing a length of
pipe and replacing it with a wye or tee fitting using flexible neoprene
adapters with stainless steel bands of a type approved by the Superintendent.
Bedding must support pipe to prevent damage or sagging. All such connections
shall be made gas-tight and water-tight;
         (h)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
building drain shall be lifted by an approved pump system according to §
51.07 and discharged to the building sewer at the expense of the owner;
         (i)   The methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing,
testing, backfilling the trench, or other activities in the construction of a
building sewer which have not been described above shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city or to the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications by the ASTM. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation; and
         (j)   An installed building sewer shall be gas-tight and water-tight.
      (6)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
      (7)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, basement drains, sump pumps or other sources
of surface runoff or groundwater to a building directly or indirectly to a
public sanitary sewer.
      (8)   Inspection of connections.
         (a)   The sewer connection and all building sewers from the building
to the public sewer main line shall be inspected before the underground portion
is covered, by the Superintendent or his or her authorized representative.
         (b)   The applicant for discharge shall notify the Superintendent when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent or his
or her representative.
   (D)   Maintenance of building sewers. Each individual property owner shall
be entirely responsible for the construction, maintenance, repair or
replacement of the building sewer as deemed necessary by the Superintendent to
meet federal, state and local regulations as well as specifications of the
city. Owners failing to maintain or repair building sewers or who allow storm
water or ground water to enter the sanitary sewer may face enforcement action
by the Superintendent up to and including discontinuation of water and sewer
service.
   (E)   Sewer extensions. All expansion or extension of the public sewer
constructed by property owners or developers must follow policies and
procedures developed by the city. In the absence of policies and procedures the
expansion or extension of the public sewer must be approved in writing by the
Superintendent or manager of the wastewater collection system. All plans and
construction must follow the latest edition of Tennessee Design Criteria for
Sewerage Works, located at http://www.state.tn.us/environment/wpc/publications.
Contractors must provide the Superintendent or manager with as-built drawing
and documentation that all mandrel, pressure and vacuum tests as specified in
design criteria were acceptable prior to use of the lines. Contractor’s one
year warranty period begins with occupancy or first permanent use of the lines.
Contractors are responsible for all maintenance and repairs during the warranty
period and final inspections as specified by the Superintendent or manager. The
Superintendent or manager must give written approval to the contractor to
acknowledge transfer of ownership to the city. Failure to construct or repair
lines to acceptable standards could result in denial or discontinuation of
sewer service.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.07  SEPTIC TANK EFFLUENT PUMP OR GRINDER PUMP WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.
   When connection of building sewers to the public sewer by gravity flow lines
is impossible due to elevation differences or other encumbrances, septic tank
effluent pump (STEP) or grinder pump (GP) systems may be installed subject to
the regulations of the city.
   (A)   Equipment requirements.
      (1)   Septic tanks shall be of water-tight construction and must be
approved by the city.
      (2)   Pumps must be approved by the city and shall be maintained by
Utilities.
   (B)   Installation requirements. Location of tanks, pumps and effluent lines
shall be subject to the approval of the city. Installation shall follow design
criteria for STEP and GP systems as provided by the Superintendent.
   (C)   Costs. STEP and GP equipment for new construction shall be purchased
and installed at the developer’s, homeowner’s or business owner’s expense
according to the specification of the city and connection will be made to the
city sewer only after inspection and approval of the city.
   (D)   Ownership and easements.
      (1)   Homeowners or developers shall provide the city with ownership of
the equipment and an easement for access to perform necessary maintenance or
repair.
      (2)   Access by the city to the STEP and GP system must be guaranteed to
operate, maintain, repair, restore service and remove sludge. Access manholes,
ports and electrical disconnects must not be locked, obstructed or blocked by
landscaping or construction.
   (E)   Use of STEP and GP systems.
      (1)   Home or business owners shall follow the STEP and GP users guide
provided by the Superintendent.
      (2)   Home or business owners shall provide an electrical connection that
meets specifications and shall provide electrical power.
      (3)   Home or business owners shall be responsible for maintenance of
drain lines from the building to the force main connector valve.
      (4)   Prohibited uses of the STEP and GP system:
         (a)   Connection of roof guttering, sump pumps or surface drains;
         (b)   Disposal of toxic household substances;
         (c)   Use of garbage grinders or disposers;
         (d)   Discharge of pet hair, lint or home vacuum water; and
         (e)   Discharge of fats, grease and oil.
   (F)   Tank cleaning. Solids removal from the septic tank shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
   (G)   Additional charges. The owner shall be responsible for maintenance of
the STEP and GP equipment.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.08  REGULATION OF HOLDING TANK WASTE DISPOSAL OR TRUCKED IN WASTE.
   (A)   (1)   No person, firm, association or corporation shall haul in or
truck in to the WWF any type of domestic, commercial or industrial waste unless
such person, firm, association or corporation obtains a written approval from
the city to perform such acts or services.
      (2)   (a)   Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring a
permit to perform such services shall file an application on the prescribed
form.
         (b)   Upon any such application, said permit shall be issued by the
Superintendent when the conditions of this subchapter have been met and
providing the Superintendent is satisfied the applicant has adequate and proper
equipment to perform the services contemplated in a safe and competent manner.
   (B)   Fees. For each permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter
the applicant shall agree in writing by the provisions of this section and pay
an annual service charge to the city to be set as specified in §
51.31 of this chapter. Any such permit granted shall be for a specified period
of time, and shall continue in full force and effect from the time issued until
the expiration date, unless sooner revoked, and shall be nontransferable.
   (C)   Designated disposal locations. The Superintendent shall designate
approved locations for the emptying and cleansing of all equipment used in the
performance of the services rendered under the permit herein provided for, and
it shall be a violation hereof for any person, firm, association or corporation
to empty or clean such equipment at any place other than a place so designated.
The Superintendent may refuse to accept any truckload of waste at his or her
discretion where it appears that the waste could interfere with the operation
of the WWF.
   (D)   Revocation of permit. Failure to comply with all the provisions of the
permit or this subchapter shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of such
permit by the Superintendent. The possession within the service area by any
person of any motor vehicle equipped with a body type and accessories of a
nature and design capable of serving a septic tank of wastewater or excreta
disposal system cleaning unit shall be prima facie evidence that such person is
engaged in the business of cleaning, draining or flushing septic tanks or other
wastewater or excreta disposal systems within the service area of the city.
   (E)   Trucked in waste. This part includes waste from trucks, railcars,
barges and the like or temporally pumped waste, all of which are prohibited
without a permit issued by the Superintendent. This approval may require
testing, flow monitoring and record keeping.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.09  DISCHARGE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General discharge prohibitions.
      (1)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or interfere
with the operation and performance of the WWF. These general prohibitions apply
to all such users of a WWF whether or not the user is subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. Violations of these general and
specific prohibitions or the provisions of this section may result in the
issuance of an industrial pretreatment permit, surcharges, discontinuance of
water and/or sewer service and other fines and provisions of §§
51.10 or
51.29.
      (2)   A user may not contribute the following substances to any WWF:
         (a)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
WWF or to the operation of the WWF. Prohibited flammable materials including,
but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than
140°F or 60°C using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromate, carbides, hydrides and sulfides
and any other substances which the city, the state or EPA has notified the user
is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system;
         (b)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the WWF;
         (c)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities including, but not limited to: grease, garbage with
particles greater than one half inch in any dimension, waste from animal
slaughter, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal,
glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste
paper, wood, plastics, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
         (d)   Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and
the like) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference to the WWF;
         (e)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the WWF treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the WWF which
exceeds 40°C (104°F) unless approved by the state;
         (f)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
         (g)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the WWF in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
         (h)   Any wastewater containing any toxic pollutants, chemical
elements or compounds in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans, including wastewater plant and
collection system operators, or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the WWF, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical
pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to
any pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act;
         (i)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points
designated by the WWF;
         (j)   Any substance which may cause the WWF’s effluent or any other
product of the WWF such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case,
shall a substance discharged to the WWF cause the WWF to be in non- compliance
with sludge use or disposal criteria, 40 C.F.R. Part 503, guidelines or
regulations developed under § 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or
state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used;
         (k)   Any substances which will cause the WWF to violate its NPDES
permit or the receiving water quality standards;
         (l)   Any wastewater causing discoloration of the wastewater treatment
plant effluent to the extent that the receiving stream water quality
requirements would be violated, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions;
         (m)   Any waters or wastes causing an unusual volume of flow or
concentration of waste constituting “slug” as defined herein;
         (n)   Any waters containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
         (o)   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance;
         (p)   Any waters or wastes containing animal or vegetable fats, wax,
grease or oil, whether emulsified or not, which cause accumulations of
solidified fat in pipes, lift stations and pumping equipment, or interfere at
the treatment plant;
         (q)   Detergents, surfactants, surface-acting agents or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming at the WWF or pass through of
foam;
         (r)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the WWF to fail toxicity tests; and
         (s)   Any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted
drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as
storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent and the
State Department of Environment and Conservation. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent
and the State Department of Environment and Conservation, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.
   (B)   Local limits. In addition to the general and specific prohibitions
listed in this section, users permitted according to §§
51.25 through
51.35 may be subject to numeric and best management practices as additional
restrictions to their wastewater discharge in order to protect the WWF from
interference or protect the receiving waters from pass through contamination.
   (C)   Restrictions on wastewater strength. No person or user shall discharge
wastewater which exceeds the set of standards provided in Table A: Plant
Protection Criteria, unless specifically allowed by their discharge permit
according to §§
51.25 through
51.35 of this chapter. Dilution of any wastewater discharge for the purpose of
satisfying these requirements shall be considered in violation of this
subchapter.
 
Table A: Plant Protection Criteria
Parameter Monthly Maximum Concentration (mg/l)
Arsenic                   0.100 mg/l
Benzene                   0.013 mg/l
Boron                     10.0 mg/l
Cadmium                   0.033 mg/l
Carbon Tetrachloride      1.500 mg/l
Chloroform                0.224 mg/l
Chromium (total)          1.000 mg/l
Copper                    0.160 mg/l
Cyanide                   0.062 mg/l
Ethybenzene               0.040mg/l
Lead                      0.281 mg/l
Manganese                 10.0 mg/l
Mercury                   0.002 mg/l
Methylene chloride        0.096 mg/l
Molybdenum                0.019 mg/l
Naphthalene               0.013 mg/l
Nickel                    0.250 mg/l
Phenol                    0.455 mg/l
Selenium                  0.014 mg/l
Silver *                  0.063 mg/l
Tetrachloroethylene       0.139 mg/l
Toluene                   0.214 mg/l
Total Phthalate           0.170 mg/l
Trichlorethlene           0.100 mg/l
1,1,1-Trichloroethane     0.250 mg/l
1,2 Transdichloroethylene 0.008 mg/l
Zinc                      0.190 mg/l
* Silver is daily max
 
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009; Ord. 784, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 51.10  ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Violators of these wastewater regulations may be cited to City Court,
General Sessions Court, Chancery Court or other court of competent
jurisdiction, face fines, have sewer service terminated or the city may seek
further remedies as needed to protect the collection system, treatment plant,
receiving stream and public health including the issuance of discharge permits
according to §§
51.25 through
51.35. Repeated or continuous violation of this chapter is declared to be a
public nuisance and may result in legal action against the property owner and/
or occupant and the service line disconnected from sewer main. Upon notice by
the Superintendent that a violation has or is occurring, the user shall
immediately take steps to stop or correct the violation.
   (B)   The city may take any or all the following remedies:
      (1)   Cite the user to City or General Sessions Court, where each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense;
      (2)   In an emergency situation where the Superintendent has determined
that immediate action is needed to protect the public health, safety or
welfare, a public water supply or the facilities of the sewerage system, the
Superintendent may discontinue water service or disconnect sewer service;
      (3)   File a lawsuit in Chancery Court or any other court of competent
jurisdiction seeking damages against the user, and further seeking an
injunction prohibiting further violations by user;
      (4)   Seek further remedies as needed to protect the public health,
safety or welfare, the public water supply or the facilities of the sewerage
system; and/or
      (5)   Where the owner of a property is in violation of §
51.06 of these wastewater regulations, upon notice to the owner when the
Utility Board deems it necessary to protect the sewer system Utilities Board
may make repairs or modification to the owner’s service connection at the
owner’s expense. In such circumstances where the owner fails repay the costs of
such repairs or modifications the utility board may attach the cost to the
owner’s water utility bill, place a lien against the property or employ any
other commonly used method of debt collection to recover payment.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER REGULATIONS FATS, OIL
AND GREASE CONTROL PROGRAM
§ 51.25  INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT.
   In order to comply with Federal Industrial Pretreatment Rules 40 C.F.R. Part
403 and Tennessee Pretreatment Rules 1200-4-14 and to fulfill the purpose and
policy of this chapter the following regulations are adopted.
   (A)   User discharge restrictions. All system users must follow the general
and specific discharge regulations specified in §
51.09 of this chapter.
   (B)   Higher concentration discharges. Users wishing to discharge pollutants
at higher concentrations than Table A: Plant Protection Criteria of §
51.09, or those dischargers who are classified as significant industrial users
will be required to meet the requirements of this subchapter. Users who
discharge waste which falls under the criteria specified in this subchapter and
who fail to or refuse to follow the provisions shall face termination of
service and/or enforcement action specified in §
51.29.
   (C)   Discharge regulation. Discharges to the sewer system shall be
regulated through use of a permitting system. The permitting system may include
any or all of the following activities: completion of survey/application forms,
issuance of permits, oversight of users monitoring and permit compliance, use
of compliance schedules, inspections of industrial processes, wastewater
processing, and chemical storage, public notice of permit system changes and
public notice of users found in significant non- compliance.
   (D)   Discharge permits. Discharge permits shall limit concentrations of
discharge pollutants to those levels that are established as Table B: Local
Limits or other applicable state and federal pretreatment rules which may take
effect after the passage of this chapter.
 
Table B: Local Limits
Pollutant Daily Maximum Concentration (mg/l)
Arsenic                   0.409 mg/l
Benzene                   0.052 mg/l
Boron                     34.6196 mg/l
Cadmium                   0.136 mg/l
Carbon Tetrachloride      6.155 mg/l
Chloroform                0.914 mg/l
Chromium (total)          4.096 mg/l
Copper                    0.641 mg/l
Cyanide                   0.251 mg/l
Ethybenzene               0.163 mg/l
Lead                      1.153 mg/l
Manganese                 34.5523 mg/l
Mercury                   0.006mg/l
Methylene chloride        0.390 mg/l
Molybdenum                0.072 mg/l
Napthalene                0.050 mg/l
Nickel                    1.011 mg/l
Phenol                    1.836 mg/l
Selenium                  0.055 mg/l
Silver                    0.256 mg/l
Tetrachloroethylene       0.569 mg/l
Toluene                   0.875 mg/l
Total Phthalate           0.688 mg/l
Trichlorethlene           0.409 mg/l
1,1,1-Trichoroethane      1.025 mg/l
1,2 Transdichloroethylene 0.030mg/l
Zinc                      0.654 mg/l
 
   (E)   Protection of treatment plant influent. The pretreatment coordinator
shall monitor the treatment works influent for each parameter in Table A: Plant
Protection Criteria. Industrial users shall be subject to reporting and
monitoring requirements regarding these parameters as set forth in this
subchapter. In the event that the influent at the WWF reaches or exceeds the
levels established by Table A or subsequent criteria calculated as a result of
changes in pass through limits issued by the State Department of Environment
and Conservation, the pretreatment coordinator shall initiate technical studies
to determine the cause of the influent violation and shall recommend to the
city the necessary remedial measures, including, but not limited to,
recommending the establishment of new or revised local limits, best management
practices or other criteria used to protect the WWF. The pretreatment
coordinator shall also recommend changes to any of these criteria in the event
that: the WWF effluent standards are changed, there are changes in any
applicable law or regulation affecting same, or changes are needed for more
effective operation of the WWF.
   (F)   User inventory. The Superintendent will maintain an up-to-date
inventory of users whose waste does or may fall into the requirements of this
subchapter, and will notify the users of their status.
   (G)   Right to establish more restrictive criteria. No statement in this
subchapter is intended or may be construed to prohibit the pretreatment
coordinator from establishing specific wastewater discharge criteria which are
more restrictive when wastes are determined to be harmful or destructive to the
facilities of the WWF or to create a public nuisance, or to cause the discharge
of the WWF to violate effluent or stream quality standards, or to interfere
with the use or handling of sludge, or to pass through the WWF resulting in a
violation of the NPDES permit, or to exceed industrial pretreatment standards
for discharge to municipal wastewater treatment systems as imposed or as may be
imposed by the State Department of Environment and Conservation and/or the
United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009; Ord. 784, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 51.26  DISCHARGE PERMITS.
   (A)   Application for discharge of commercial or industrial wastewater. All
users or prospective users which generate commercial or industrial wastewater
shall make application to the Superintendent for connection to the municipal
wastewater treatment system. It may be determined through the application that
a user needs a discharge permit according to the provisions of federal and
state laws and regulations. Applications shall be required from all new
dischargers as well as for any existing discharger desiring additional service
or where there is a planned change in the industrial or wastewater treatment
process. Connection to the city sewer or changes in the industrial process or
wastewater treatment process shall not be made until the application is
received and approved by the Superintendent, the building sewer is installed in
accordance with §
51.06 of this chapter and an inspection has been performed by the
Superintendent or his or her representative. The receipt by the city of a
prospective customer’s application for connection shall not obligate the city
to render the connection. If the service applied for cannot be supplied in
accordance with this subchapter and the city’s rules and regulations and
general practice, the connection charge will be refunded in full, and there
shall be no liability of the city to the applicant for such service. Etowah
reserves the right to refuse to issue a permit to discharge to the sanitary
sewer if the discharge will cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES
permit. Trucking companies that wish to haul wastewater to the wastewater
treatment plant or a sanitary sewer manhole designated by Etowah Utilities must
secure a pump and haul permit from the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (B)   Industrial wastewater discharge permits.
      (1)   General requirements. All industrial users proposing to connect to
or to contribute to the WWF shall apply for service and apply for a discharge
permit before connecting to or contributing to the WWF. All existing industrial
users connected to or contributing to the WWF may be required to apply for a
permit within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter.
      (2)   Applications. Applications for wastewater discharge permits shall
be required as follows.
         (a)   Users required by the Superintendent to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the pretreatment coordinator, an
application on a prescribed form accompanied by the appropriate fee.
         (b)   The application shall be in the prescribed form of the city and
shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: name, address
and SIC/NAICS number of applicant; wastewater volume; wastewater constituents
and characteristic, including, but not limited to, those mentioned in §§
51.09 and
51.25 discharge variations daily, monthly, seasonal and 30-minute peaks; a
description of all chemicals handled on the premises, each product produced by
type, amount, process or processes and rate of production, type and amount of
raw materials, number and type of employees, hours of operation, site plans,
floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details showing all sewers and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation; a description of existing and
proposed pretreatment and/or equalization facilities and any other information
deemed necessary by the pretreatment coordinator.
         (c)   Any user who elects or is required to construct new or
additional facilities for pretreatment shall as part of the application for
wastewater discharge permit submit plans, specifications and other pertinent
information relative to the proposed construction to the pretreatment
coordinator for approval. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be issued
until such plans and specifications are approved. Approval of such plans and
specifications shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the
city under the provisions of this subchapter.
         (d)   If additional pretreatment and/or operations and maintenance
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the application shall
include the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. For the
purpose of this division (B)(2)(d), pretreatment standard shall include either
a national pretreatment standard or a pretreatment standard imposed by this
subchapter.
         (e)   The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms
and conditions provided herein.
         (f)   The receipt by the city of a prospective customer’s application
for wastewater discharge permit shall not obligate the city to render the
wastewater collection and treatment service. If the service applied for cannot
be supplied in accordance with this subchapter or the city’s rules and
regulations and general practice, the application shall be rejected and there
shall be no liability of the city to the applicant of such service.
         (g)   The pretreatment coordinator will act only on applications
containing all the information required in this section. Persons who have filed
incomplete applications will be notified by the pretreatment coordinator that
the application is deficient and the nature of such deficiency and will be
given 30 days to correct the deficiency. If the deficiency is not corrected
within 30 days or within such extended period as allowed by the local
administrative officer, the local administrative officer shall deny the
application and notify the applicant in writing of such action.
         (h)   Applications shall be signed by the duly authorized
representative.
      (3)   Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this subchapter and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the city.
         (a)   Permits shall contain the following:
            1.   Statement of duration;
            2.   Provisions of transfer;
            3.   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards in this chapter, state rules, categorical
pretreatment standards, local, state and federal laws;
            4.   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law;
            5.   Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violations of pretreatment standards and the requirements of any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedules shall not extend the compliance date beyond
the applicable federal deadlines;
            6.   Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the
WWF to be necessary; and
            7.   Requirement to notify the WWF immediately if changes in the
users processes affect the potential for a slug discharge.
         (b)   Additionally, permits may contain the following:
            1.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
            2.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities;
            3.   Compliance schedules;
            4.   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
            5.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city
access thereto;
            6.   Requirements for notification of the city 60 days prior to
implementing any substantial change in the volume or character of the
wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system,
and of any changes in industrial processes that would affect wastewater quality
or quantity;
            7.   Prohibition of bypassing pretreatment or pretreatment
equipment;
            8.   Effluent mass loading restrictions; and
            9.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
      (4)   Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the permit may be
subject to modification by the pretreatment coordinator during the term of the
permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists.
The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in this permit at least 60
days prior to the effective date of change; except in the case where federal
deadlines are shorter, in which case the federal rule must be followed. Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.
      (5)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than
a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for
permit renewal a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user’s
existing permit.
      (6)   Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the written approval of the
city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and
conditions of the existing permit. The permit holder must provide the new owner
with a copy of the current permit.
      (7)   Revocation of permit. Any permit issued under the provisions of
this chapter is subject to be modified, suspended or revoked in whole or in
part during its term for cause including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit or other applicable federal, state, or local law or regulation;
         (b)   Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose
fully all relevant facts;
         (c)   A change in:
            1.   Any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge;
            2.   Strength, volume or timing of discharges; and
            3.   Addition or change in process lines generating wastewater.
         (d)   Intentional failure of a user to accurately report the discharge
constituents and characteristics or to report significant changes in plant
operations or wastewater characteristics.
   (C)   Confidential information. All information and data on a user obtained
from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs and from inspection shall be available to the public or any
governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the pretreatment coordinator
that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the users.
When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available to
governmental agencies for use; related to this chapter or the city’s or user’s
NPDES permit. Provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be
available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information. Information accepted by the pretreatment coordinator as
confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the
general public by the pretreatment coordinator until and unless prior and
adequate notification is given to the user.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009; Ord. 784, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 51.27  INDUSTRIAL USER ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Monitoring facilities.
      (1)   The installation of a monitoring facility shall be required for all
industrial users. A monitoring facility shall be a manhole or other suitable
facility approved by the pretreatment coordinator.
      (2)   When in the judgment of the pretreatment coordinator, there is a
significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced
by different operations of a single user the pretreatment coordinator may
require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each separate
source of discharge.
      (3)   Monitoring facilities that are required to be installed shall be
constructed and maintained at the user’s expense. The purpose of the facility
is to enable inspection, sampling and flow measurement of wastewater produced
by a user. If sampling or metering equipment is also required by the
pretreatment coordinator, it shall be provided and installed at the user’s
expense.
      (4)   The monitoring facility will normally be required to be located on
the user’s premises outside of the building. The pretreatment coordinator may,
however, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on
the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street right-of-
way with the approval of the public agency having jurisdiction of that right-
of-way and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
      (5)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition at the expenses of the user.
   (B)   Sample methods. All samples collected and analyzed pursuant to this
regulation shall be conducted using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in the current edition of 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance. Multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour
period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows. For cyanide, total
phenol and sulfide the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the
field; for volatile organics and oil and grease the samples may be composited
in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the control authority, as appropriate.
   (C)   Representative sampling and housekeeping. All wastewater samples must
be representative of the user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow
measuring facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and in good working
order at all times. The failure of the user to keep its monitoring facilities
in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
   (D)   Proper operation and maintenance. The user shall at all times properly
operate and maintain the equipment and facilities associated with spill
control, wastewater collection, treatment, sampling and discharge. Proper
operation and maintenance includes adequate process control as well as adequate
testing and monitoring quality assurance.
   (E)   Inspection and sampling. The city may inspect the facilities of any
user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all
requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or its representative
ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the
purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or in the
performance of any of its duties. The city, approval authority and EPA shall
have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations. The city will utilize qualified city personnel or a private
laboratory to conduct compliance monitoring. Where a user has security measures
in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry
into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel
from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without
delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibility.
   (F)   Safety. While performing the necessary work on private properties, the
pretreatment coordinator or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and
the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by
city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the monitoring
and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure
of the company to maintain safe conditions.
   (G)   New sources. New sources of discharges to the WWF shall have in full
operation all pollution control equipment at start up of the industrial process
and be in full compliance of effluent standards within 90 days of start up of
the industrial process.
   (H)   Slug discharge evaluations. Evaluations will be conducted of each
significant industrial user according to the state and federal regulations.
Where it is determined that a slug discharge control plan is needed, the user
shall prepare that plan according to the appropriate regulatory guidance.
   (I)   Accidental discharges or slug discharges.
      (1)   Protection from accidental or slug discharge.
         (a)   All industrial users shall provide such facilities and institute
such procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the
potential for accidental or slug discharge into the WWF of waste regulated by
this subchapter from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and rail
car loading and unloading areas, from in plant transfer or processing and
materials handling areas, and from diked areas or holding ponds of any waste
regulated by this subchapter. Detailed plans showing the facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator before
the facility is constructed.
         (b)   The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures
will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this
subchapter.
      (2)   Notification of accidental discharge or slug discharge.
         (a)   Any person causing or suffering from any accidental discharge or
slug discharge shall immediately notify the pretreatment coordinator in person,
or by the telephone to enable countermeasures to be taken by the pretreatment
coordinator to minimize damage to the WWF, the health and welfare of the
public, and the environment.
         (b)   This notification shall be followed, within five days of the
date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the cause of the
accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence.
         (c)   Such notification shall not relieve the user of liability for
any expense, loss or damage to the WWF, fish kills or any other damage to
person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines,
civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or
state or federal law.
      (3)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call
in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.28  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Users, whether permitted or non-permitted may be required to submit
reports detailing the nature and characteristics of their discharges according
to the following division (B).
   (B)   Failure to make a requested report in the specified time is a
violation subject to enforcement actions under §
51.29 .
      (1)   Baseline monitoring report.
         (a)   Report. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.06(1)(d), whichever is
later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the WWF shall submit to the Superintendent a report
which contains the information listed in division (B)(1)(b) below. At least 90
days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that
become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the Superintendent a report
which contains the information listed in division (B)(1)(b) below. A new source
shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
         (b)   Information. Users described above shall submit the information
set forth below:
            1.   Identifying information. The user name, address of the
facility including the name of operators and owners;
            2.   Permit information. A listing of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility;
            3.   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount,
processes and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of
the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the WWF from
the regulated processes;
            4.   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula; and
            5.   Measurement of pollutants.
               a.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing
sources;
               b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process;
               c.   Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average
concentrations or mass, where required, shall be reported;
               d.   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in 40 C.F.R. Part 136
and amendments, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
standard. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution
prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the
Superintendent or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the
standard;
               e.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample
to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this division
(B)(1)(b)5.e.;
               f.   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream
formula to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards;
               g.   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
40 C.F.R. Part 136 or other approved methods;
               h.   The Superintendent may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures; and
               i.   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place
of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the WWF.
         (c)   Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s
duly authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis,
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.
         (d)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance
schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in
division (B)(2) below.
         (e)   Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring
reports must be certified in accordance with division (B)(14) below and signed
by the duly authorized representative.
      (2)   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions
shall apply to the compliance schedule required by division (B)(1)(d) above.
         (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not
limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation).
         (b)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
         (c)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule.
         (d)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.
      (3)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the WWF, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Superintendent a report containing the information described in divisions (B)
(1)(b)4. and (B)(1)(b)5. above. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per
unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with division (B)
(14) below. All sampling will be done in conformance with division (B)(11)
below.
      (4)   Periodic compliance reports.
         (a)   All significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined
by the Superintendent submit no less than twice per year (at 180 day intervals)
reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP)
or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by the Superintendent or the pretreatment standard necessary to
determine the compliance status of the user.
         (b)   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with this chapter.
         (c)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
         (d)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the Superintendent, using the procedures prescribed
in division (B)(11) below, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
      (5)   Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the
Superintendent of any significant changes to the user’s operations or system
which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 60
days before the change.
         (a)   The Superintendent may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
51.25 of this chapter.
         (b)   The Superintendent may issue an individual wastewater discharge
permit under §
51.26 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
51.26 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
      (6)   Report of potential problems.
         (a)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause
potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and
notify the Superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the
location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known,
and corrective actions taken by the user.
         (b)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which might be
incurred as a result of damage to the WWF, natural resources, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of
any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter.
         (c)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (B)(6)(a), above. Employers shall ensure that
all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
         (d)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the
Superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge.
      (7)   Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain an
individual wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
Superintendent as the Superintendent may require to determine users status as
non-permitted.
      (8)   Notice of violations/repeat sampling and reporting. Where a
violation has occurred, another sample shall be conducted within 30 days of
becoming aware of the violation, either a repeat sample or a regularly
scheduled sample that falls within the required time frame. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of
the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the city
performs sampling at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the city
performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was
conducted and the time when the user or the city receives the results of this
sampling, or if the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the
industrial user.
      (9)   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
         (a)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R. Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste
as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the
type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the user discharges more
than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of
the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass
and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during
that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once
for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under division (B)(5) above. The notification
requirement in this division (B)(9)(a) does not apply to pollutants already
reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self
monitoring requirements of divisions (B)(1), (B)(3) and (B)(4) above.
         (b)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (B)(9)
(a) above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
         (c)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90
days of the effective date of such regulations.
         (d)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
         (e)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued there under, or any applicable federal or state law.
      (10)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including
sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 C.F.R. Part
136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical
techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other
applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested
by the Superintendent or other parties approved by EPA.
      (11)   Sample collection. Samples collected to satisfy reporting
requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and
analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that
is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
         (a)   Except as indicated in divisions (B)(11)(b) and (B)(11)(c)
below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional composite sampling or
grab sampling is authorized by the Superintendent. Where time proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must
be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior
to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols and sulfides the samples
may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and
oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite
samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as
documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as
appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous limits.
         (b)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total
phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
         (c)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-
day compliance reports required in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) above, a minimum
of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which
historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical
sampling data are available, the Superintendent may authorize a lower minimum.
For the reports required by division (B)(4) above, the industrial user is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
      (12)   Date of receipt of reports. Written reports will be deemed to have
been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, the
date of receipt of the report shall govern.
      (13)   Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of
this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required
by this chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements,
and documentation associated with best management practices established under §
51.32. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Superintendent.
      (14)   Certification statements.
         (a)   Signature and certification. All reports associated with
compliance with the pretreatment program shall be signed by the duly authorized
representative and shall have the following certification statement attached:
            “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
         (b)   Reports. Reports required to have signatures and certification
statement include, permit applications, periodic reports, compliance schedules,
baseline monitoring, reports of accidental or slug discharges, and any other
written report that may be used to determine water quality and compliance with
local, state and federal requirements.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009; Ord. 784, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 51.29  ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN.
   Under the authority of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 69-3-123 et seq.:
   (A)   Complaints; notification of violation; orders.
      (1)   (a)   Whenever the local administrative officer has reason to
believe that a violation of any provision of the wastewater regulations,
pretreatment program or of orders of the local hearing authority issued under
it has occurred, is occurring, or is about to occur, the local administrative
officer may cause a written complaint to be served upon the alleged violator or
violators.
         (b)   The complaint shall specify the provision or provisions of the
pretreatment program or order alleged to be violated or about to be violated
and the facts alleged to constitute a violation, may order that necessary
corrective action be taken within a reasonable time to be prescribed in the
order, and shall inform the violators of the opportunity for a hearing before
the local hearing authority.
         (c)   Any such order shall become final and not subject to review
unless the alleged violators request by written petition a hearing before the
local hearing authority as provided in division (B) below, no later than 30
days after the date the order is served; provided, that the local hearing
authority may review the final order as provided in Tenn. Code Ann. § 69-3-123
(a)(3).
         (d)   Notification of violation: notwithstanding the provisions of
divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(c) above, whenever the pretreatment
coordinator finds that any user has violated or is violating this subchapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirements, the city or its agent may serve upon the user a
written notice of violation. Within 15 days of the receipt of this notice, the
user shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator an explanation of the
violation and a plan for its satisfactory correction and prevention including
specific actions. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
      (2)   (a)   When the local administrative officer finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate this subchapter, wastewater discharge permits,
any order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
he or she may issue one of the following orders. These orders are not
prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.
            1.   Compliance order. An order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time.
If the user does not come into compliance within the specified time, sewer
service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders may also contain
other requirements to address the non-compliance, including additional self-
monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation.
            2.   Cease and desist order. An order to the user directing it to
cease all such violations and directing it to immediately comply with all
requirements and take needed remedial or preventive action to properly address
a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or
terminating the discharge.
            3.   Consent order. Assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible for non-
compliance, including specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
non-compliance within a time period specified in the order.
            4.   Emergency order.
               a.   Whenever the local administrative officer finds that an
emergency exists imperatively requiring immediate action to protect the public
health, safety or welfare, the health of animals, fish or aquatic life, a
public water supply, or the facilities of the WWF, the local administrative
officer may, without prior notice, issue an order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that any action be taken as the local
administrative officer deems necessary to meet the emergency.
               b.   If the violator fails to respond or is unable to respond to
the order, the local administrative officer may take any emergency action as
the local administrative officer deems necessary, or contract with a qualified
person or persons to carry out the emergency measures. The local administrative
officer may assess the person or persons responsible for the emergency
condition for actual costs incurred by the city in meeting the emergency.
         (b)   Appeals from orders of the local administrative officer.
            1.   Any user affected by any order of the local administrative
officer in interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter may file
with the local administrative officer a written request for reconsideration
within 30 days of the order, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the
user’s request for reconsideration.
            2.   If the ruling made by the local administrative officer is
unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, he or she may, within
30 days, file a written petition with the local hearing authority as provided
in division (B) below. The local administrative officer’s order shall remain in
effect during the period of reconsideration.
            3.   Except as otherwise expressly provided, any notice, complaint,
order or other instrument issued by or under authority of this section may be
served on any named person personally, by the local administrative officer or
any person designated by the local administrative officer, or service may be
made in accordance with state statutes authorizing service of process in civil
action. Proof of service shall be filed in the office of the local
administrative officer.
   (B)   Hearings.
      (1)   Any hearing or rehearing brought before the local hearing authority
shall be conducted in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Upon receipt of a written petition from the alleged violator
pursuant to this division (B), the local administrative officer shall give the
petitioner 30 days’ written notice of the time and place of the hearing, but in
no case shall the hearing be held more than 60 days from the receipt of the
written petition, unless the local administrative officer and the petitioner
agree to a postponement;
         (b)   The hearing may be conducted by the local hearing authority at a
regular or special meeting. A quorum of the local hearing authority must be
present at the regular or special meeting to conduct the hearing;
         (c)   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the hearings shall be
taken and filed with the local hearing authority, together with the findings of
fact and conclusions of law made under division (B)(1)(d) below. The recorded
transcript shall be made available to the petitioner or any party to a hearing
upon payment of a charge set by the local administrative officer to cover the
costs of preparation;
         (d)   In connection with the hearing, the chair shall issue subpoenas
in response to any reasonable request by any party to the hearing requiring the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant
to any matter involved in the hearing. In case of contumacy or refusal to obey
a notice of hearing or subpoena issued under this section, the Chancery Court
of the county has jurisdiction upon the application of the local hearing
authority or the local administrative officer to issue an order requiring the
person to appear and testify or produce evidence as the case may require, and
any failure to obey an order of the Court may be punished by such Court as
contempt;
         (e)   Any member of the local hearing authority may administer oaths
and examine witnesses;
         (f)   On the basis of the evidence produced at the hearing, the local
hearing authority shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and enter
decisions and orders that, in its opinion, will best further the purposes of
the pretreatment program. It shall provide written notice of its decisions and
orders to the alleged violator. The order issued under this division (B)(1)(f)
shall be issued by the person or persons designated by the chair no later than
30 days following the close of the hearing;
         (g)   The decision of the local hearing authority becomes final and
binding on all parties unless appealed to the courts as provided in division
(B)(2) below;
         (h)   Any person to whom an emergency order is directed under division
(A)(2)(a)4. above shall comply immediately, but on petition to the local
hearing authority will be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. In no case
will the hearing be held later than three days from the receipt of the petition
by the local hearing authority.
      (2)   An appeal may be taken from any final order or other final
determination of the local hearing authority by any party who is or may be
adversely affected, including the pretreatment agency. Appeal must be made to
the Chancery Court under the common law writ of certiorari set out in Tenn.
Code Ann. § 27-8-101 et seq. 60 days from the date the order or determination
is made.
      (3)   Show cause hearing: notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (B)
(1) or (B)(2) above, the pretreatment coordinator may order any user that
causes or contributes to violation(s) of this chapter, wastewater discharge
permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirements, to appear before the local administrative officer and show cause
why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for the action, and a request that the user
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should be taken. The notice of
the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. The notice
may be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the
user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following
the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be prerequisite for taking any
other action against the user. A show cause hearing may be requested by the
discharger prior to revocation of a discharge permit or termination of service.
   (C)   Violations, administrative civil penalty.  Under the authority of
Tenn. Code Ann. § 69-3-125:
      (1)   (a)   Any person including, but not limited to, industrial users,
who does any of the following acts or omissions is subject to a civil penalty
of up to $10,000 per day for each day during which the act or omission
continues or occurs:
            1.   Unauthorized discharge, discharging without a permit;
            2.   Violates an effluent standard or limitation;
            3.   Violates the terms or conditions of a permit;
            4.   Fails to complete a filing requirement;
            5.   Fails to allow or perform an entry, inspection, monitoring or
reporting requirement;
            6.   Fails to pay user or cost recovery charges; or
            7.   Violates a final determination or order of the local hearing
authority or the local administrative officer.
         (b)   Any administrative civil penalty must be assessed in the
following manner:
            1.   The local administrative officer may issue an assessment
against any person or industrial user responsible for the violation;
            2.   Any person or industrial user against whom an assessment has
been issued may secure a review of the assessment by filing with the local
administrative officer a written petition setting forth the grounds and reasons
for the violator’s objections and asking for a hearing in the matter involved
before the local hearing authority and, if a petition for review of the
assessment is not filed within 30 days after the date the assessment is served,
the violator is deemed to have consented to the assessment and it becomes
final;
            3.   Whenever any assessment has become final because of a person’s
failure to appeal the assessment, the local administrative officer may apply to
the appropriate court for a judgment and seek execution of the judgment, and
the court, in such proceedings, shall treat a failure to appeal the assessment
as a confession of judgment in the amount of the assessment;
            4.   In assessing the civil penalty the local administrative
officer may consider the following factors:
               a.   Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial
economic deterrent to the illegal activity;
               b.   Damages to the pretreatment agency, including compensation
for the damage or destruction of the facilities of the publicly owned treatment
works, and also including any penalties, costs and attorneys’ fees incurred by
the pretreatment agency as the result of the illegal activity, as well as the
expenses involved in enforcing this section and the costs involved in
rectifying any damages;
               c.   Cause of the discharge or violation;
               d.   The severity of the discharge and its effect upon the
facilities of the publicly owned treatment works and upon the quality and
quantity of the receiving waters;
               e.   Effectiveness of action taken by the violator to cease the
violation;
               f.   The technical and economic reasonableness of reducing or
eliminating the discharge; and
               g.   The economic benefit gained by the violator.
            5.   The local administrative officer may institute proceedings for
assessment in the Chancery Court of the county in which all or part of the
pollution or violation occurred, in the name of the pretreatment agency.
         (c)   The local hearing authority may establish by regulation a
schedule of the amount of civil penalty which can be assessed by the local
administrative officer for certain specific violations or categories of
violations.
         (d)   Assessments may be added to the user’s next scheduled sewer
service charge and the local administrative officer shall have such other
collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees.
      (2)   Any civil penalty assessed to a violator pursuant to this section
may be in addition to any civil penalty assessed by the Commissioner for
violations of Tenn. Code Ann. § 69-3-115(a)(1)(F). However, the sum of
penalties imposed by this section and by Tenn. Code Ann. § 69-3-115(a) shall
not exceed $10,000 per day for each day during which the act or omission
continues or occurs.
   (D)   Assessment for non-compliance with program permits or orders.
      (1)   The local administrative officer may assess the liability of any
polluter or violator for damages to the city resulting from any person’s or
industrial user’s pollution or violation, failure or neglect in complying with
any permits or orders issued pursuant to the provisions of the pretreatment
program or this section.
      (2)   If an appeal from such assessment is not made to the local hearing
authority by the polluter or violator within 30 days of notification of such
assessment, the polluter or violator shall be deemed to have consented to the
assessment, and it shall become final.
      (3)   Damages may include any expenses incurred in investigating and
enforcing the pretreatment program of this section, in removing, correcting and
terminating any pollution, and also compensation for any actual damages caused
by the pollution or violation.
      (4)   Whenever any assessment has become final because of a person’s
failure to appeal within the time provided, the local administrative officer
may apply to the appropriate court for a judgment, and seek execution on the
judgment. The court, in its proceedings, shall treat the failure to appeal the
assessment as a confession of judgment in the amount of the assessment.
   (E)   Judicial proceedings and relief. The local administrative officer may
initiate proceedings in the Chancery Court of the county in which the
activities occurred against any person or industrial user who is alleged to
have violated or is about to violate the pretreatment program, this section, or
orders of the local hearing authority or local administrative officer. In the
action, the local administrative officer may seek, and the Court may grant,
injunctive relief and any other relief available in law or equity.
   (F)   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to the revocation of permit provisions in §
51.26(B)(7) of this chapter, users are subject to termination of their
wastewater discharge for violations or a wastewater discharge permits, or
orders issued hereunder, or for any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling;
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in the general discharge
prohibitions in §
51.09 of chapter; and
         (f)   Failure to properly submit an industrial waste survey when
requested by the pretreatment coordination Superintendent.
      (2)   The user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause, as provided in division
(B)(3) above, why the proposed action should not be taken.
   (G)   Disposition of damage payments and penalties–special fund. All damages
and/or penalties assessed and collected under the provisions of this section
shall be placed in a special fund by the pretreatment agency and allocated and
appropriated for the administration of its wastewater fund or combined water
and wastewater fund.
   (H)   Levels of non-compliance.
      (1)   Insignificant non-compliance. For the purpose of this chapter,
insignificant non-compliance is considered a relatively minor infrequent
violation of pretreatment standards or requirements. These will usually be
responded to informally with a phone call or site visit but may include a
notice of violation (NOV).
      (2)   Significant non-compliance.
         (a)   Per 1200-4-14-.08(6)(b)8:
            1.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for each
parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limit;
            2.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). TRC calculations for pH
are not required;
            3.   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
(daily maximum of longer-term average, instantaneous limit or narrative
standard) that the WWF determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public);
            4.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
the WWF’s exercise of its emergency authority under §
51.29(A)(2)(a)4., Emergency Order, to halt or prevent such a discharge;
            5.   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
            6.   Failure to provide, within 45 days after their due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
            7.   Failure to accurately report non-compliance;
            8.   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include
a violation of best management practices, which the WWF determines will
adversely affect the operation of implementation of the local pretreatment
program; and
            9.   Continuously monitored pH violations that exceed limits for a
time period greater than 50 minutes or exceed limits by more than 0.5 s.u. more
than eight times in four hours.
         (b)   Any significant non-compliance violations will be responded to
according to the Enforcement Response Plan Guide Table (
Appendix A).
   (I)   Public notice of the significant violations. The Superintendent shall
publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides
meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the WWF, a list of
the users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant
non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The
term significant non- compliance shall be applicable to all significant
industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates divisions (I)(3),
(I)(4) or (I)(7) below) and shall mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits,
multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease,
and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH), TRC calculations for pH are not
required;
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by §
51.31 (daily maximum, long term average, instantaneous limit or narrative
standard) that the Superintendent determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of WWF personnel or the general public;
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Superintendent’s
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance;
      (7)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Superintendent determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program; or
      (8)   Continuously monitored pH violations that exceed limits for a time
period greater than 50 minutes or exceed limits by more than 0.5 s.u. more than
eight times in four hours.
   (J)   Criminal penalties. In addition to civil penalties imposed by the
local administrative officer and the state, any person who willfully and
negligently violates permit conditions is subject to criminal penalties imposed
by the state and the United States.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.30  ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE GUIDE TABLE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the consistent
and equitable enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Enforcement Response Guide Table. The applicable officer shall use the
schedule found in
Appendix A to impose sanctions or penalties for the violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.31  FEES AND BILLING.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the
equitable recovery of costs from users of the city’s wastewater treatment
system including costs of operation, maintenance, administration, bond service
costs, capital improvements, depreciation and equitable cost recovery of EPA
administered federal wastewater grants.
   (B)   Types of charges and fees. The charges and fees as established in the
city’s schedule of charges and fees may include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Inspection fee and tapping fee;
      (2)   Fees for applications for discharge;
      (3)   Sewer use charges;
      (4)   Surcharge fees (see Table C);
      (5)   Waste hauler permit;
      (6)   Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees;
      (7)   Fees for industrial discharge monitoring; and
      (8)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary.
   (C)   Fees for application for discharge. A fee may be charged when a user
or prospective user makes application for discharge as required by §
51.26 of this chapter.
   (D)   Inspection fee and tapping fee. An inspection fee and tapping fee for
a building sewer installation shall be paid to the city’s sewer department at
the time the application is filed.
   (E)   Sewer user charges.
      (1)   The City Commission shall establish monthly rates and charges for
the use of the wastewater system and for the services supplied by the
wastewater system.
      (2)   Such rates are reflected in administrative ordinances or
resolutions, which are of record in the city offices.
   (F)   Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees. A fee may be charged for
the issuance of an industrial wastewater discharge fee in accordance with this
section.
   (G)   Fees for industrial discharge monitoring. Fees may be collected from
industrial users having pretreatment or other discharge requirements to
compensate the city for the necessary compliance monitoring and other
administrative duties of the pretreatment program.
   (H)   Administrative civil penalties. Administrative civil penalties shall
be issued according to the following schedule. Violations are categorized in
the Enforcement Response Guide Table (Appendix A). The local administrative
officer may assess a penalty within the appropriate range. Penalty assessments
are to be assessed per violation per day unless otherwise noted.
 
Category 1 No penalty
Category 2 $50—$500
Category 3 $500—$1,000
Category 4 $1,000—$5,000
Category 5 $5,000—$10,000
 
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.32  FATS, OIL AND GREASE CONTROL PROGRAM; FATS, OILS AND GREASE TRAPS AND
INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Fat, oil and grease (FOG), waste food and sand interceptors. FOG,
waste food and sand interceptors shall be installed when, in the opinion of the
Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing fats, oils and grease, any flammable wastes, ground food waste,
sand, soil and solids, or other harmful ingredients in excessive amount which
impact the wastewater collection system. Such interceptors shall not be
required for single family residences, but may be required on multiple family
residences. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
   (B)   Fat, oil, grease and food waste.
      (1)   New construction and renovation. Upon construction or renovation,
all restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools,
grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches, camps, caterers, manufacturing plants
and any other sewer users who discharge applicable waste shall submit a FOG and
food waste control plan that will effectively control the discharge of FOG and
food waste.
      (2)   Existing structures. All existing restaurants, cafeterias, hotels,
motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails,
churches, camps, caterers, manufacturing plants and any other sewer users who
discharge applicable waste shall be required to submit a plan for control of
FOG and food waste, if and when the Superintendent determines that FOG and food
waste are causing excessive loading, plugging, damage or potential problems to
structures or equipment in the public sewer system.
      (3)   Implementation of plan. After approval of the FOG plan by the
Superintendent the sewer user must:
         (a)   Implement the plan within a reasonable amount of time;
         (b)   Service and maintain the equipment in order to prevent impact
upon the sewer collection system and treatment facility. If in the opinion of
the Superintendent the user continues to impact the collection system and
treatment plan, additional pretreatment may be required, including a
requirement to meet numeric limits and have surcharges applied;
         (c)   Sand, soil and oil interceptors: all car washes, truck washes,
garages, service stations and other sources of sand, soil and oil shall install
effective sand, soil and oil interceptors. These interceptors shall be sized to
effectively remove sand, soil and oil at the expected flow rates. The
interceptors shall be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent impact upon the
wastewater collection and treatment system. Owners whose interceptors are
deemed to be ineffective by the Superintendent may be asked to change the
cleaning frequency or to increase the size of the interceptors. Owners or
operators of washing facilities will prevent the inflow of rainwater into the
sanitary sewers;
         (d)   Laundries: commercial laundries shall be equipped with an
interceptor with a wire basket or similar device, removable for cleaning, that
prevents passage into the sewer system of solids one-half inch or larger in
size such as strings, rags, buttons or other solids detrimental to the system;
         (e)   Control equipment: the equipment of facilities installed to
control FOG, food waste, sand and soil, must be designed in accordance with the
State Department of Environment and Conservation engineering standards or
applicable city guidelines. Underground equipment shall be tightly sealed to
prevent inflow of rainwater and easily accessible to allow regular maintenance.
Control equipment shall be maintained by the owner or operator of the facility
so as to prevent a stoppage of the public sewer, and the accumulation of FOG in
the lines, pump stations and treatment plant. If the city is required to clean
out the public sewer lines as a result of a stoppage resulting from poorly
maintained control equipment, the property owner shall be required to refund
the labor, equipment, materials and overhead costs to the city. Nothing in this
division (B)(3)(e) shall be construed to prohibit or restrict any other remedy
the city has under this chapter, or state or federal law. The city retains the
right to inspect and approve installation of control equipment;
         (f)   Solvents prohibited: the use of degreasing or line cleaning
products containing petroleum based solvents is prohibited. The use of other
products for the purpose of keeping FOG dissolved or suspended until it has
traveled into the collection system of the city is prohibited; and
         (g)   The Superintendent may use industrial wastewater discharge
permits under §§
51.26 or
51.33 to regulate the discharge of fat, oil and grease.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.33  FOG MANAGEMENT POLICY.
   The City Utilities Board Fats, Oils and Grease Management Policy is
established under North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)
guidelines to prohibit obstruction and interference to the publicly owned
treatment works.
   (A)   Scope and purpose. To prevent sanitary and combined sewer system
blockages, obstructions and overflows due to the contribution and accumulation
of fats, oils and grease (FOG) from food service establishments, commercial
facilities and industrial facilities.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or plant sources. FOG may be referred to as “grease” or “greases” in this
section.
      FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE).
         (a)   Any establishment, business or facility engaged in preparing,
serving or making food available for consumption. Single-family residences are
not a FSE, however, multi-residential facilities may be considered a FSE at the
discretion of the Director.
         (b)   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS will be classified as follows:
            1.   CLASS 1. Deli - engaged in the sale of cold-cut and microwave
sandwiches/subs with no frying or grilling on site, ice cream shops and
beverage bars as defined by NAICS 72213, mobile food vendors as defined by
NAICS 722330;
            2.   CLASS 2. Limited-service restaurants (a.k.a. fast food
facilities) as defined by NAICS 722211 and caterers as defined by NAICS 722320;
            3.   CLASS 3. Full-service restaurants as defined by NAICS 722110;
            4.   CLASS 4. Buffet and cafeteria facilities as defined by NAICS
72212; and
            5.   CLASS 5. Institutions (schools, hospitals, prisons and the
like) as defined by NAICS 722310 but not to exclude self-run operations.
      GREASE (BROWN). Fats, oils and grease that is discharged to the grease
control equipment, or is from kitchen or food prep wastewater.
      GREASE (YELLOW). Fats, oils and grease that has not been in contact or
contaminated from other sources (water, wastewater, solid waste and the like)
and can be recycled.
      GREASE CONTROL EQUIPMENT (GCE). A device for separating and retaining
wastewater FOG prior to wastewater exiting the FSE and entering the City
Utilities Board sewer system. The GCE is so constructed as to separate and trap
or hold fats, oils and grease substances from entering the City Utilities Board
sewer system. Devices include grease interceptors, grease traps or other
devices approved by the Director.
      GREASE INTERCEPTOR. Grease control equipment identified as a large tank,
usually 1,000 gallon to 2,000 gallon capacity with proper inlet and outlet Ts,
that provides FOG control for a FSE. GREASE INTERCEPTORS will be located
outside the FSE, unless a variance request has been granted.
      GREASE TRAP. Grease control equipment identified as an “under the sink”
trap, a small container with baffles, or a floor trap. For a FSE approved to
install a GREASE TRAP, the minimum size requirement is the equivalent of a 20-
gallon per minute/40 pound capacity trap. All GREASE TRAPS will have flow
control restrictor and a vent pipe.
      GREASE RECYCLE CONTAINER. Container used for the storage of yellow
grease.
      NAICS. North American Industry Classification System. The website is
found at: (http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/naics.html).
      TEE or T (INFLUENT AND EFFLUENT). A T-shaped pipe extending from the
ground surface below grade into the grease interceptor to a depth allowing
recovery (discharge) of the water layer located under the layer of FOG.
Influent and effluent T’s are recommended to be made of PVC or equivalent
material, and extend to within 12 to 15 inches of the bottom of the
interceptor.
      WATER (BLACK). Wastewater containing human waste, from sanitary fixtures
such as toilets and urinals.
      WATER (GRAY). Refers to all other wastewater other than black water as
defined in this section.
   (C)   General requirements.
      (1)   All existing food service establishments (FSEs) are required to
have grease control equipment (GCE) installed, maintained and operating
properly.
      (2)   All FSEs will be required to maintain records of cleaning and
maintenance of GCE. GCE maintenance records include, at a minimum, the date of
cleaning/maintenance, company or person conducting the cleaning/maintenance,
amount or volume of grease wastewater removed. A grease waste hauler completed
manifest will meet this requirement.
      (3)   GCE maintenance records will be available at the FSE premises so
they can be provided to City Utilities Board personnel or its representative,
and/or the Health Department. The FSE shall maintain GCE maintenance records
for three years.
      (4)   No FSE will discharge oil and grease in concentrations that exceed
the city instantaneous grab limit for oil and grease.
      (5)   All FSEs are required to dispose of yellow grease in an approved
container, where contents will not be discharged to any storm water grate,
drain or conveyance. Yellow grease, or any oils or grease, poured or discharged
into the FSE sewer lines or City Utilities Board sewer system is a violation of
this chapter.
      (6)   New food service establishment, upgrading of existing food service
establishment or change of ownership of existing food service establishment
requirement: any new FSE, upgrading of an existing FSE or change of ownership
of existing FSE will be required to install and maintain a grease interceptor.
Food service establishments in one of these categories must submit a FOG plan
to City Utilities Board for approval. The FOG plan includes identification of
all cooking and food preparation equipment (i.e., fryers, grills, woks and the
like); the number and size of dishwashers, sinks, floor drains and other
plumbing fixtures; type of FSE classification; type of food to be served; and
plans for the grease interceptor dimensions and location. The City Utilities
Board will review the FOG plan, grease interceptor sizing and approve, or make
changes as necessary to aid in the protection of a FOG discharge from the FSE.
      (7)   Existing food service establishments will be phased in to
compliance through their FSE permit and a compliance schedule. The compliance
schedule will be determined by the FSE ERG as defined in §
51.34.
      (8)   Variance to grease interceptor installation: at the discretion of
the Director, some FSEs may receive a variance from the required installation
of a grease interceptor.
      (9)   Grease control equipment sizing.
         (a)   Minimum acceptable size of grease control equipment for each FSE
classification will be as follows:
            1.   Class 1: Deli, ice cream shops, beverage bars, mobile food
vendors - 20 gallons per minute/40 pound grease trap (at discretion of the
Superintendent);
            2.   Class 2: Limited-service restaurants/caterers - 1,000 gallon
grease interceptor;
            3.   Class 3: Full-service restaurants - 1,000 gallon grease
interceptor;
            4.   Class 4: Buffet and cafeteria facilities - 1,500 gallon grease
interceptor; and
            5.   Class 5: Institutions (schools, hospitals, prisons and the
like) - 2,000 gallon grease interceptor.
         (b)   1.   To calculate the appropriate size GCE, the following
formula will be used: Fixture Units (total) x Facility type multiplier x 36
(retention time) = Size of Interceptor (gals.).
            2.   Should the size of the interceptor calculate to 499 gallons or
less with the formula above: Size of interceptor (gals.) x 0.75 (max. cap. of
sink) = Flow (gpm) x hours (work day) = Acceptable Flow rate with retention
time.
      (10)   Grease control equipment specifications.
         (a)   Grease control equipment must remove fats, oils and grease at or
below enforcement action in accordance with the City Utilities Food Service
Establishment Enforcement Response Guide.
         (b)   Grease traps must have the Plumbing Drainage Institute
certification. The minimum acceptable size is rated at 20 gpm/40 pounds. All
grease traps will be installed as per manufacturer specifications, which
includes the flow restrictor and venting prior to the discharge entering the
grease trap.
      (11)   Grease interceptors.
         (a)   Piping design.
            1.   The inlet and outlet piping shall have two-way cleanout tees
installed;
            2.   The inlet piping shall enter the receiving chamber two and
one-half inches above the invert of the outlet piping;
            3.   On the inlet pipe, inside the receiving chamber, a sanitary
tee of the same size pipe in the vertical position with the top unplugged shall
be provided as a turndown. To provide air circulation and to prevent “air
lock”, a pipe (nipple) installed in the top tee shall extend to a minimum of
six inches clearance from the interceptor ceiling, but not less that the inlet
pipe diameter. A pipe installed in the bottom of the tee shall extend to a
point of two-thirds the depth of the tank. See illustration;
            4.   The outlet piping shall be no smaller than the inlet piping,
but in no case smaller than four inches ID;
            5.   The outlet piping shall extend to 12 inches above the floor of
the interceptor and shall be made of a non-collapsible material; and
            6.   The outlet piping shall contain a tee installed vertically
with a pipe (nipple) installed in the top of the tee to extend to a minimum of
six-inch clearance from the interceptor ceiling, but not less that the pipe
diameter, with the top open. See illustration.
         (b)   Baffles.
            1.   The grease interceptor shall have a non-flexing (i.e.,
concrete, steel and the like) baffle the full width of the interceptor, sealed
to the walls and the floor, and extend from the floor to within six inches of
the ceiling. The baffle shall have an inverted 90 degree sweep fitting at least
equal in diameter size to the inlet piping, but in no case less than six inches
ID. The bottom of the sweep shall be placed in the vertical position in the
inlet compartment 12 inches above the floor. The sweep shall rise to the
horizontal portion, which shall extend through the baffle into the outlet
compartment. The baffle wall shall be sealed to the sweep. See illustration.
            2.   The inlet compartment shall be two-thirds of the total liquid
capacity with the outlet compartment at one-third liquid capacity of the
interceptor.
         (c)   Access openings (manholes).
            1.   Access to grease interceptors shall be provided by a minimum
of one manhole per interceptor division (baffle chamber) and of 24-inch minimum
dimensions terminating one inch above finished grade with cast iron frame and
cover. An eight-inch thick concrete pad extending a minimum of 12 inches beyond
the outside dimension of the manhole frame shall be provided. One manhole shall
be located above the inlet tee hatch and the other manhole shall be located
above the outlet tee hatch. A minimum of 24 inches of clear opening above each
manhole access shall be maintained to facilitate maintenance, cleaning, pumping
and inspections.
            2.   Access openings shall be mechanically sealed and gas-tight to
contain odors and bacteria and to exclude vermin and ground water, in a manner
that permits regular re-uses.
            3.   The manholes are to be accessible for inspection by the
Department.
   (D)   Additional requirements.
      (1)   Water-tight. Precast concrete grease interceptors shall be
constructed to be water-tight. A static water test shall be conducted by the
installer and timed so as to permit verification through visual inspection by
regulatory agent. The water test shall consist of plugging the outlet (and the
inlet if necessary) and filling the tank(s) with water to the tank top a
minimum of 24 hours before the inspection. The tank shall not lose water during
this test period. Certification by the plumbing contractor shall be supplied to
the City Utilities prior to final approval of grease control equipment.
      (2)   Location. Grease control equipment shall be located so as to be
readily accessible for cleaning, maintenance and inspections. They should be
located close to the fixture(s) discharging the greasy wastestream.
      (3)   Responsibility. Removal of the grease from the wastewater routed to
a public or private sanitary system is the responsibility of the user/owner.
      (4)   Construction material. Grease interceptors shall be constructed of
sound durable materials, not subject to excessive corrosion or decay, and shall
be water- and gas-tight. Each interceptor shall be structurally designed to
withstand any anticipated load to be placed on the interceptor (i.e., vehicular
traffic in parking or driving areas).
   (E)   Grease interceptor cleaning/maintenance requirements.
      (1)   Grease interceptor minimum size will be 1,000 gallon capacity, and
maximum size will be 2,500 gallon capacity. If the FSE needs additional
capacity, then grease interceptors will be installed in series.
      (2)   Partial pump of interceptor contents or on-site pump and treatment
of interceptor contents will not be allowed due to reintroduction of fats, oils
and grease to the interceptor and pursuant to the C.F.R. § 403.5(b)(8), which
states “Specific prohibitions. In addition, the following pollutants shall not
be introduced into a POTW: Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at
discharge points designated by the POTW”.
      (3)   Grease interceptors must be pumped-in-full when the total
accumulations of surface FOG (including floating solids) and settled solids
reaches 25% of the grease interceptor’s overall liquid depth. This criterion is
referred to as the “25% Rule”. At no time, shall the cleaning frequency exceed
90 days unless approved City Utilities Board. Approval will be granted on a
case by case situation with submittal by the FSE documenting proof of proposed
frequency. Some existing FSEs in Class 2 through 5 will need to consider
monthly pumping to meet this requirement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bedc0bc7f11a5eb9470a27506fee9adea2de8726/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1472.jpg]
 
      (4)   Grease interceptor effluent-T will be inspected during cleaning and
maintenance and the condition noted by the grease waste hauler’s company or
individual conducting the maintenance. Effluent-T’s that are loose, defective
or not attached must be repaired or replaced immediately.
      (5)   Grease interceptors must have access manholes over the influent-
T and effluent-T for inspection and ease of cleaning/maintenance. Access
manholes will be provided for all separate compartments of interceptors for
complete cleaning (i.e., interceptor with two main baffles or three
compartments will have access manholes at each compartment).
   (F)   Grease trap cleaning/maintenance requirements.
      (1)   All grease traps will have flow control restrictor and vented.
Failure to have the flow restrictor and venting will be considered a violation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bedc0bc7f11a5eb9470a27506fee9adea2de8726/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1474.jpg]
 
      (2)   Grease trap minimum size requirement is a 20 gallon per minute/40
pound capacity trap.
      (3)   Grease traps will be cleaned of complete fats, oils and grease and
food solids at a minimum of every two weeks, unless less cleaning frequency is
authorized by City Utilities. If the FOG and food solids content of the grease
trap is greater than 50%, then the grease trap must be cleaned every week, or
as frequently as needed to prevent 50% of capacity being taken from FOG and
food solids.
      (4)   Grease trap waste should be sealed or placed in a container to
prevent leachate from leaking, and then disposed.
      (5)   Grease trap waste should not be mixed with yellow grease in the
grease recycle container.
   (G)   Food service establishment FOG permits and inspections. The City
Utilities Board may issue FOG permits to food service establishments to control
FOG discharges to the city sewer system, prevent obstruction and interference
to the POTW, and prevent sanitary sewer overflows. The City Utilities Board may
establish food service establishment FOG permit classifications, or issue
general FOG permits to each food service establishment. Also, the City
Utilities Board, or their authorized representative, will conduct inspections
of food service establishments for grease control equipment installation and
maintenance, types of food served and preparation of food, impact to the city
sewer system, and review of best management practices. The City Utilities
Board, or its authorized representative, has the right to enter the food
service establishments’ premises to determine impacts to the city sewer system.
The City Utilities Board will conduct any additional monitoring of the food
service establishment to determine compliance with the FOG management policy.
   (H)   Fees. The City Utilities Board may charge FOG permit, inspection or
monitoring fees to the food service establishments to get reimbursement for the
FOG program costs.
   (I)   “Additives” prohibition for use as grease management and control.
      (1)   Additives include but are not limited to products that contain
solvents, emulsifiers, surfactants, caustics, acids, enzymes and bacteria.
      (2)   At no time will additives be used just prior to under the sink or
floor grease traps.
      (3)   The use of additives is prohibited with the following exceptions.
         (a)   Additives may be used to clean the FSE drain lines but only in
such quantities that it will not cause fats, oils and grease to be discharged
from the grease control equipment to the sewer system, or cause temporary
breakdown of FOG that will later re-congeal in the downstream sewer system.
         (b)   If the product used can be proven to contain 100% bacteria, with
no other additives. Approval of the use of the product must come from the
Director and FSE must submit a full disclosure MSDS and certified sample
results from the manufacturer of the product.
      (4)   The use of approved additives will in no way be considered as a
substitution to the maintenance procedures required herein.
   (J)   Enforcement action. Enforcement action against the FSE includes, but
is not limited to, failure to clean or pump grease control equipment, failure
to maintain grease control equipment including inspection and installation of
properly functioning effluent-T and baffles, failure to install grease control
equipment, failure to control FOG discharge from the FSE, contributing to a
sewer line blockage or obstruction, contributing to a sanitary sewer overflow,
and use of additives in such quantities so that FOG is pushed downstream of the
FSE.
   (K)   Fats, oils and grease blockage in downstream manhole from FSE. If FSE
inspections and field investigations by City Utilities, or its authorized
representative, determine that any fats, oils and grease interference or
blockage in the sewer system, a sewage pumping station, or the wastewater
treatment plant is caused by a particular food service establishment, then that
food service establishment shall reimburse the City Utilities Board for all
labor, equipment, supplies and disposal costs incurred by the City Utilities
Board to clean the interference or blockage. The charges will be added to the
FSEs water/wastewater bill. Failure to reimburse the City Utilities Board will
result in termination of water service.
   (L)   FSE failure to maintain GCE after notification or NOV due date. If a
FSE fails to pump, clean or maintain their GCE after a non-compliance
notification or notice of violation due date, the City Utilities Board may
chose to pump/clean the GCE to prevent additional FOG problems downstream. The
FSE will be charged for the cost of pumping and maintaining the FSE’s GCE at a
rate of one and one- half times the cost to the City Utilities Board.
Mechanical failure of the GCE will be considered a violation of the City Sewer
Use Ordinance which pertains to the construction and maintenance of
pretreatment facilities and subject to penalties of up to $10,000/day for each
day in violation.
   (M)   Penalties. Penalties will be issued as per the City Utilities Board
FSE Enforcement Response Guide.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.34  FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE GUIDE.
   (A)   Purpose. This Food Service Establishment Enforcement Response Guide
(FSE-ERG) was developed to ensure a consistent response to all food service
establishments that cause, or have the potential to cause, interference,
obstruction, sanitary sewer overflows, bypasses or storm water inflow to the
City Utilities Board wastewater collection system and WWTP. Food service
establishments are nondomestic users and are monitored by the City Utilities
Board Pretreatment Section. This FSE-ERG is intended to be used for food
service establishments only. Refer to the City Utilities Board Fats, Oils and
Grease Management Policy for additional information on the City Utilities Board
FOG management program.
   (B)   Significant non-compliance of wastewater discharge limits. The E.P.A.
has defined “significant non-compliance” as violations that meet one or more of
the following criteria:
      (1)   “Significant non-compliance.” Per 1200-4-14-.08(6)(b)8:
         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for each
parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limit;
         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). TRC calculations for pH
are not required;
         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
(daily maximum or longer-term average, instantaneous limit or narrative
standard) that the WWF determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the
health of WWF personnel or the general public);
         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
the WWF’s exercise of its emergency authority under §
51.29(A)(2)(a)4., Emergency Order, to halt or prevent such a discharge;
         (e)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
         (f)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after their due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
         (g)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance;
         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the WWF determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program; and
         (i)   Continuously monitored pH violations that exceed limits for a
time period greater than 50 minutes or exceed limits by more than 0.5 s.u. more
than eight times in four hours.
      (2)   Generally, an isolated instance of non-compliance or a Category 0
violation can be met with an informal response or non-compliance notification
(NCN). Any Category 1 to Category 4 violations should be responded to with an
enforceable order that requires a return to compliance by a specific deadline.
   (C)   Non-compliance notification (NCN).
      (1)   Generally issued by the inspector/field personnel, the non-
compliance notification (NCN) is an official communication from City Utilities
to the non-compliant user that deficiencies have been identified. Most NCNs
allow the non-compliant user a 30-day period to respond to the deficiencies.
Failure to respond to an NCN will result in the issuance of a notice of
violation.
      (2)   NCNs may be issued to food service establishments for the following
deficiencies:
         (a)   Grease interceptor effluent (outlet) T not acceptable;
         (b)   Grease interceptor effluent (outlet) T not visible or accessible
for inspection;
         (c)   Grease interceptor mid-wall baffle or side walls indicates
deterioration of concrete;
         (d)   Grease interceptor FOG and food solids layer are greater than
25% of the capacity of the interceptor tank, or interceptor was not pumped
within last 90 days;
         (e)   FOG evident in downstream sewer line from this facility;
         (f)   Facility has no grease control equipment installed;
         (g)   No records of interceptor or trap maintenance available at the
facility;
         (h)   Sewer cleanout covers missing or damaged, allowing rainfall
inflow to sanitary sewer; and
         (i)   FOG on ground, around recycle bin or dumpster, causing storm
water impact.
   (D)   Notice of violation (NOV). Generally issued by the inspector/field
personnel, the notice of violation (NOV) is an official communication from the
Department to the non-compliant user that informs the user that the
pretreatment violation has occurred. The NOV is issued for relatively minor or
infrequent violations of pretreatment standards and requirements and should be
issued within five working days of the identification of a violation. A NOV
does not contain assessment of penalties or cost recovery. The NOV provides the
user with an opportunity to correct the non-compliance on its own initiative
rather than according to a schedule of actions determined by the Department.
The NOV documents the initial attempts of the Department to resolve the non-
compliance. Authenticated copies of NOVs may serve as evidence in judicial
proceedings.
   (E)   Schedule of compliance. A schedule of compliance is a detailed list of
the steps to be taken by a non-compliant industry whereby compliance with all
pretreatment regulations will be achieved. This schedule shall contain
increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion
of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, executing
contracts for components, commencing construction and the like).
   (F)   Administrative penalties. An administrative penalty is a monetary
penalty assessed by the Department for violations of pretreatment standards and
requirements. Administrative penalties are to be used as an escalated
enforcement action and are punitive in nature and are not related to a specific
cost born by the Department. Instead, the amount of the penalty should
recapture any economic benefit gained by non-compliance and/or deter future
violations. An administrative order is to be used to assess an administrative
penalty.
   (G)   Administrative orders. Administrative orders (AO) are to be issued by
the Industrial Waste Coordinator, or the Director. Administrative orders are
enforcement documents that direct users to undertake and/or to cease specified
activities. Administrative orders are to be used as the first formal response
to significant non-compliance, and may incorporate compliance schedules,
administrative penalties, assessments for costs incurred during investigation
and/or enforcement, attorneys’ fees, assessments for damages and termination of
service. The Department has adopted four general types of AOs: compliance
orders, show cause orders, cease and desist orders and agreed orders.
      (1)   Compliance order. A compliance order directs the user to achieve or
restore compliance by a specified date and is the primary means of assessing
penalties and costs. The compliance order will document the non-compliance and
state required actions to be accomplished by specific dates and is issued by
the Director.
      (2)   Show cause order. An order to show cause directs the user to appear
before the Department, explain its non-compliance, and show cause why more
severe enforcement action should not be pursued. The hearing is open to the
public and may be formal (i.e., conducted according to the rules of evidence,
with verbatim transcripts and cross-examination of witnesses) or informal. The
results of all hearings, along with any data and testimony (recorded by tape
machine or stenographer) submitted as evidence, are available to the public and
may serve as evidentiary support for future enforcement actions.
      (3)   Cease and desist order. A cease and desist order directs a non-
compliant user to cease illegal or unauthorized discharge immediately or to
terminate discharge altogether. To preserve the usefulness of this order in
emergency situations, penalties should not be assessed in this document. A
cease and desist order will be used in situations where the discharge is
causing interference, pass through, environmental harm, or otherwise creating
an emergency situation. The order may be issued immediately upon discovery of
an emergency situation or following a hearing. In an emergency, the order to
cease and desist may be given by telephone with a subsequent written order to
be served by the Department before the close of business on the next working
day. If the user fails to comply with the order, the Department may take
independent action to halt the discharge.
      (4)   Agreed order.
         (a)   The agreed order is an agreement between the Department and the
user.
         (b)   The agreed order normally contains three elements:
            1.   Compliance schedules with specific milestone dates;
            2.   Stipulated penalties, damages and/or remedial actions; and
            3.   Signature by the Director and the user representative.
         (c)   An agreed order is appropriate when the user assumes the
responsibility for its non- compliance and is willing (in good faith) to
correct the causes.
   (H)   Penalty assessment.
      (1)   Determining a penalty amount that reflects the violation’s
significance is extremely important. If the penalty is too small, its deterrent
value is lost and the user may regard the amount as a tax or nominal charge to
pollute. If the penalty is too great, it could bankrupt the industry (making
necessary investment in pretreatment equipment impossible or potentially
forcing unnecessary closure). The Department has categorized the various types
of violations, and assigned a penalty range to each category. Penalty
categories are determined by using the Enforcement Response Table (
Appendix A). All penalty assessments will be approved and signed by the
Director or his or her designee. Penalty amounts are considered to be an
economic deterrent to the illegal activity. Penalty ranges have been designed
to recover any economic benefit gained by the violator through non-compliance.
      (2)   Assessments for damages or destruction of the facilities of the
POTW, and any penalties, costs, and attorneys’ fees incurred by the
pretreatment agency as the result of the illegal activity, as well as the
expenses involved in enforcement, are not part of this penalty assessment
procedure.
   (I)   Abbreviations.
 
AO               Administrative order
Etowah Utilities EUB
FOG              Fats, oils and grease
FSE              Food service establishment
GCE              Grease control equipment
NCN              Non-compliance notification
NOV              Notice of violation
POTW             Publicly owned treatment works
SC               Show cause
SPS              Sewerage pumping station
WWTP             Wastewater treatment plant
 
   (J)   City Utilities Board Food Service Establishment Enforcement Response
Guide; incident.
      (1)   Failure to install grease control equipment;
      (2)   Grease interceptor structural failure (baffle wall collapsed, walls
deteriorated, tank leaking, infiltration/inflow in tank);
      (3)   Failure to install proper effluent (outlet T); or
      (4)   No access to effluent (outlet T) to determine compliance.
 
    Incident                               Action Taken
    Initial notification - non-compliance  Issue NCN- 30 day deadline for
(a) notification of problem, with response response
    due date
    Second notification - failure to
(b) comply with NCN. Issue NOV and 15      Issue NOV - 15 day deadline
    additional days to comply
(c) Third notification - issue $500 AO and Issue AO $500
    30 additional days Issue AO to comply
(d) Fourth notification - failure to       Cutoff water supply
    comply with AO
 
      (5)   Facility contributing FOG to downstream manhole, SPS, or WWTP.
Classify degree of impact for appropriate response:
 
    Impact                                Action Taken
    Slight FOG impact (slight coating of
(a) FOG in POTW less than 1/4 in.         Issue NCN- 30 days for response
    coverage - 1/2 of pipe)
    Moderate FOG impact (moderate coating NOV - 30 day deadline reimburse
(b) FOG in POTW less than 1/2 in.         cleaning costs to city, require
    coverage - 1/2 of pipe)               interceptor mid-wall sweep
    Heavy FOG impact (heavy coating FOG   Reimburse cleaning costs to city and
(c) in POTW, causing obstruction and/or   AO $1,000 require interceptor mid-
    interference in sewer line)           wall sweep
(d) Fourth notification - Failure to      Cutoff water supply
    comply with AO
 
      (6)   Grease control equipment not maintained (pumped or cleaned)
*Interceptor has > 25% FOG and solids, or > 90 days *Trap cleaned > monthly.
 
    Impact                             Action Taken
(a) 1 incident within 24-month period  NCN - 30 days
(b) 2 incidents within 24-month period NOV - 15 days
(c) 3 incidents within 24-month period NOV - $250
(d) 4 incidents within 24-month period Cutoff water supply until FSE pumps GCE
                                       + $500
 
      (7)   No records of grease control equipment maintenance or cleaning at
facility.
 
    Impact                              Action Taken
(a) 1 incident within 24-month period   NCN - 30 days
(b) 2 incidents within 24-month period  NOV - 15 days
(c) 3 incidents within 24-month period  NOV - $100
(d) 4 incidents within 24-month period. Cutoff water supply + $500
 
      (8)   Failure to allow access for inspectors to adequately show cause:
inspect tank.
      (9)   Safety hazard at grease control equipment area (i.e., missing
manhole cover, manhole cover damaged or not made of material of suitable
strength): notify Health Department/Codes and issue NCN.
      (10)   Facility in violation of numerical FOG limit
 
    Limit Violation                                          Action Taken
(a) FOG concentration in excess of limit but less than 2x of NOV - $100
    limit
(b) FOG concentration between 2x to 4x of limit              NOV - $250
(c) FOG concentration in excess of 4 x limit                 NOV - $300—$500
 
      (11)   Facility using additives or chemicals that emulsify or otherwise
cause FOG to be discharged to the city sewer system; show cause.
      (12)   Failure of new facility, or an existing facility that upgrades
their facility, to notify EUB, or submit information: issue NOV and require
GCE.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
§ 51.35  VALIDITY.
   This chapter and its provisions shall be valid for all service areas,
regions and sewage works under the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
APPENDIX A:  ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE GUIDE TABLE
 
Non-Compliance Nature of Violation Category Enforcement Response Personnel
Unauthorized Discharge (no permit)
                  Initial,                            Phone call or
Failure to return requirements not  1                 visit to explain  PC
industrial user   understood                          or assist
survey            Persistent after                    AO and fine or
                  assistance        4                 termination of    PC, LAO
                                                      service
                  IU unaware of                       Phone call and/or
                  requirements; no  1                 NOV with          PC
                  harm to POTW or                     application
                  environment
                  IU unaware of                       AO and fine or
Unpermitted       requirement; harm 4                 termination of    LAO
discharge         to POTW or                          service
                  environment
                  Failure to apply                    Civil action in
                  continues after                     Chancery Court
                  notification by   5                 and/or criminal   LAO
                  PC                                  investigation and
                                                      or termination
                  IU has not
Failure to renew  submitted
permit            application       1                 Phone call, NOV   PC
                  within 10 days of
                  due date
Discharge Permit Violations
                  Isolated, < or =  1                 Phone call and/or PC
                  1/month (no harm)                   NOV
                  Isolated, > or =  2                 NOV and/or AO     PC, LAO
                  1/month (no harm)
                  Isolated, harmful                   Show cause
                  to POTW or        3                 hearing and/or AO PC LAO
                  environment                         and fine, and/or
Exceeding of                                          legal action
local, state or   Chronic or TRC,   1                 NOV and public    PC
federal standards no harm                             notice
                  Chronic or TRC,   2, 2nd 3, 3rd 4,  Public notice,
                  no harm           4th               with/without AO   PC, LAO
                                                      and fine
                                                      AO and fine, and/
                  Chronic or TRC,                     or legal action,
                  harm to POTW or   4                 and/or            LAO
                  environment                         termination of
                                                      service
Monitoring and Reporting Violations
                  Report improperly                   Phone call and/or
                  signed or         1                 NOV               PC
Reporting         certified
violation         Report improperly
                  signed or         2                 Show cause        PC
                  certified after                     hearing and/or AO LAO
                  prior notice
                  Isolated (< 20%/                    Phone call and/or
                  6mo. > 5 days     1                 NOV               PC
                  late)
                  Significant (>                      AO to submit and
                  20%/6 mo.>5 days  2                 fine for each     LAO
                  late)                               additional day
                                                      late
                  Reports always
                  late: failure to                    AO and fine and/
                  submit (> 75% of                    or civil action
                  reports > 5 days  5                 or Chancery Court LAO
                  late) within 12-                    or termination of
                  month reporting                     service
                  period
                  Failure to report
                  spill or          1                 NOV               PC
                  discharge change,
                  no harm
                  Failure to report
                  spill or          3                 AO and fine and/  LAO
                  discharge change                    or civil action
                  with harm
                  Repeated failure
                  to report spills                    AO and fine and/
                  > 2 failures/12   5                 or civil action   LAO
                  mo. reporting                       or termination
                  periods
                  Falsification of                    Criminal
                  records           5                 investigation or  LAO
                                                      termination
                                    1                 NOV 1/12-mo.
                  Failure to                          reporting period
                  monitor all       Recurring failure                   PC
Failure to        permit required   to monitor > 4    3                 LAO
monitor correctly pollutants        failures/24-month
                                    reporting period
                  AO and fine and/  LAO
                  or civil action
                  No evidence of    1                 NOV               PC
                  intent
Improper sampling Evidence of                         NOV and AO
                  intent, tampering 3, 1st 5,         Criminal          PC, LAO
                  with sampler      repeated          investigation or
                                                      termination
                  Delay of less     1                 NOV               PC
                  than 30 days
                                                      AO to install
Failure to        Delay of more     2                 with fine for     LAO
install           than 30 days                        each additional
monitoring                                            day
equipment                                             Civil action or
                  Recurring,                          criminal
                  violation of AO   5                 investigation or  LAO
                                                      termination of
                                                      service
                  Missed milestone,
Compliance        less than 30
schedule          days, will not    1                 NOV               PC
                  affect final
                  schedule
                  Missed milestone
                  more than 30
                  days, will affect 2                 AO                LAO
                  final schedule
                  (good cause)
                  Missed milestone,
                  more than 30                        AO and fine civil
                  days, will affect 4                 action or         LAO
                  final schedule                      termination
                  (no good cause)
                                                      Civil action and/
                  Recurring                           or criminal
                  violations or     5                 investigation     LAO
                  violations of AO                    and/or
                                                      termination of
                                                      service
Other Permit Violations
Waste stream      Initial violation 2                 AO and fine       LAO
dilution in lieu                                      Show cause
of pretreatment   Recurring         3                 hearing           LAO
                                                      termination
Failure to        Does not cause    1                 NOV               PC
mitigate non-     harm
compliance or     Does cause harm   5                 AO and fine or    LAO
halt production                                       civil action
Discharging
following a
terminated permit
due to            Initial violation 5                 Maximum penalties LAO
enforcement
action that
terminated
service
                  Initial violation 1                 Phone call or     PC
                                                      visit
Failure to                                            2nd NOV, 3rd AO
resample          Repeated failure                    and fine
following         after notice by   2nd #l, 3rd #2,   4th AO and fine   PC, LAO
violation         PC                4th #3            and/or
                                                      termination of
                                                      service
Failure to        Does not cause    1                 NOV               PC
properly operate  harm
and maintain      Does cause harm,  4                 AO and fine or    LAO
facility          or reoccurring                      civil action
Violations Detected During Site Visit
                  Entry denied or
Entry denial      consent           2                 Obtain warrant    PC
                  withdrawn; copies                   and return to IU
                  of records denied
                  No harm tp POTW   2                 AO and fine       LAO
Illegal           or environment
discharge,        Caused harm or                      AO and fine and/
violation of      evidence of       4                 or civil action   LAO
general discharge intent or                           and or criminal
prohibitions      negligence                          investigation
                  Recurring         5                 Terminate service LAO
                  violation of AO
                  Unintentional
                  sampling at       1                 NOV               PC
                  incorrect
                  location
Improper sampling Unintentional
                  using incorrect   1                 NOV               PC
                  sample type
                  Unintentional
                  using incorrect   1                 NOV               PC
                  techniques
                  Files incomplete
Inadequate record or missing (no    1                 NOV               PC
keeping           evidence of
                  intent)
                  Recurring         3                 AO and fine       LAO
                  Inspection finds
Failure to report additional files  2                 NOV               LAO
additional        (unintentional)
monitoring        Recurring
                  (considered       4                 AO and fine       LAO
                  falsification)
 
(Ord. 699, passed 10-26-2009)
CHAPTER 52:  WATER
 
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Scope
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   Standard service
   
52.04   Fire protection service
   
52.05   Non-standard service
   
52.06   Water sprinkler service
   
52.07   Obtaining service
   
52.08   Application and contract for service
   
52.09   Deposits
   
52.10   Service charges for temporary service
Meters
   
52.25   Meters
   
52.26   Additional load
   
52.27   Meter tests
   
52.28   Meter locations
   
52.29   Multiple service through a single meter; residential
   
52.30   Multiple service through a single meter; commercial and industrial
Regulations and Billing
   
52.45   Bills for water service
   
52.46   Discontinuance of service; refusal to connect service
   
52.47   Reconnection charge
   
52.48   Termination of service by customer
   
52.49   Liability for cut-off failure
   
52.50   Water turned on by customer
   
52.51   Damage to property due to water pressure
   
52.52   Interruption of service
   
52.53   Restricted use of water
   
52.54   Schedule of rates and charges
   
52.55   Tapping main and making service connections
   
52.56   Point of delivery
   
52.57   Multiple delivery points
   
52.58   Main extensions
   
52.59   Customer’s piping and fixtures; standards
   
52.60   Rights of access
   
52.61   Inspections
   
52.62   Notice of trouble
   
52.63   Customer’s responsibility for Board’s property
   
52.64   Customer’s responsibility for violation of rules and regulations
   
52.65   Customer’s not to supply water to others
   
52.66   Cross-connections
   
52.67   Conflict
   
52.68   Revisions
   
52.69   Filing the posting
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01  SCOPE.
   These rules and regulations are a part of all contracts for receiving water
service from the Water Department of the Utilities Department and shall apply
whether the service is based upon contract, agreement, signed application or
otherwise.
(1994 Code, § 18-201)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCOUNTS, INSIDE-CITY LIMITS AND OUTSIDE-CITY LIMITS. Rate schedules and
rules and regulations of the Department of water are affected by such location.
The rate schedule attachments No. 1 and 1A and 1B, attached to the ordinance
codified herein, or rate schedules which might later supersede this schedule,
shall apply to those accounts where service connections made within the
corporate limits supply water to premises lying wholly within the corporate
limits or on which assessments are made by the city for tax purposes. However,
in those cases in which water is furnished at the present time or in the future
to any water faucet or other outlet lying outside the corporate limits of the
city or lying outside the boundaries of any tracts on which the city makes
assessments for taxation purposes the water furnished in such cases shall be
paid for at rates on attachment No. 1, 1A and 1B.
   BOARD. The Public Utilities Board of the city, including the Chairperson and
all members, but does not include any employees of the City Utilities
Department.
   CUSTOMER. Any person who applies for water service or who receives water
service from the Department under either an expressed or implied contract
requiring such person to pay the Department for such service; and shall include
any person upon whose property there is located a customer-owned water service
line even though such service line is not in active use.
   CUSTOMER’S SERVICE LINE or SERVICE LINE. The water line extending from the
service connection to and within the improvements on such property.
   DAY. Whenever used with reference to a period for which water used is
measured, shall mean a period of 24 consecutive hours, beginning as near as
practical to 8:00 a.m., Eastern Standard Time, and the date of any such day
shall be the date of the calendar day on which said 24-hour period begins.
   DEPARTMENT. The Utilities Department of the city, Department of Water, and
its duly authorized employees, agents and representatives.
   DISCOUNT DATE. The date which appears on the bill, except when some other
date is expressly required by these rules and regulations or rate schedules, or
by any agreement approved by the Board. The DISCOUNT DATE is the last date on
which bills can be paid at the net rates.
   DWELLING. Any single structure, with auxiliary buildings, occupied by one or
more persons or households for residential purposes.
   FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE CHARGES. The term applied to charges made for fire
protection provided by fire hydrants owned and maintained on unmetered lines by
the Department for the use of the city, firms, corporations or individuals.
   HOUSEHOLD. Any one or more persons, living together as a family group.
   MAIN. The water lines of the Department of all sizes, with service
connection excluded, laid in or on the public streets or highways or on
easements acquired by the Department for the installations of the Department’s
water lines on private property.
   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations, as well as individuals.
   PREMISES. Any structure or group of structures operated as a single business
or enterprise; provided, however, the term PREMISES shall not include more than
one dwelling.
   REGULAR BILLING PERIOD or the BILLING PERIOD. Any designated calendar month
means the billing period, the revenues from which are included in monthly
statements of the Department for the calendar month in question.
   RULES AND REGULATIONS. Includes addenda, attachments, supplements and
interpretations adopted from time to time by the Board.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The tap of the main and that portion of the line
extending from the tap of the main to and including the meter and meter
installation, in those installations where the meter is set at or near the
property line on the street, highway or right-of-way on which the main is
located. For meters located elsewhere on private property, the SERVICE
CONNECTION is considered to extend only from the tap of the main to the
property line, plus the meter and meter installation.
   SERVICE PIPE. Synonymous in meaning with the term SERVICE CONNECTION.
   TAPPING FEE. Any charges made by the Department to users or prospective
users for the tap of the main and the installation of the service connection,
including the meter, meter installation and the meter box. Any TAPPING FEE so
collected is a contribution in aid of construction and the customer acquires no
legal title to, nor equity in the facilities installed by reason of the payment
therefor.
(1994 Code, § 18-202)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.03  STANDARD SERVICE.
   Water pressure shall be such as determined by the physical properties of the
Department's distribution and storage facilities and no maximum pressure can be
guaranteed. In situations where the pressure at the meter exceeds the
customer's needs a pressure reducer may be installed by the customer. The cost
of this pressure reducer and the repair or replacement of the device is at the
customer's expense not the Department. The Department will supply a minimum
pressure of 20 pounds per square inch at the meter. If the customer needs
additional pressure it is their responsibility to add their own pump to
increase the pressure. The Department may require a reduce pressure backflow
preventer device be added prior to the water service being activated. The
pressure reducer/back flow preventer device is at the expense of the customer.
(1994 Code, § 18-203)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987;
Ord. 784, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 52.04  FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE.
   (A)   Public.
      (1)   Fire hydrant installations for the city. The Department will
install and maintain public fire hydrants for fire protection within the
corporate limits of the city. The number and location of fire hydrants to be
provided on new mains shall be determined by the Department in accordance with
general policies of the City Commission. The City Commission may, of course,
direct the Department to provide additional hydrants or otherwise upgrade the
water system with regard to its fire flow capability.
      (2)   Charges. Charges for public fire protection service shall be those
charges set forth in the current contract between the Public Utilities Board of
the city and the City Commissioners.
      (3)   Water taken from fire hydrants for purposes other than
firefighting.
         (a)   No person shall take water from a fire hydrant for purposes
other than firefighting, except for municipal employees authorized to do so and
such other persons as may hold a current permit for this purpose duly issued by
the Water Department. The permit must designate the hydrants to be used and the
period of time for which the permit is valid.
         (b)   When water is taken from fire hydrants for any purpose other
than firefighting, such as sprinkling of streets, construction purposes or
other temporary uses, the hydrant from which the water is so taken must have a
reducing appliance attached to the nozzle of the fire hydrant with an
independent valve capable of regulating the supply. The main valve of the fire
hydrant must be fully opened it the beginning of each work day and remain open
until the close of work at night.
         (c)   The supply is to be regulated by independent valves. Fire
hydrants shall be operated only by a wrench of the type which must be approved
by the Department. When taking water from a fire hydrant for any purpose other
than firefighting, no wastage will be tolerated.
      (4)   Fire hydrant installations outside the city. The Utilities
Department may permit the installation of public fire hydrants outside the
corporate limits of the city where a contract may be executed with a suitable
agency, body or individual to ensure payment of the annual charges for
operation and maintenance. Any such hydrants shall be installed in accordance
with the requirements of the Utilities Department and shall be deeded to the
Department in an instrument. The Department may install hydrants outside the
city with an installation cost share basis with the county. Private parties
that install hydrants must pay the monthly unmetered fire line service charge
based on the water line providing water to the hydrant. If the Department
determines the private party is not maintaining the hydrant properly and water
is leaking, the Department has the option to turn off water service to the
service after due notice to the private party.
   (B)   Private.
      (1)   Private fire hydrants and fire lines. Private fire hydrants and
fire lines will be installed at the expense of the customer and the
construction will be made in accordance with specifications of the Department.
Such facilities shall be owned and maintained by the customers and the charges
for service shall be in accordance with published rates or, in the absence
thereof, shall be subject to negotiation, but in no case shall they be less
than the charges for similar public installations.
      (2)   Charges for sprinkler systems.
         (a)   Facilities installed for providing water for automatic sprinkler
systems for fire protection shall be owned and maintained by the customer and
charges for water service to such installations shall be in keeping with
charges outlined in the schedule of rates and charges.
         (b)   Multiple connections for sprinkler service to one structure in
service at the time of the effective date of these rules and regulations shall,
for billing purposes only, be considered a single connection.
      (3)   Limited use of unmetered private fire lines.
         (a)   Where private fire lines are not metered no water will be used
from such lines or from any fire hydrant thereon, except to fight fire or while
being inspected in the presence of an authorized agent of the Department.
         (b)   All private fire hydrants shall be sealed by the Department and
shall be inspected at regular intervals to see that they are in proper
condition and no water shall be used therefrom in violation of the Department’s
rules and regulations. When a seal is broken on account of fire or for any
other reason, the customer taking such service shall give the Department
written notice of such occurrence as soon as possible.
         (c)   No customer furnished service by an unmetered service connection
shall use any device requiring or allowing the continuous flow or water unless
such use has been approved in writing by the Department.
(1994 Code, § 18-204)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987;
Ord. 784, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 52.05  NON-STANDARD SERVICE.
   (A)   In areas of low pressure where the reason for low pressure is known to
be the elevation of the customer’s present or proposed service connection in
relation to the elevation of the water storage facilities, special contracts
with applicants for service in these areas will be obtained.
   (B)   Customers living in sections of the city and surrounding areas as
described above must provide or maintain, at their expense, any equipment
necessary to provide standards of water service desired.
(1994 Code, § 18-205)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.06  WATER SPRINKLER SERVICE.
   Any residence with water and sewer service may be allowed to purchase meters
to be installed by the Utilities Department to measure water usage on the
outside of the residence with no minimum water billing for the additional
meter.
(1994 Code, § 18-206)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.07  OBTAINING SERVICE.
   A written application for either initial or additional water service must be
made at the office of the Department or with a duly appointed employee of the
Department and must be duly approved by the Department before service
connection or meter installation job orders will be issued and work performed.
(1994 Code, § 18-207)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.08  APPLICATION AND CONTRACT FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Each prospective customer desiring water service will be required to
sign the Department’s standard form of contract before service is supplied and
shall pay a tapping fee as required in Attachment No. 2.
   (B)   Customers requiring the installation of special equipment by the
Department may be required to sign a form of contract guaranteeing a minimum
charge for such period of time as may be agreed upon between the Department and
the customer.
   (C)   If, for any reason, the applicant, after signing contract for water
service, does not take the service by reason of not occupying premises or
otherwise, he or she shall reimburse the Department for the expense incurred by
reason of its efforts to furnish such service.
   (D)   The receipt by the Department of a prospective customer’s application
for service, regardless of whether or not accompanied by tap fee and deposit,
shall not obligate the Department to render the service applied for. If the
service applied for cannot be supplied in accordance with the Department’s
rules, regulations and general practices, the liability of the Department to
the applicant for such service shall be limited to the return of any tap fee
and deposit made with, or payment of charges to, the Department by such
applicant.
   (E)   Whenever an application is made for service to premises concerning
which the Department knows there is a dispute as to the ownership or the right
of occupancy, and one or more of the claimants attempts to prevent such service
from being furnished, the Department reserves the right to adopt either one of
the following two alternatives:
      (1)   To treat the applicant in actual possession of the premises to be
served as being entitled to such service, irrespective of the rights or claims
of other persons; or
      (2)   To withhold service, pending a judicial or other settlement of the
rights of the various claimants.
(1994 Code, § 18-208)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.09  DEPOSITS.
   (A)   The customer, when called upon by the Department, shall deposit with
it such reasonable sums of money as may be required by the Department as
continuing security for the performance of the obligations contracted by the
customer, and failure to make such deposit upon demand of the Department will
give the Department the right to declare the contract forfeited and to refuse
or to discontinue service.
   (B)   Upon termination of the service, the deposit may be applied by the
Department against any obligations of the customer to the Department,
regardless of whether such obligations arose in connection with water service
or otherwise. Any part of the deposit which is not applied will be refunded to
the customer.
   (C)   No deposit shall be transferable or assignable by the customer.
   (D)   The Department may, at its option, return deposits to customers.
   (E)   Deposits shall not be applied in payment of current monthly bills for
water service and such deposits shall in no way affect the Department’s rights
arising from non-payment of bills provided for in these rules and regulations.
(1994 Code, § 18-209)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.10  SERVICE CHARGES FOR TEMPORARY SERVICE.
   (A)   Customers requiring temporary service may be required to pay all costs
as determined by the Department for connection and disconnection of facilities
incidental to the supplying of service in addition to the regular charge for
water used. This rule applies to circuses, carnivals, fairs, trailers,
temporary construction and other application requiring temporary service.
   (B)   The Department may issue permits for use of water for building or
construction purposes or for other temporary purposes; provided, the applicant
pays for tapping the main and installing the necessary facilities and complies
with all other requirements of the Department.
(1994 Code, § 18-210)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
METERS
§ 52.25  METERS.
   (A)   All meters used for billing purposes by the Department shall be the
property of the Department as shall the meter installations and meter boxes in
which the Department’s meters are located, even though the customer may have
made a capital contribution as a condition of obtaining service.
   (B)   No one shall do anything which will in any way interfere with or
prevent the proper registration of a meter. No one shall work on a water meter
without the written permission of the Department. No one shall install any pipe
or other device which will cause water to pass through a meter or line without
such water being registered fully by the meter.
   (C)   Each customer will be supplied through a separate meter. In those
cases where a business under one ownership has a number of apartments,
businesses and/or offices under one roof, service may be provided through one
meter and for one account with the bill being computed in accordance with the
provisions of §§
52.29 or
52.30 of this chapter, or separate services and meters may be provided for each
individual tenant.
   (D)   Meters and meter installations must be accessible at all times and
must not be covered with rubbish and/or other material of any kind. No one
other than an authorized agent of the Department shall be permitted to repair,
adjust, remove or replace any meter or any part thereof.
   (E)   The customer shall be responsible for damage to the meter and meter
installation through which he or she is served if such damage is caused by
carelessness or negligence of the customer or his or her agent or employee or
any member of his or her family. Such customer shall be billed for actual costs
of repairs or replacements, and such bills shall be paid within ten days from
the date of mailing thereof. Failure to pay for damage to a meter or meter
installation as outlined above within a reasonable time may be taken as grounds
for discontinuing water service by the Department.
   (F)   The Department may discontinue furnishing water to any customer who
refuses permission for the Department to remove a meter from his or her
premises.
(1994 Code, § 18-211)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-
1987)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.26  ADDITIONAL LOAD.
   (A)   Meters and equipment supplied by the Department for each customer have
definite capacity and no major addition to the equipment or load connected
thereto shall be made, except with consent of the Department.
   (B)   Failure to give notice of additions or changes in load or to obtain
Department’s consent for same shall render the customer liable for any damage
to any of the Department’s lines or equipment caused by the additional or
changed installation.
(1994 Code, § 18-212)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.27  METER TESTS.
   (A)   The Department will, at its own expense, make periodical tests and
inspections of its meters in order to maintain high standards of accuracy.
   (B)   When a customer requests a meter test, the customer shall pay for such
tests if the tests show that the meter does register accurately. To be
considered accurate, the meter registration shall check within the percentage
shown in the below table. In case the test shows the meter to not register
accurately appropriate adjustments will be made by the Department over a period
of not over 60 days prior to date of such test, and cost of making the test
shall be borne by the Department.
   (C)   (1)   The charges to customers for meter tests under the section above
shall be those given below:
 
Meter Size Test Charge Percentage
5/8 inch meter           $10          2%
1 inch meter             $15          2%
1-1/2, 1-1/4 inch meters $20          2%
2 inch meter             $25          2%
3 inch meter             Cost of test 3%
4 inch meter             Cost of test 4%
6 inch meter             Cost of test 5%
 
      (2)   These charges do not apply to inspections of meters and meter
installations, the checking and verification of meter readings and the like
made at the customer’s request and carried out while the meters are being
maintained in normal service. The Department has the option to replace the
meter in question with a new or rebuilt meter in lieu of testing.
(1994 Code, § 18-213)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987;
Ord. 784, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 52.28  METER LOCATIONS.
   (A)   For new installations, the Department’s approval of meter locations
shall be obtained before any piping is installed. Meters shall be placed on or
adjacent to the property line of the premises to be served at the street in
which the main lies from which service is to be given. Insofar as is
practicable, such locations shall be chosen for the joint convenience of the
customer and the Department, but the Department reserves the right to specify
the location of the meter.
   (B)   Where more than one meter is to be installed at one premises, such
meters shall be grouped in one common place accessible at all times. Where more
than one meter for a new installation is to be installed so as to give each
consumer a separate meter, the charges to the applicant for service shall be
the smaller of the actual cost of the installation or the normal tapping charge
for each meter, whichever is smaller.
   (C)   Where meters are at present located on private property, it shall be
the policy of the Department to move the meters to locations on public
property, or at the property line, as speedily as practicable.
   (D)   The cost of relocating meters for the sole convenience of the customer
will be paid the Department by the customer.
(1994 Code, § 18-214)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.29  MULTIPLE SERVICE THROUGH A SINGLE METER; RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   No customer shall supply water service to more than one household or
dwelling from a single service line and meter, except when permitted for
housing projects, apartment buildings, trailer courts or other project under
one management.
   (B)   (1)   Where more than one household or dwelling is served through a
single service line and meter, the amount of water used by all the households
and dwellings shall be allocated to each separate household or dwelling served.
      (2)   The charge for each such household or dwelling thus served shall be
computed just as if each household or dwelling had received through a separate
metered service the amount of water so allocated to it, such computation to be
made in accordance with the applicable provisions of Attachment No. 1 hereto,
(including the provisions as to minimum bills) which shall be the latest
revision of schedule of rates and charges. The charges for all such units shall
be totaled and billed to the managing owner or agency which shall be
responsible for prompt payment thereof.
(1994 Code, § 18-215)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.30  MULTIPLE SERVICE THROUGH A SINGLE METER; COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   No customer shall supply water service to more than one premises from
a single service line and meter without first obtaining the written permission
of the Department.
   (B)   Where the Department allows more than one premises to be served
through a single service line and meter the amount of water used shall be
billed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Attachment No. 1 hereto,
which shall be the latest revision of schedule of rates and charges of the
Department of Water of the Utilities Department.
   (C)   The owner of the premises involved will then receive one bill for all
premises.
(1994 Code, § 18-216)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
REGULATIONS AND BILLING
§ 52.45  BILLS FOR WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Bills for water service must be paid on or before the discount date
shown thereon to obtain the net rate, otherwise, the gross rate shall apply.
Failure to receive a bill will not relieve the customer from payment of
obligation, nor extend the discount date.
   (B)   In the event bills are not paid by the discount date, the Department
may at any time thereafter, upon five days written notice to customer,
discontinue service and not again resume service until all bills are paid, and
the Department shall not be liable for the damages on account of discontinuance
of service any time after five days’ written notice, even though payment of
such bills is made on the same day either before or after the service is
actually discontinued.
   (C)   Should the date for the final payment of a bill at the net rate fall
on a Sunday or a holiday, the business day next following the final date will
be held as the last day to obtain the net rate. Net remittances received by
mail after the discount date will be accepted by the Department if the incoming
envelope bears the United States Post Office date stamp of the discount date or
any date prior thereto.
   (D)   No customer shall be entitled to pay any bill at the net rate while
delinquent in the payment of any obligation owed the Department.
   (E)   If a meter fails to register properly, or if the meter is removed to
be tested and repaired, or if water is received other than through a meter, the
Department reserves the right to render and collect an estimated ball based on
the best information available.
   (F)   The Department may at its option make provision to allow a customer to
pay for excessive water bills due to hidden leaks over an extended period of
time not to exceed six months after the General Manager's approval. HIDDEN
LEAKS are herein defined as those leaks which the customer could not reasonably
have been expected to find until a bill for excessive consumption indicated the
presence of such leaks. Leaks in interior plumbing, leaking or dripping
faucets, leaking or dripping yard hydrants, leaks in commodes or other loss
through failure of customer to provide cut-off, water lost due to frozen pipes
and water used to keep pipes from freezing are specifically sited as examples
of leaks which will not be termed as “hidden leaks” for the purpose of this
section. In the case of excessive water bills, the sewer bill may be adjusted
if the customer can prove to the Department's satisfaction, that the water from
the hidden leak did not enter the sewer system for treatment.
   (G)   No adjustment in billing shall be made where premises are vacated
without a notice to discontinue service having been given to the Department.
(1994 Code, § 18-217)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987;
Ord. 784, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 52.46  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; REFUSAL TO CONNECT SERVICE.
   (A)   The Department shall have the right to discontinue service or to
refuse to connect service for a violation of or failure to comply with any
provisions of these rules and regulations and the applicable schedule of rates
and charges. Such right to discontinue service shall apply to all service
rendered through a single meter, even though more than one consumer or tenant
is furnished therefrom, and even though a delinquency or violation is limited
to only one such consumer or tenant.
   (B)   Discontinuance of service by the Department for any cause stated in
these rules and regulations shall not release the customer from liability for
payment for service already received or from liability from payments that
thereafter become due under the minimum bill provisions or other provisions of
the customer’s contract.
   (C)   The Department shall have the right to refuse to render service to any
applicant whenever the applicant or any member of the household, company or
firm to which such service is to be furnished, is in default in the payment of
any obligations to the Department or has previously had his or her service
discontinued because of a violation of the rules and regulations of the Board.
   (D)   If the Department should, for any reason, begin to render service to
an applicant to whom the Department has a good and valid reason for refusing to
render such service, the Department shall have the right to discontinue such
service at any time within one year after such service has begun, even though
such customer does nothing to justify the discontinuance of service during the
time such service is being rendered.
(1994 Code, § 18-218)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.47  RECONNECTION CHARGE.
   (A)   The customer shall pay all costs for discontinuance of service for
temporary repairs, and for other purposes for the customers’s exclusive
benefit, outside of normal working hours.
   (B)   Whenever service has been discontinued as provided for above, or for
non-payment of bills, a reconnection charge of not less than $5 may be
collected by the Department before service is restored.
(1994 Code, § 18-219)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.48  TERMINATION OF SERVICE BY CUSTOMER.
   (A)   Under no circumstances will the continuance or discontinuance of water
service be used as a means of forcing an occupant of any premises to surrender
possession thereof.
   (B)   Where water service is being furnished to an occupant of premises
under a contract not in the occupant’s name, the Department reserves the right
to impose the following conditions on the right of the customer to discontinue
service under such a contract. Written notice of the customer’s desire for such
service to be discontinued may be required; and the Department shall have the
right to continue such service for a period not to exceed ten days after
receipt of such written notice, during which time the customer will be
responsible to the Department for all charges for such service. If the
Department should continue service after such ten-day period subsequent to the
receipt of the customer’s written notice to discontinue service, the customer
shall not be responsible to the Department for charges for any service
furnished after the expiration of such ten-day period.
(1994 Code, § 18-220)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.49  LIABILITY FOR CUT-OFF FAILURE.
   (A)   The Department’s liability shall be limited to the forfeiture of the
right to charge the customer for water that is not used, but is received from a
service connection under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   After receipt of at least ten days’ written notice to discontinue
the water service, the Department has failed to discontinue such service;
      (2)   The Department has attempted to discontinue service, but such
service has not been completely cut off; or
      (3)   The Department has completely cut off service, but subsequently the
cut-off develops a leak or is turned on again by representatives of the
Department so that water enters the customer’s pipes from the Department’s
mains.
   (B)   Except to the extent stated above, the Department shall not be liable
for any loss or damage resulting from cut-off failures. If a customer wishes to
avoid possible damage for cut-off failures, the customer shall rely exclusively
on privately owned cut-offs and not on the Department’s cut-offs. Also, the
customer (and not the Department) shall be responsible for seeing that his or
her plumbing is properly drained, after his or her plumbing is properly
drained, after his or her water service has been cut off.
(1994 Code, § 18-221)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.50  WATER TURNED ON BY CUSTOMER.
   If the Department discontinues water service for non-payment of bill, or for
any other reason, and the water is turned on without authority of the
Department, the Department shall have the right to discontinue service, remove
the meter and charge a fee of actual cost for reinstalling or reconnecting the
meter. The Department will not be required to again furnish service until all
charges against the customer or owner, as the case may be, have been fully
paid.
(1994 Code, § 18-222)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.51  DAMAGE TO PROPERTY DUE TO WATER PRESSURE.
   The Department shall not be liable for any damage to a customer’s plumbing
or property, which damage may be caused by high pressure or by low pressure, or
by fluctuations in pressure in the Department’s water mains.
(1994 Code, § 18-223)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.52  INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   The Department will use reasonable diligence in attempting to provide a
regular and uninterrupted supply of water, but in case the supply of water
should be interrupted, for any cause, the Department shall not be liable for
damages resulting therefrom.
(1994 Code, § 18-224)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.53  RESTRICTED USE OF WATER.
   In times of emergency or in times of water shortage, the Department reserves
the right to restrict the purposes for which water may be used by a customer
and the amount of water which the customer may use during such periods.
(1994 Code, § 18-225)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.54  SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES.
   It is necessary in the orderly operations of a water system that the
schedule of rates and charges be reviewed periodically to see that the charges
made are adequate and equitable and, for this reason, the schedule of rates and
charges of the Department of Water of the Utilities Department of the city are
carried as an addendum or attachment hereto designated as No. 1 and 1A and
references in the rules and regulations shall always refer to the latest or
current schedule of rates and charges.
(1994 Code, § 18-226)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.55  TAPPING MAIN AND MAKING SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Service connections will be laid by the Department from the water main
to the property line in keeping with the provisions of Attachment No. 3 hereto,
which shall be the latest revision of Extension Policies of the Department of
Water of the Public Utilities Board, City of Etowah, Tennessee. Such service
connections, including the meter installation, will befitted with all necessary
hardware and so installed as to be readily accessible at all times to the
agents of the Department. The location for such service connections will be in
accordance with §
52.28 of this chapter.
   (B)   When such service connections are completed, the Department shall have
ownership of and shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such
service connections from the main to and including the meter and meter
installation. The remaining portion, designated as the “service line” or
“customer’s service line”, beyond the meter and meter installation (even though
such remaining portion is not located within the customer’s property line)
shall belong to and be the responsibility of the customer.
   (C)   In all cases, the service line shall be installed by the customer at
the customer’s expense and shall be and remain the exclusive property of the
customer. The service line shall be of material approved by the Department and
shall be provided with a stop and waste cock. Water service to any customer may
be discontinued and water service to any applicant may be refused or declined
by the Department if the service line is not supplied with a stop and waste
cock. Notwithstanding anything else herein provided, the Department shall not
be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of any customer’s service line
located within the property line of the customer, even though the Department’s
meter and meter installation are located within said property line.
(1994 Code, § 18-227)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.56  POINT OF DELIVERY.
   (A)   Except as may be otherwise provided by written agreement between the
Department and the customer, the point of delivery shall be at the property
line on the customer side of the meter. All piping and equipment between this
point and the use of water shall be the property of and be maintained by the
customer.
   (B)   The Department shall not be liable for injury to person or property on
account of any defect or negligence in the installation, maintenance or use of
any piping or equipment beyond the point of delivery.
(1994 Code, § 18-228)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.57  MULTIPLE DELIVERY POINTS.
   (A)   The schedule of rates is based on the supply of water to the entire
premises for a single service line and meter location, separate supply for the
same customer at other points of consumption shall be separately metered and
billed.
   (B)   In case of separate metering points and metering installations, use of
water through each of the separate meters shall be billed in accordance with
rates applicable thereto.
(1994 Code, § 18-229)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.58  MAIN EXTENSIONS.
   Extensions of the Department’s water distribution system shall be made in
accordance with the applicable provisions of Attachment No. 3 hereto, which
shall be the latest revision of Extension Policies of the Department of Water
of the Utilities Department, City of Etowah, Tennessee.
(1994 Code, § 18-230)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.59  CUSTOMER’S PIPING AND FIXTURES; STANDARDS.
   (A)   All water piping beyond the meter shall be installed and maintained at
the expense of the customer. In the case of new installation, if within the
corporate limits of the city, all such piping fixtures shall be installed in
accordance with the applicable requirements and specifications of the latest
edition of the Standard Building Code as approved by the ordinances of the
city.
   (B)   By furnishing service to a customer, the Department assumes no
responsibility for seeing that the customer’s piping and/or plumbing fixtures
comply with the requirements set forth herein.
(1994 Code, § 18-231)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.60  RIGHTS OF ACCESS.
   The Department’s properly identified employees and agents shall have access
to customer’s premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of reading
meters, testing, repairing, removing or changing any or all equipment belonging
to the Department.
(1994 Code, § 18-232)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.61  INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Department shall have the right, but shall not be obligated, to
inspect any installation before water is introduced at a later time. The
Department reserves the right to refuse service or discontinue service to any
piping or plumbing installations not in accordance with the ordinances of the
city, or which are not in accordance with special contracts, or these rules and
regulations, or other requirements of the Department; but any failure to
exercise this right shall not render the Department liable or responsible for
any of the piping or plumbing fixtures or from violations of the latest edition
of the Standard Building Code, city ordinances, or the provisions of any
special contract or from accidents which may occur on the customer’s premises.
   (B)   The Department shall not be obligated to connect to, or render water
service to new buildings or to buildings or premises not now approved for water
service until such time as a certificate of approval has been tendered by the
city inspector charged with the duty of issuing such a certificate if the
premises are located within the corporate limits.
(1994 Code, § 18-233)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.62  NOTICE OF TROUBLE.
   The customer shall notify the Department immediately should the water
service be unsatisfactory for any reason, or should there be any defects,
trouble or accidents affecting the supply of water. Such notices, if verbal,
should be confirmed in writing.
(1994 Code, § 18-234)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.63  CUSTOMER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR BOARD’S PROPERTY.
   All meters, service connections and other equipment furnished and maintained
by the Department shall be, and remain, the property of the Department.
Customers shall exercise proper care to protect the property of the Department
on the customer’s premises and in the event of loss or damage to Department’s
property, arising from the failure of customer to take proper care of the same,
the cost of necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the customer.
(1994 Code, § 18-235)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.64  CUSTOMER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Where the Department furnishes water service to a customer, such
customer shall be responsible to the Department for all violations of the rules
and regulations and rate schedules of the Department, which violations occur on
the premises served or in connection with such service.
   (B)   Personal participation by the customer in such violation shall not be
necessary to impose such personal responsibility on the customer.
(1994 Code, § 18-236)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.65  CUSTOMER'S NOT TO SUPPLY WATER TO OTHERS.
   (A)   All purchased water used on the premises of the customer shall be
supplied by the Department and the customer shall not directly or indirectly
sell, sublet, assign or otherwise dispose of the water so purchased.
   (B)   Customers shall not supply water, not allow water to be carried or run
through a hose or pipe or otherwise, to any premises other than that described
in the application, agreement or contract, without first having received
written permission from the Department.
(1994 Code, § 18-237)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.66  CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No cross-connections of any kind shall be permitted between the water
supply from the Department’s mains and the water supply from any other sources.
   (B)   A CROSS-CONNECTION is defined as any physical connection whereby the
Department’s water supply is connected with any other water system, whether
public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in
such a manner that a flow of water into the Department’s water supply is
possible, either through a manipulation of valves or because of any defective
check or back pressure valves, or by any other arrangement.
   (C)   The Department is required by law to disconnect water service to
existing customers where there is concern that a cross-connection exists that
could lead to contamination of the water supply with pollutants. The existing
residential, commercial, agricultural or industrial customer may be notified,
if contamination has not occurred, and given up to 30 days notice to correct
the problem at the Department's discretion. The Department reserves the right
to deny service to new residential, commercial, agricultural or other
industrial customer until proper back flow prevention devices have been
installed to protect the integrity of the water supply.
(1994 Code, § 18-238)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987;
Ord. 784, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 52.67  CONFLICT.
   In case of conflict between any provisions of these rules and regulations
and the schedule of rates and charges, the provisions of the schedule of rates
and charges shall apply.
(1994 Code, § 18-239)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.68  REVISIONS.
   These rules and regulations may be revised, amended, supplemented or
otherwise changed from time to time. Such changes, when effective, shall have
the same force as the present rules and regulations.
(1994 Code, § 18-240)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 52.69  FILING THE POSTING.
   (A)   A copy of these rules and regulations, together with a copy of the
Department’s schedule of rates and charges, shall be kept open to inspection at
the offices of the Department.
   (B)   The rules and regulations contained in this chapter shall supersede
and replace existing rules and regulations for service rendered by the
Department of Water and for such purposes all existing rules and regulations
relating to services rendered by the Department of Water, are hereby repealed;
provided, however, the repeal thereof shall in no way affect any right or
contract made or any obligation assumed prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
(1994 Code, § 18-241)  (Ord. 421, passed 12-18-1986; Ord. 423, passed 3-5-1987)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING RULES
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Emergency Vehicles
   
70.01   “Authorized emergency vehicles” defined
   
70.02   Operation of authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.03   Following emergency vehicles
   
70.04   Running over fire hoses and the like
Enforcement
   
70.15   Issuance of traffic citations
   
70.16   Failure to obey citation
   
70.17   Illegal parking
   
70.18   Impoundment of vehicles
   
70.19   Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles
   
70.20   Deposit of operator’s or chauffeur’s license in lieu of bond
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
§ 70.01  “AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES” DEFINED.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES shall be Fire Department vehicles, police
vehicles and such ambulances and other emergency vehicles as are designated by
the Chief of Police.
(1994 Code, § 15-201)
§ 70.02  OPERATION OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, subject to the conditions
herein stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may park or stand,
irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code; proceed past a red or stop
signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down to ascertain that the
intersection is clear; exceed the maximum speed limit and disregard regulations
governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as
he or she does not endanger life or property.
   (C)   The exemptions herein granted for an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds an
audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle and when the vehicle is
equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle; except that, an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front
of the vehicle.
   (D)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1994 Code, § 15-202)
§ 70.03  FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   No driver of any vehicle shall follow any authorized emergency vehicle
apparently traveling in response to an emergency call closer than 500 feet or
drive or park any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in
answer to a fire alarm.
(1994 Code, § 15-203)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.04  RUNNING OVER FIRE HOSES AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to drive over any hose lines or
other equipment of the Fire Department, except in obedience to the direction of
a firefighter or police officer.
(1994 Code, § 15-204)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.15  ISSUANCE OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   When a police officer halts a traffic violator other than for the purpose of
giving a warning, and does not take such person into custody under arrest, he
or she shall take the name, address and operator’s license number of said
person, the license number of the motor vehicle involved and such other
pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall issue to him or her a
written traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge against
him or her in the City Court at a specified time. The officer, upon receiving
the written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the
citation, shall release such person from custody. It shall be a civil offense
for any alleged violator to give false or misleading information as to his or
her name or address.
(1994 Code, § 15-701)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 7-63-101 et seq.
§ 70.16  FAILURE TO OBEY CITATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his or her written
promise to appear in Court after giving said promise to an officer upon the
issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the charge for
which the citation was originally issued.
   (B)   For failure to obey citations, the offender may waive his or her right
to a judicial hearing and have the charges disposed out of court, but the fines
shall be as set from time to time by the City Commission.
(1994 Code, § 15-702)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.17  ILLEGAL PARKING.
   (A)   Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped
in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this traffic code, the
officer finding such vehicle shall take its license number and may take any
other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and
shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a citation for the driver and/or
owner to answer for the violation within ten days during the hours and at a
place specified in the citation.
   (B)   For parking violations, the offender may waive his or her right to a
judicial hearing and have the charges disposed out of court, but the fines
shall be $3 within ten days and $5 thereafter.
(1994 Code, § 15-703)
§ 70.18  IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized, when reasonably
necessary for the security of the vehicle or to prevent obstruction of traffic,
to remove from the streets and impound any vehicle whose operator is arrested
or any unattended vehicle which is parked so as to constitute an obstruction or
hazard to normal traffic. Any impounded vehicle shall be stored until the owner
or other person entitled thereto claims it, gives satisfactory evidence of
ownership or right to possession, and pays all applicable fees and costs, or
until it is otherwise lawfully disposed of. The fee for impounding a vehicle
shall be $5 and the storage costs shall be $1 for each 24-hour period or
fraction thereof that the vehicle is stored.
(1994 Code, § 15-704)
§ 70.19  DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Abandoned motor vehicles, as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-16-103, shall
be impounded and disposed of by the Police Department in accordance with the
provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 55-16-103 through 55-16-109.
(1994 Code, § 15-705)
§ 70.20  DEPOSIT OF OPERATOR’S OR CHAUFFEUR’S LICENSE IN LIEU OF BOND.
   (A)   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 55-50-801 through 55-50-805, whenever
any person lawfully possessed of a chauffeur’s or operator’s license
theretofore issued to him or her by the Department of Safety of the state, or
under the driver licensing laws of any other state or territory or the District
of Columbia, is issued a citation or arrested and charged with a violation of
any municipal ordinance regulating traffic, except those ordinances which call
for the mandatory revocation of an operator’s or chauffeur’s license for any
period of time, said person shall have the option of depositing his or her
chauffeur’s or operator’s license with the officer or court demanding bail in
lieu of any other security required for his or her appearance in the City Court
in answer to any such charge before said court.
   (B)   All city officers and employees shall comply fully with the
requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 55-50-801 through 55-50-805 and any
implementing orders of the Department of Safety of the state.
(1994 Code, § 15-706)  (Ord. 348, passed - -)
CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Speed limits
   
71.02   Turning movements
   
71.03   Motor vehicle requirements
   
71.04   Driving on streets closed for repairs and the like
   
71.05   One-way streets
   
71.06   Unlaned streets
   
71.07   Laned streets
   
71.08   Yellow lines
   
71.09   Miscellaneous traffic-control signs and the like
   
71.10   General requirements for traffic-control signs and the like
   
71.11   Unauthorized traffic-control signs and the like
   
71.12   Presumption with respect to traffic-control signs and the like
   
71.13   School safety patrols
   
71.14   Driving through funerals or other processions
   
71.15   Clinging to vehicles in motion
   
71.16   Riding on outside of vehicles
   
71.17   Backing vehicles
   
71.18   Projections from the rear of vehicles
   
71.19   Causing unnecessary noise
   
71.20   Passing
   
71.21   Damaging pavements
   
71.22   Bicycle riders and the like
   
71.23   Motorcycles, motor scooters and motorbikes
   
71.24   Operation of commercial trucks
   
71.25   Street crossing by pedestrians
   
71.26   Delivery of vehicle to unlicensed driver and the like
   
71.27   Compliance with financial responsibility law required
   
71.28   Use of safety belts in passenger vehicles
   
71.29   Adoption of state traffic statues
Stopping and Yielding
   
71.40   Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles
   
71.41   When emerging from alleys and the like
   
71.42   To prevent obstructing an intersection
   
71.43   At railroad crossings
   
71.44   At “stop” signs
   
71.45   At “yield” signs
   
71.46   At traffic-control signals generally
   
71.47   At flashing traffic-control signals
   
71.48   Stopping for school buses
   
71.49   Stops to be signaled
 
   
71.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01  SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   In general. It shall be a civil offense for any person to operate or
drive a motor vehicle upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess
of 30 mph, except where official signs have been posted indicating other speed
limits, in which cases the posted speed limit shall apply.
(1994 Code, § 15-301)
   (B)   At intersections. It shall be a civil offense for any person to
operate or drive a motor vehicle through any intersection at a rate of speed in
excess of 15 mph unless such person is driving on a street regulated by
traffic-control signals or signs which require traffic to stop or yield on the
intersecting streets.
(1994 Code, § 15-302)
   (C)   In school zones.
      (1)   (a)   Generally, pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-153, special
speed limits in school zones shall be enacted based on an engineering
investigation, shall not be less than 15 mph and shall be in effect only when
proper signs are posted with a warning flasher or flashers in operation.
         (b)   It shall be a civil penalty for any person to violate any such
special speed limit enacted and in effect in accordance with this division (C).
      (2)   When the City Commission has not established special speed limits
as provided for above, any person who shall drive at a speed exceeding 15 mph
when passing a school during a recess period when a warning flasher or flashers
are in operation, or during a period of 40 minutes before the opening hour of a
school or a period of 40 minutes after the closing hour of a school, while
children are actually going to or leaving school, shall be prima facie guilty
of reckless driving.
(1994 Code, § 15-303)
   (D)   In congested areas. It shall be a civil penalty for any person to
operate or drive a motor vehicle through any congested area at a rate of speed
in excess of any posted speed limit when such speed limit has been posted by
authority of the city.
(1994 Code, § 15-304)
   (E)   Cruising in motor vehicles on shopping center parking areas and
roadway.
      (1)   Owners and operators of shopping centers in the city are hereby
authorized to post signs on and about the parking areas and private roadways on
their properties giving notice that cruising on the property is prohibited.
      (2)   The term CRUISING, as used in this section, is defined as the
continual, repeated and aimless operation of a motor vehicle back and forth,
through, around or within the parking areas and private roadways of a shopping
center after 8:00 p.m. until the following sunrise other than for the purpose
of entering or leaving a parking space where the vehicle has been parked while
the driver or passenger(s) is or was visiting the shopping center or business.
      (3)   It shall be a violation of this section and a trespass for any
person to cruise on any shopping center parking area and/or private roadways
that have been posted by the owner or operator as authorized in division (E)(1)
above.
(1994 Code, § 15-305)
(Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 498, passed 11-4-1993)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02  TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. No person operating a motor vehicle shall make any turning
movement which might affect any pedestrian or the operation of any other
vehicle without first ascertaining that such movement can be made in safety and
signaling his or her intention in accordance with the requirements of the state
law.
(1994 Code, § 15-401)
   (B)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(1994 Code, § 15-402)
   (C)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of the
intersection of the centerline of the two roadways.
(1994 Code, § 15-403)
   (D)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering
the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection,
as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
(1994 Code, § 15-404)
   (E)   U-turns. U-turns are prohibited.
(1994 Code, § 15-405)
Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-143
§ 71.03  MOTOR VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to operate any motor vehicle
within the corporate limits unless such vehicle is equipped with properly
operating muffler, lights, brakes, horn and such other equipment as is
prescribed and required by Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55, Ch. 9.
(1994 Code, § 15-101)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007) 
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04  DRIVING ON STREETS CLOSED FOR REPAIRS AND THE LIKE.
   Except for necessary access to property abutting thereon, no motor vehicle
shall be driven upon any street that is barricaded or closed for repairs or
other lawful purpose.
(1994 Code, § 15-102)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05  ONE-WAY STREETS.
   On any street for one-way traffic with posted signs indicating the
authorized direction of travel at all intersections offering access thereto, no
person shall operate any vehicle except in the indicated direction.
(1994 Code, § 15-103)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06  UNLANED STREETS.
   (A)   Upon all unlaned streets of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right half of the street, except:
      (1)   When lawfully overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction; or
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
   (B)   All vehicles proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at
the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn.
(1994 Code, § 15-104)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07  LANED STREETS.
   (A)   On streets marked with traffic lanes, it shall be a civil offense for
the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep his or her vehicle within
the boundaries of the proper lane for his or her direction of travel, except
when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning
movement.
   (B)   On two-lane and three-lane streets, the proper lane for travel shall
be the right-hand lane unless otherwise clearly marked. On streets with four or
more lanes, either of the right-hand lanes shall be available for use; except
that, traffic moving at less than the normal rate of speed shall use the
extreme right-hand lane.
(1994 Code, § 15-105)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007) 
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08  YELLOW LINES.
   On streets with a yellow line placed to the right of any lane line or left
line, such yellow line shall designate a no-passing zone, and no operator shall
drive his or her vehicle or any part thereof across or to the left of such
yellow line, except when necessary to make a lawful left turn from such street.
(1994 Code, § 15-106)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09  MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It shall be a civil offense for any pedestrian or the operator of any
vehicle to violate or fail to comply with any traffic-control sign, signal,
marking or device placed or erected by the state or the city unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
   (B)   It shall be a civil offense for any pedestrian or the operator of any
vehicle willfully to violate or fail to comply with the reasonable directions
of any police officer.
(1994 Code, § 15-107)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007) 
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.10  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND THE LIKE.
   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 54-5-108, all traffic-control signs, signals,
markings and devices shall conform to the latest revision of the Tennessee
Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices for Streets and Highways and shall be
uniform as to type and locations throughout the city.
(1994 Code, § 15-108)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 71.11  UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street,
any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control sign, signal, marking or
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to control the movement of
traffic or parking of vehicles, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic-control sign, signal, marking or device
or any railroad sign or signal.
(1994 Code, § 15-109)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.12  PRESUMPTION WITH RESPECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   When a traffic-control sign, signal, marking or device has been
placed, the presumption shall be that it is official and that it has been
lawfully placed by the proper authority.
   (B)   All presently installed traffic-control signs, signals, markings and
devices are hereby expressly authorized, ratified, approved and made official
irrespective of whether or not they were lawfully placed originally.
(1994 Code, § 15-110)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 71.13  SCHOOL SAFETY PATROLS.
   All motorists and pedestrians shall obey the directions or signals of school
safety patrols when such patrols are assigned under the authority of the Chief
of Police and are acting in accordance with instructions; provided that, such
persons giving any order, signal or direction shall at the time be wearing some
insignia and/or using authorized flags for giving signals.
(1994 Code, § 15-111)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.14  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERALS OR OTHER PROCESSIONS.
   Except when otherwise directed by a police officer, no driver of a vehicle
shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously
designated.
(1994 Code, § 15-112)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.15  CLINGING TO VEHICLES IN MOTION.
   It shall be a civil penalty for any person traveling upon any bicycle,
motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any other vehicle to cling to, or
attach himself or herself or his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle
upon any street, alley or other public way or place.
(1994 Code, § 15-113)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007) 
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.16  RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLES.
   It shall be a civil penalty for any person to ride, or for the owner or
operator of any motor vehicle being operated on a street, alley or other public
way or place, to permit any person to ride on any portion of such vehicle not
designed or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to
persons engaged in the necessary discharge of lawful duties nor to persons
riding in the load-carrying space of trucks.
(1994 Code, § 15-114)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007) 
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.17  BACKING VEHICLES.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(1994 Code, § 15-115)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.18  PROJECTIONS FROM THE REAR OF VEHICLES.
   Whenever the load or any projecting portion of any vehicle shall extend
beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, the operator shall display at the
end of such load or projection, in such position as to be clearly visible from
the rear of such vehicle, a red flag being not less than 12 inches square.
Between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise there shall
be displayed in place of the flag a red light plainly visible under normal
atmospheric conditions at least 200 feet from the rear of such vehicle.
(1994 Code, § 15-116)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.19  CAUSING UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to cause unnecessary noise by
unnecessarily sounding the horn, “racing” the motor, or causing the
“screeching” or “squealing” of the tires on any motor vehicle.
(1994 Code, § 15-117)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007) 
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.20  PASSING.
   (A)   (1)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted,
the driver of a vehicle passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken
vehicle.
      (2)   The driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in
favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the
speed of his or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   (B)   When the street is wide enough, the driver of a vehicle may overtake
and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a
left turn.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a
street of sufficient width for four or more lanes of moving traffic when such
movement can be made in safety.
   (D)   No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the
street in overtaking or passing on the right.
   (E)   When any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the street, no operator of any
other vehicle approaching from the rear shall overtake and pass such stopped
vehicle.
   (F)   No vehicle operator shall attempt to pass another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction unless he or she can see that the way ahead is
sufficiently clear and unobstructed to enable him or her to make the movement
in safety.
(1994 Code, § 15-118)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.21  DAMAGING PAVEMENTS.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon any street of the city
any vehicle, motor propelled or otherwise, which by reason of its weight or the
character of its wheels, tires or track, is likely to damage the surface or
foundation of the street.
(1994 Code, § 15-119)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.22  BICYCLE RIDERS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Every person riding or operating a bicycle shall be subject to the
provisions of all traffic ordinances, rules and regulations of the city
applicable to the driver or operator of other vehicles, except as to those
provisions which, by their nature, can have no application to bicycles.
   (B)   No person operating or riding a bicycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall the operator
carry any other person upon such vehicle other than upon a firmly attached and
regular seat thereon.
   (C)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (D)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the handlebars.
(1994 Code, § 15-120)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.23  MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR SCOOTERS AND MOTORBIKES.
   (A)   General. No driver of a two- or three-wheel motor vehicle or bicycle
shall carry any other person on, upon or within such vehicle on any street or
highway in the city, except as hereinafter provided; provided, however, that,
if any two- or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter of 12 inches or
greater or any bicycle shall have either a double seating device with double
foot rests or a side car attachment for each person riding therein so that such
person shall be seated entirely within the body of said side car, then it shall
be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of 16 years of age or
older to carry a passenger. A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his or
her employee is excepted from the provisions hereof. No motorcycle, bicycle or
motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk of the city. No rider of a
motorcycle, bicycle or motor scooter shall hold to any moving vehicle for the
purpose of being propelled.
   (B)   Required equipment for motorcycles and motor scooters and motor driven
cycles.
      (1)   Windshield. All vehicles covered under this section shall be
equipped with a windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect
the operator from foreign objects; except that, in lieu of such windshield the
operator may wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect him
or her from foreign objects.
      (2)   Brakes. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped
with brakes adequate to control the movement of same and to stop and hold such
vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes. One means shall
be effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one means shall be
effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheels.
      (3)   Headgear. No person shall operate or ride upon any motorcycle,
motorbike or motor scooter within the city unless such person is equipped with
and wearing on the head a safety helmet with a secured chin strap and
suspension lining, which said helmet shall conform to the type and design
manufactured for the use of the operators and riders of such motor vehicles.
      (4)   Lights. All vehicles covered under this section shall carry at
least one lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at least
300 feet in the direction in which the same is proceeding, and one taillamp
mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible
from at least 300 feet to the rear, and such lights required by this section
shall be burning whenever such vehicles are in motion during the period from
one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and at any other
time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions,
persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance
of at least 500 feet ahead; provided that, a bicycle, in lieu of the red light
in the rear, may carry a red or ruby glass reflector.
      (5)   Mufflers. Muffler cutouts are prohibited. No person shall drive a
motor vehicle on any road, street or highway unless such vehicle is equipped
with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent
excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke.
      (6)   Crash bars. No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor scooter
on any road, street or highway in the city unless such motor vehicle is
equipped with crash bars.
   (C)   Special speed limitation on motorcycles and motor scooters. No person
shall operate any motorcycle or any motor scooter at a speed greater than the
speed limit posted; provided, however, in no event and at no time may an
operator under the age of 16 operate a motorcycle or motor scooter at a speed
greater than 25 mph.
   (D)   Penalty. Anyone violating any of the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a civil offense and shall be punishable under the general penalty
clause for this code; provided further that, if any parent or guardian
knowingly permits a minor to operate a motorcycle or motor driven cycle in
violation of this section, such parent or guardian shall be guilty of a civil
offense and shall be punishable under the general penalty clause for this code.
(1994 Code, § 15-121)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007) 
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.24  OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL TRUCKS.
   It shall be a civil offense for any owner, driver or other person in charge
of any commercial carrier truck to drive within 300 feet of another truck to
drive in any lane other than the left-hand lane at all times or to pass another
vehicle within the corporate limits.
(1994 Code, § 15-122)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007;
Ord. 745, passed 11-25-2013)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.25  STREET CROSSING BY PEDESTRIANS.
   Pedestrians shall not cross streets, except at street intersections or
designated crossings and then at right angles only.
(1994 Code, § 15-123)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.26  DELIVERY OF VEHICLE TO UNLICENSED DRIVER AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADULT. Any person 18 years of age or older.
      AUTOMOBILE. Any motor driven automobile, car, truck, tractor, motorcycle,
motor driven cycle, motorized bicycle or vehicle driven by mechanical power.
      CUSTODY. The control of the actual, physical care of the juvenile, and
includes the right and responsibility to provide for the physical, mental,
moral and emotional well being of the juvenile. CUSTODY, as herein defined,
relates to those rights and responsibilities as exercised either by the
juvenile’s parent or parents or a person granted custody by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
      DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the State Department of Safety to
an individual, which authorizes the individual to operate a motor vehicle on
the highways.
      JUVENILE. A person less than 18 years of age. No exception shall be made
for a JUVENILE who has been emancipated by marriage or otherwise.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any adult to deliver the possession of or the
control of any automobile or other motor vehicle to any person, whether an
adult or a juvenile, who does not have in his or her possession a valid
driver’s license issued by the Department of Safety of the state, or for any
adult to permit any person, whether an adult or a juvenile, to drive any motor
vehicle upon the streets, highways, roads, avenues, parkways, alleys or public
thoroughfares in the city unless such person has a valid driver’s license as
issued by the Department of Safety of the state.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or person having custody of a
juvenile to permit any such juvenile to drive a motor vehicle upon the streets,
highways, roads, parkways, avenues or public ways in the city in a reckless,
careless or unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to violate the ordinances
of the city.
(1994 Code, § 15-124)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.27  COMPLIANCE WITH FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every vehicle operated within the corporate limits must be in
compliance with the financial responsibility law.
   (B)   At the time the driver of a motor vehicle is charged with any moving
violation under Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55, Ch. 8, Ch. 10, parts 1 through 5, and
Ch. 50, any provision in this traffic code or at the time of an accident for
which notice is required under Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-10-106, the officer shall
request evidence of financial responsibility as required by this section. In
case of an accident for which notice is required under Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-10-
106, the officer shall request such evidence from all drivers involved in the
accident, without regard to apparent or actual fault.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY means:
      (1)   Documentation, such as the declaration page of an insurance policy,
an insurance binder or an insurance card from an insurance company authorized
to do business in the state, stating that a policy of insurance meeting the
requirements of the State Financial Responsibility Law of 1977, compiled in
Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55, Ch. 12, has been issued;
      (2)   A certificate, valid for one year, issued by the Commissioner of
Safety, stating that a cash deposit or bond in the amount required by the State
Financial Responsibility Law of 1977, compiled in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55, Ch.
12, has been paid or filed with the Commissioner, or has qualified as a self-
insurer under Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-12-111; or
      (3)   The motor vehicle being operated at the time of the violation was
owned by a carrier subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of Safety or
the Interstate Commerce Commission, or was owned by the United States, the
state or any political subdivision thereof, and that such motor vehicle was
being operated with the owner’s consent.
(1994 Code, § 15-125)  (Ord. 031102.37, passed 5- -2002; Ord. 674, passed 6-26-
2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.28  USE OF SAFETY BELTS IN PASSENGER VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a passenger motor vehicle on any
highway, as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-101(22), in the city unless such
person and all passengers four years of age or older are restrained by a safety
belt at all times the vehicle is in forward motion.
      (2)   No person four years of age or older shall be a passenger in a
passenger motor vehicle on any highway, as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-
101(22), in the city unless such person is restrained by a safety belt at all
times the vehicle is in forward motion.
   (B)   (1)   The provisions of this section shall apply only to the operator
and all passengers occupying the front seat of a passenger motor vehicle.
      (2)   If the vehicle is equipped with a rear seat which is capable of
folding, the provisions of this section shall only apply to front seat
passengers and the operator if the back seat is in the fold down position.
   (C)   As used in this section, unless specified otherwise, PASSENGER CAR or
PASSENGER MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross
vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or less, that is not used as a public or
livery conveyance for passengers. “Passenger car” or “passenger motor vehicle”
does not apply to motor vehicles which are not required by federal law to be
equipped with safety belts.
   (D)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   A passenger or operator with a physically disabling condition whose
physical disability would prevent appropriate restraint in such safety seat or
safety belt; provided that, such condition is duly certified in writing by a
physician who shall state the nature of the handicap, as well as the reason
such restraint is inappropriate;
      (2)   A passenger motor vehicle operated by a rural letter carrier of the
United States postal service while performing the duties of a rural letter
carrier;
      (3)   Salespersons or mechanics employed by an automobile dealer who, in
the course of their employment, test-drive a motor vehicle, if such dealership
customarily test-drives 50 or more motor vehicles a day, and if such test-
drives occur within one mile of the location of the dealership;
      (4)   Utility workers, water, gas and electric meter readers in the
course of their employment;
      (5)   A newspaper delivery motor carrier service while performing the
duties of a newspaper delivery motor carrier service; provided that, this
exemption shall only apply from the time of the actual first delivery to the
customer until the last actual delivery to the customer;
      (6)   A vehicle in use in a parade if operated at less than 15 mph;
      (7)   A vehicle in use in a hayride if operated at less than 15 mph; or
      (8)   A vehicle crossing a highway from one field to another if operated
at less than 15 mph.
   (E)   (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary,
no person between 16 years of age and up to and through the age of 17 years of
age, shall operate a passenger motor vehicle, or be a passenger therein, unless
such person is restrained by a safety belt at all times the vehicle is in
forward motion.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) above, the provisions of this
division (E) shall apply to all occupants between 16 years of age and 18 years
of age occupying any seat in a passenger motor vehicle.
      (3)   Notwithstanding §
71.99(C)(5)(a) of this chapter, a law enforcement officer observing a violation
of this division (E) shall issue a citation to the violator, but shall not
arrest or take into custody any person solely for a violation of this division
(E).
   (F)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B) above, no person with a
learner’s permit or an intermediate driver’s license shall operate a passenger
motor vehicle in the city unless such person and all passengers between the
ages of four and 17 years of age are restrained by a safety belt at all times
the vehicle is in forward motion.
(1994 Code, § 15-126)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.29  ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC STATUTES.
   By the authority granted under Tenn. Code Ann. § 16-18-302, the city adopts
by reference as if fully set forth in this section Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55.
(1994 Code, § 15-127)  (Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)
STOPPING AND YIELDING
§ 71.40  UPON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and/or visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of the
state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible
signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge of curb
of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such
position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer.
(1994 Code, § 15-501)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.41  WHEN EMERGING FROM ALLEYS AND THE LIKE.
   The drivers of all vehicles emerging from alleys, parking lots, driveways or
buildings shall stop such vehicles immediately prior to driving onto any
sidewalk or street. They shall not proceed to drive onto the sidewalk or street
until they can safely do so without colliding or interfering with approaching
pedestrians or vehicles.
(1994 Code, § 15-502)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.42  TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTING AN INTERSECTION.
   (A)   No driver shall enter any intersection or marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of such intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the
passage of traffic in or on the intersecting street or crosswalk.
   (B)   This provision shall be effective notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
(1994 Code, § 15-503)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.43  AT RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   Any driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing shall stop
within not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall
not proceed further while any of the following conditions exist:
   (A)   A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the approach of a railroad train;
   (B)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagger signals the approach of
a railroad train;
   (C)   A railroad train is approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the
highway crossing and is emitting an audible signal indicating its approach;
and/or
   (D)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to the crossing.
(1994 Code, § 15-504)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.44  AT “STOP” SIGNS.
   The driver of a vehicle facing a “stop” sign shall bring his or her vehicle
to a complete stop immediately before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then immediately before
entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until he or she can
proceed through the intersection in safety.
(1994 Code, § 15-505)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.45  AT “YIELD” SIGNS.
   The drivers of all vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to approaching
vehicles before proceeding at all places where “yield” signs have been posted.
(1994 Code, § 15-506)
§ 71.46  AT TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS GENERALLY.
   Traffic-control signals exhibiting the words “go”, “caution” or “stop”, or
exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows,
shall show the following colors only and shall apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows.
   (A)   Green alone or “go”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits such turn. But
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone or “caution”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “stop”
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway.
   (C)   Steady red alone or “stop”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “go” is
shown alone; provided, however, that, a right turn on a red signal shall be
permitted at all intersections within the city; provided that, the prospective
turning car comes to a full and complete stop before turning and that the
turning car yields the right-of-way to pedestrians and cross traffic traveling
in accordance with their traffic signal. However, said turn will not endanger
other traffic lawfully using said intersection. A right turn on red shall be
permitted at all intersections except those clearly marked by a “No Turns On
Red” sign, which may be erected by the city at intersections which the city
decides requires no right turns on red in the interest of traffic safety.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway.
   (D)   Steady red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway.
   (E)   Applicability. In the event an official traffic-control signal is
erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this section shall be applicable, except as to those provisions which, by their
nature, can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made a vehicle length
short of the signal.
(1994 Code, § 15-507)
§ 71.47  AT FLASHING TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a
traffic sign or signal placed or erected in the city, it shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if
none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
   (B)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
the rules set forth in §
71.43 of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 15-508)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.48  STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking from
either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the
purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle
before reaching such school bus, and said driver shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or
the visual signals are no longer actuated.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not
stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or
when upon a controlled access highway and the school bus is stopped in a
loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where
pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
   (C)   SEPARATE ROADWAYS shall mean roadways divided by an intervening space
which is not suitable to vehicular traffic.
(1994 Code, § 15-509)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.49  STOPS TO BE SIGNALED.
   No person operating a motor vehicle shall stop such vehicle, whether in
obedience to a traffic sign or signal or otherwise, without first signaling his
or her intention in accordance with the requirements of the state law, except
in an emergency.
(1994 Code, § 15-510)  Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-143
§ 71.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   It is a civil offense to fail to provide evidence of financial
responsibility pursuant to §
71.27 of this chapter. Any violation of §
71.27 of this chapter is punishable by a civil penalty of up to $50. The civil
penalty prescribed hereby shall be in addition to any other penalty prescribed
by the laws of the state or by the city’s municipal code of ordinances.
      (2)   On or before the court date, the person charged with a violation of
§
71.27 of this chapter may submit evidence of compliance with §
71.27 of this chapter in effect at the time of the violation. If the court is
satisfied that compliance was in effect at the time of the violation, the
charge of failure to provide evidence of financial responsibility may be
dismissed.
(1994 Code, § 15-125)
   (C)   (1)   A violation of §
71.28 of this chapter is a civil offense punishable by a fine of up to $50. All
proceeds from the fines imposed by this division (C) shall be deposited in the
state’s General Fund and designated for the exclusive use of the Division of
Vocational Rehabilitation to assist eligible individuals with a disability, as
defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 49-11-602(3), who have been severely injured in
motor vehicle accidents.
      (2)   A person charged with a violation of §
71.28 of this chapter may, in lieu of appearance in court, submit a fine of $10
for a first violation and $20 on second and subsequent violations to the City
Court Clerk.
      (3)   (a)   Notwithstanding division (C)(3)(b) below to the contrary, a
person charged with a violation of §
71.28(E) of this chapter may, in lieu of appearance in court, submit a fine of
$20 to the City Court Clerk.
         (b)   Notwithstanding any provision of division (C)(3)(a) above to the
contrary, the revenue generated by $10 of the $20 fine under division (C)(3)(a)
above for a person’s first conviction under §
71.28(E) of this chapter shall be deposited in the state’s General Fund without
being designated for any specific purpose. The remaining $10 of such $20 fine
for such person’s first conviction under division (C)(3)(a) above shall be
deposited in the state’s General Fund and designated for the exclusive use of
the division of vocational rehabilitation in accordance with division (C)(1)
above.
         (c)   The revenue generated from such person’s second or subsequent
conviction under §
71.28(E) of this chapter shall be deposited in the state’s General Fund and
designated for the exclusive use of the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
in accordance with division (C)(1) above.
      (4)   No clerk’s fee nor court costs, including, but not limited to, any
statutory fees of officers, shall be imposed or assessed against anyone
convicted of a violation of §
71.28. No litigation tax levied pursuant to the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann.
Title 67, Ch. 4, part 6, shall be imposed or assessed against anyone convicted
of a violation of §
71.28 of this chapter.
      (5)   (a)   A law enforcement officer observing a violation of §
71.28 of this chapter shall issue a citation to the violator, but shall not
arrest or take into custody any person solely for a violation of §
71.28 of this chapter.
         (b)   The Department of Safety shall not report any convictions under
§
71.28 of this chapter, except for law enforcement or governmental purposes.
      (6)   In no event shall a violation of this section be assigned a point
value for suspension or revocation of a license by the Department of Safety,
nor shall such violation be construed as any other offense under the provisions
of §
71.28 of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 15-126)
(Ord. 031102.37, passed 5- -2002; Ord. 674, passed 6-26-2007)
CHAPTER 72:  PARKING RULES
Section
   
72.01   Generally
   
72.02   Angle parking
   
72.03   Occupancy of more than one space
   
72.04   Where prohibited
   
72.05   Loading and unloading zones
   
72.06   Presumption with respect to illegal parking
   
72.07   Unauthorized use of handicapped parking
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01  GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall leave any motor vehicle unattended on any street
without first setting the brakes thereon, stopping the motor, removing the
ignition key and turning the front wheels of such vehicle toward the nearest
curb or gutter of the street.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, every vehicle parked upon a street
within the city shall be so parked that its right wheels are approximately
parallel to and within 18 inches of the right edge or curb of the street.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything else in this code to the contrary, no person
shall park or leave a vehicle parked on any public street or alley within the
fire limits between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. or on any other public
street or alley for more than 72 consecutive hours without the prior approval
of the Chief of Police.
   (D)   No person shall park and leave standing unattended any commercial
motor truck, with or without trailer, for more than one hour upon any street or
alley within a residential area within the city.
   (E)   Furthermore, no person shall wash, grease or work on any vehicle,
except to make repairs necessitated by an emergency, while such vehicle is
parked on a public street.
(1994 Code, § 15-601)  (Ord. 353, passed - -)  Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02  ANGLE PARKING.
   On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle
indicated by such signs or markings. No person shall angle park any vehicle
which has a trailer attached thereto or which has a length in excess of 24
feet.
(1994 Code, § 15-602)  Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03  OCCUPANCY OF MORE THAN ONE SPACE.
   No person shall park a vehicle in any designated parking space so that any
part of such vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
official markings on the street or curb designating such space unless the
vehicle is too large to be parked within a single designated space.
(1994 Code, § 15-603)  Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04  WHERE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any sign placed or erected by
the city or state, nor:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection or within 15 feet thereof;
   (D)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (E)   Within a pedestrian crosswalk;
   (F)   Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing;
   (G)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of the entrance;
   (H)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when other
traffic would be obstructed;
   (I)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (J)   Upon any bridge; and/or
   (K)   Alongside any curb painted yellow or red by the city.
(1994 Code, § 15-604)  Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05  LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.
   No person shall park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than
for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or merchandise in any
place marked by the city as a loading and unloading zone.
(1994 Code, § 15-605)  Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06  PRESUMPTION WITH RESPECT TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   When any unoccupied vehicle is found parked in violation of any provision of
this chapter, there shall be a prima facie presumption that the registered
owner of the vehicle is responsible for such illegal parking.
(1994 Code, § 15-606)
§ 72.07  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   Any person, except a qualified person displaying a disabled license
plate or proper placard, who parks in any parking space designated with the
wheelchair disabled sign commits a civil offense, punishable as prescribed by §
72.99(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to the civil penalty imposed pursuant to division
(A) above, a vehicle which does not display a disabled license plate or
placard, and which is parked in any parking space designated with the
wheelchair disabled sign, is subject to being towed.
      (2)   When a vehicle has been towed or removed pursuant to this section,
it shall be released to its owner, or person in lawful possession, upon demand;
provided that, such person making demand for return pays all reasonable towing
and storage charges and that such demand is made during the operating hours of
the towing company.
   (C)   It is also a violation of this section for any person to park a motor
vehicle so that a portion of such vehicle encroaches into a handicapped parking
space in a manner which restricts, or reasonably could restrict, a person
confined to a wheelchair from exiting or entering a motor vehicle property
parked within such handicapped parking space.
(1994 Code, § 15-607)  (Ord. 507, passed 4-25-1994)  Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, except a qualified person displaying a disabled license
plate or proper placard, who parks in any parking space designated with the
wheelchair disabled sign, per §
72.07 of this chapter, commits a civil offense, punishable by a civil penalty
of $100.
(1994 Code, § 15-607)  (Ord. 507, passed 4-25-1994)
CHAPTER 73:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Low-Speed Motor Vehicles and Golf Carts
   
73.01   Findings; definition
   
73.02   Registration and requirements
   
73.03   Operation regulations
   
73.04   Liability
 
   
73.99   Penalty
LOW-SPEED MOTOR VEHICLES AND GOLF CARTS
§ 73.01  FINDINGS; DEFINITION.
   (A)   The City Commission finds that all streets located within the
territorial boundaries of the city and under its jurisdiction are designed and
constructed so as to safely permit their use by operators of motorized carts
and low speed motor vehicle (“LSMV”), except as stated elsewhere in this
subchapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LSMVs. Those four-wheeled vehicles whose top speed exceeds 20 mph, but
does not exceed 25 mph and which possess some mechanical, electrical or similar
system other than merely decreased pressure on the accelerator wherein the
vehicles’s top speed can be prohibited from exceeding 20 mph by the operator.
      MOTORIZED CARTS. Those electric and gasoline-powered pleasure carts,
commonly called golf carts, which do not exceed 20 mph.
(1994 Code, § 15-801)  (Ord. 628, passed 5-27-2003)
§ 73.02  REGISTRATION AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Motorized carts. It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized
cart that is operated over public streets and those areas accessible by the
public to register the cart with the city within ten business days of the date
of purchase. A numerical decal shall be issued upon registration; and a record
of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner,
year, make, serial number and color of cart shall be maintained by the Police
Department. The decal must be affixed to the cart in the such a manner as to be
fully visible at all times. The registration fee for motorized carts owned by
city residents shall be $20, and the registration shall be effective until July
1 each year or until such time cart is sold or otherwise disposed of. A flat
annual fee of registration/user fee of $25 shall be charged to non-residents of
the city. The non-resident fee shall be effective until July 1 each year or
until such time as the cart is sold or otherwise disposed of. Registrations
will not be transferrable.
   (B)   LSMVs. No LSMV shall be operated on the public streets located within
the territorial boundaries of the city unless it is legally registered with the
city.
   (C)   Equipment. Every cart shall at all time be equipped with an exhaust
system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following
specifications.
      (1)   The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange
of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or
include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer.
      (2)   The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened,
including the consideration of missing of broken brackets or hangers.
      (3)   The engine and powered mechanism of every cart shall be so
equipped, adjusted and tuned as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or
fumes.
   (D)   Operation. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cart to operate
or permit the operation of such cart on which any device controlling or abating
atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer, to render
the devise unserviceable by removal, alteration or which interferes with its
operation.
   (E)   Rental carts. Cart dealers and distributors, as well as other
commercial establishments, may rent carts to the public for use on the public
streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city. Each such
establishment renting carts shall be required to register each such rental cart
in accordance with divisions (A) and (B) above and shall maintain a written
record of each person who rents each cart. Renters shall be required to furnish
positive identification, shall be provided a copy of this subchapter to read
and must be at least 16 years of age and possess a valid driver’s license. The
registration fee and transfer fees and regulations shall be the same as those
in divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (F)   Age, number of registrants limited. Only those persons 18 years of age
or older may register a motorized cart. Cart registration may be in one
person’s name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person.
(1994 Code, § 15-802)  (Ord. 628, passed 5-27-2003; Ord. 821, passed 7-23-2018)
  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03  OPERATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Those persons who are 16 years of age and older may drive a motorized
cart on the public streets and those accessible by the public of the city,
unless such person has had his or her license to operate a motor vehicle
suspended or revoked by the state which issued said license, in which case such
person shall not be permitted to operate a motorized cart on the public streets
and those areas accessible by the public of the city during the time of
suspension or revocation.
   (B)   Those persons who are 15 years of age, but not yet 16 years of age,
may drive a motorized cart on the public streets and those areas accessible by
the public of the city. This person must have in his or her possession a valid
learners permit issued by the state and be accompanied in the front seat by a
person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid driver’s license.
   (C)   All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to
vehicular traffic when using the public streets and those areas accessible by
the public in the city.
   (D)   Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time.
   (E)   Motorized carts may be operated over those authorized public streets
and those areas accessible by the public only during daylight hours unless such
motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights.
   (F)   No motorized cart shall be permitted to operate over, along or across
Highway 411 and Highway 30, except where cross streets are available.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart or LSMV or
any other person operating, employing, permitting the use of or otherwise
directing the use of such motorized cart or LSMV to operate or permit the
operator on any motorized cart of LSMV to drive over the public streets or
those areas accessible by the public in the city in violation of this
subchapter.
   (H)   No LSMV shall be permitted to operate on any street of which the
posted speed limit exceeds 35 mph.
(1994 Code, § 15-803)  (Ord. 628, passed 5-27-2003)  Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04  LIABILITY.
   Each person using a public street is liable for his or her own actions.
Liability insurance coverage varies, and each person operating a golf cart on
the public streets and those areas accessible by the public should verify his
or her coverage.
(1994 Code, § 15-804)  (Ord. 628, passed 5-27-2003)
§ 73.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates the terms of §§
73.01 through
73.04 of this chapter shall be punished as provided in this section.
      (2)   Any violation of regulations set forth in §§
73.01 through
73.04 of this chapter shall be charged against the registered owner of the
motorized cart, and all fines and penalties shall be levied against the
registered owner of the motorized cart. All fines and penalties shall be set by
the City Judge.
      (3)   All motorized carts and LSMVs shall obey all state and local motor
vehicle laws. Any violation of state or local motor vehicle laws shall be
charged against the operator of the motorized cart of LSMV. All fines and
penalties shall be levied according to state and local law.
(1994 Code, § 15-801)
(Ord. 628, passed 5-27-2003)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
92.   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Running at large prohibited
   
90.03   Vicious animals other than dogs and cats
   
90.04   Livestock or fowl
   
90.05   Pen, enclosure to be kept clean; adequate provisions; nuisances
   
90.06   Wild animals; permit
   
90.07   Poisoning or trapping of animals prohibited
   
90.08   Dead animals
   
90.09   Rabies; hydrophobia; duty of owner, custodian; procedure in suspected
cases
   
90.10   Cruel treatment prohibited
   
90.11   Inspections of premises
Dogs and Cats
   
90.25   Rabies vaccination required
   
90.26   Registration and license requirement
   
90.27   Running at large prohibited
   
90.28   Vicious dogs to be securely restrained
   
90.29   Noisy dogs prohibited
   
90.30   Nuisance defined; actions constituting a nuisance
   
90.31   Ignorance of dog’s or cat’s habits no defense
   
90.32   Pound to be provided
   
90.33   Impoundment
   
90.34   Disposition of fees, civil penalties and the like
Pit Bulls
   
90.45   Definitions
   
90.46   Restrictions
   
90.47   Standards and requirements
   
90.48   Sale or transfer of ownership prohibited
   
90.49   Animals born of registered dogs
   
90.50   Rebuttable presumptions
   
90.51   Failure to comply
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
90.01 through
90.11 and
90.25 through
90.33, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The person or persons employed or designated by the
City Manager as the municipality’s enforcement officer.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designated by action of the city for the
purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large in
violation of this chapter.
   AT LARGE. Any animal shall be deemed to be AT LARGE when he or she is off
the property of his or her owner and not under control of a competent person.
   EXPOSED TO RABIES. An animal which has been exposed to rabies within the
meaning of this chapter if it has been bitten by or been exposed to, any animal
known to have been infected with rabies.
   FOWL. Any domesticated bird such as game cocks and hens, chickens, ducks and
the like, but it shall not include birds used as household pets that are kept
inside the house.
   KENNEL. Any person, group of persons or corporations engaged in breeding,
buying, selling or boarding of dogs or cats.
   LIVESTOCK. Swine, cattle, goats or any other domestic animal kept for use on
a farm or raised for sale or profit.
   RESTRAINT. A dog or cat is under RESTRAINT, within the meaning of this
chapter, if he or she is controlled by a leash, under control of a competent
person and obedient to that person’s commands, on or within a vehicle being
driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits of its owner or
keeper.
   SPAYED FEMALE. Any bitch which has been operated upon to prevent conception.
(1994 Code, § 10-101)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 425, passed 3-5-1987)
§ 90.02  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or being in charge of any cows,
swine, sheep, horses, mules, goats or any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys or
other domestic fowl, cattle or livestock, knowingly or negligently to permit
any of them to run at large in any street, alley or unenclosed lot within the
corporate limits.
(1994 Code, § 10-102)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03  VICIOUS ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS AND CATS.
   No one shall keep, possess or harbor a vicious animal in the city. It shall
be the duty of any animal control officer or police officer to impound any such
animal and, if impoundment cannot be made with safety to the animal control
officer, police officer or other citizens, the animal may be destroyed.
(1994 Code, § 10-103)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04  LIVESTOCK OR FOWL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or confine any livestock
or type of fowl in any building, structure, shed, corral, pen or enclosure
within the corporate limits of the city, except:
   (A)   Where such animals are being kept at a licensed stock show, lasting
not longer than ten days; and/or
   (B)   Where such animals are kept at a licensed slaughterhouse, recognized
stockyard or processing facility where swine or fowl are kept for a period of
not more than four days.
   (C)   Keeping near a residence or business restricted. No person shall keep
any animal or fowl except cats enumerated in the preceding section to come
within 1,060 feet of any residence, place of business, and public street
without a permit from the Codes Enforcement Officer. The Codes Enforcement
office shall issue a permit only when in his sound judgement the keeping of
such animals in a yard of building under the circumstances as set for in the
application for the permit will not injuriously effect the public health.
   (D)   Keeping in such a manner as to become a nuisance is prohibited. No
animal or foul shall be kept in such a place or condition as to become a
nuisance because of either noise, odor, contagious diseases, or other reason.
   (E)   Inspection of premises. For the purpose of making inspections to
insure compliance with the provision of this chapter, the Codes Enforcement
officer or authorized representative, shall be authorized to enter an any
reasonable time, any premises where he has reasonable cause to believe an
animal or fowl is being kept in violation of this chapter.
   (F)   Limitations as to number of livestock and or fowl being allowed within
the city limits of the City of Etowah. Property owners wishing to maintain
livestock and or fowl shall have a minimum of five acres of land with a minimum
of 60 feet from any other residence to be allowed to apply for a livestock/fowl
permit with the City of Etowah Codes Enforcement Officer.
 
Animal       Number permitted Dedicated acre per animal
Horse/Cattle 2                2 acres
Goats/Sheep  6                2 acres
 
   (G)   Application for livestock/fowl permit. Application for a livestock/
fowl permit can be obtain at the office of the City of Etowah Code Enforcement
Officer. There will be no fee for this permit; permitting is for registration
and maintenance of property locations and owners.
(1994 Code, § 10-104)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 425, passed 3-5-1987;
Ord. 810, passed 12-18-2017)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05  PEN, ENCLOSURE TO BE KEPT CLEAN; ADEQUATE PROVISIONS; NUISANCES.
   (A)   When animals are kept within the corporate limits, the building,
structure, corral, pen or enclosure in which they are kept shall at all times
be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and it shall be a civil offense
for the owner thereof to keep the same otherwise.
(1994 Code, § 10-105)
   (B)   No animal shall be kept or confined in any place where the food,
water, shelter and ventilation are not adequate and sufficient for the
preservation of its health, safe condition and wholesomeness for food if so
intended. All feed shall be stored and kept in a rat-proof and fly-tight
building, box or receptacle.
(1994 Code, § 10-106)
   (C)   No animal shall be kept in such a place or condition as to become a
nuisance either because of noise, odor, contagious disease or other reason.
(1994 Code, § 10-107)
(Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06  WILD ANIMALS; PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall have, sell, keep or maintain any wild, exotic,
dangerous or non- domesticated animal or reptile without first applying to and
receiving from the city a permit to do so; provided, however, the keeping or
maintenance of such animal shall conform to any applicable zoning regulations
as well as any applicable state and/or federal regulations.
(1994 Code, § 10-108)
   (B)   (1)   The animal control officer and/or any police officer are hereby
authorized to apprehend any wild animal that may be at large within the city.
Such wild animal may be impounded, released in wild areas outside the city or
destroyed as the animal control officer, in his or her discretion, shall
determine subject to the applicable state laws. Animal control officers are
authorized to use any tranquilizer guns, firearms or any other suitable devices
to subdue or destroy any animal that is deemed by the animal control officer,
in his or her discretion, to be of a danger to itself or the public health and
safety.
      (2)   Any animal brought into the city for purposes of display in any
carnival, menagerie or circus shall be fully confined in a secure cage and
shall not be removed from the cage under any circumstances.
(1994 Code, § 10-109)
   (C)   Permit costs.
      (1)   An application shall be completed at City Hall and submitted with
proof of veterinarian care and photos of said animal.
      (2)   A minimal fee of $5 shall be charged for each permit. Permit will
be per animal and approval shall be at the discretion of the Animal Control
Officer and/or City Manager. This permit will renew annually and expire one
year from the permit receipt.
      (3)   Evidence of wild animal registration shall be kept at City Hall in
perpetuity and a decal will be required to be displayed on the window nearest
the front door of the property of residence to provide advanced notice to all
first responders including but not limited to law enforcement officer, EMTs,
etc.
(Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 831, passed 5-20-2019)   Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07  POISONING OR TRAPPING OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to poison or to trap any animal
or aid, abet or assist in the poisoning or trapping or the putting out or
placing of poison or a trap at any point or place outside of buildings within
the corporate limits of the city where dogs, cats or other domesticated animals
may secure or encounter the same; provided, however, in instances where any
animal by reason of damage to property, danger to life or threat to public
health becomes a nuisance, a live, humane trapping method approved by the City
Commissioners may be used.
(1994 Code, § 10-110)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993) 
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08  DEAD ANIMALS.
   No person shall place or leave the carcass of any dead animal or fowl in any
street, alley or lot or allow the same to remain on his or her lot.
(1994 Code, § 10-111)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09  RABIES; HYDROPHOBIA; DUTY OF OWNER, CUSTODIAN; PROCEDURE IN SUSPECTED
CASES.
   (A)   Except as stated in division (B) below, any animal which shows
symptoms of rabies, or which has bitten anyone, shall be penned up immediately
by its owners, or by the person having charge of the animal, or by the person
sheltering, feeding, harboring or taking care of said animal. The animals shall
be confined in a place approved by the Animal Control Officer or his or her
authorized representative for not less than ten days. The animal shall be
subject to observation by the city, or a person designated by the Animal
Control Officer at all times during said period.
   (B)   If rabies or hydrophobia does not develop within said period, then the
animal shall be released to his or her owner, but if either of them does
develop, the said animal shall be destroyed by the city in a humane manner.
(1994 Code, § 10-112)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986)
§ 90.10  CRUEL TREATMENT PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person unnecessarily to beat or
otherwise abuse or injure any animal.
(1994 Code, § 10-113)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993) 
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11  INSPECTIONS OF PREMISES.
   For the purpose of making inspections to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Public Officer or his or her authorized
representative shall be authorized to enter, at any reasonable time, any
premises where he or she has reasonable cause to believe an animal is being
kept in violation of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 10-114)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986)
DOGS AND CATS
§ 90.25  RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be a civil offense for any person to own, keep or harbor any
dog more than three months old that has not been vaccinated against rabies as
required in this section. Only a vaccine that meets the standards prescribed by
the United States Department of Agriculture for interstate sale shall be used.
The vaccination shall be made annually by or under the supervision of a
licensed veterinarian. The veterinarian making the vaccination shall collect
his or her fee for the same from the owner of the dog, shall issue a
vaccination tag and shall sign and issue a certificate bearing the owner’s name
and address, number of the vaccination tag issued, date of vaccination, date
the dog should be revaccinated, description and sex of the dog vaccinated and
the type and lot number of vaccine administered. The certificate shall be
prepared in triplicate; the original shall be given to the owner, the first
copy filed in the office of the local Health Department, and the second copy
retained by the person administering the vaccine. The certificate form shall be
the same as prepared and distributed by the State Department of Public Health.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to own, keep, harbor or to permit
to remain on or about the premises of such owner any dog that does not wear a
tag evidencing that the dog has been vaccinated.
(1994 Code, § 10-201)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 486, passed 4-1-1993;
Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.26  REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter expressly provided, all persons owning, or
keeping any canine within the corporate limits, more than three months old,
shall annually register it with the city and apply for a license for such
canine. The registration fee shall be $5 per canine. The fee shall be due and
payable within five days after the acquisition of such canine or the canine
reaching three months of age and from that point forward for the canine’s life
span within the city shall be renewed annually within five days of the original
registration/expiration date. The city shall issue an annual license and tag
for each canine whose owner pays the above registration fee and exhibits
current proof of vaccination(s).
   (B)   (1)   Said proof of vaccination shall display the true and actual
breed of said canine(s) or said canine(s) shall be presented for visual
verification before the City Administration and/or Animal Control. If said
canine(s) after visual inspection of Animal Control is deemed to present
characteristics as set forth in Ord. 815 amending and adding the requirement of
DNA testing.
      (2)   No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog which does not at all
times wear current license and vaccination tags.
      (3)   In the event the license tag is lost, the city shall issue a
duplicate tag for a fee of $2.
(1994 Code, § 10-202)  (Ord. 486, passed 4-1-1993; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993;
Ord. 832, passed 4-22-2019)   Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.27  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to knowingly or negligently
permit any dog owned by him or her or under his or her control to run at large
within the corporate limits. A dog shall be deemed to be running at large when
it goes uncontrolled by the owner upon the premises of another without the
consent of the owner of the premises or other person authorized to give consent
or goes uncontrolled by the owner upon a highway, public road, street or any
other place open to the public generally.
(1994 Code, § 10-203)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993;
Ord. 750, passed 12-16-2013)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.28  VICIOUS DOGS TO BE SECURELY RESTRAINED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be a civil offense for any person to own or keep any
dog known to be vicious or dangerous unless such dog is so confined and/or
otherwise securely restrained as to reasonably provide for the protection of
other animals and persons.
      (2)   If a dog or cat attacks a person by biting or in any manner causing
injury or habitually or repeatedly attacks livestock or other domestic animals
without provocation, it shall be prima facie evidence that the dog or cat is
vicious.
      (3)   After a notification by the animal control officer that the dog or
cat is vicious, the owner or keeper of such dog or cat shall keep the same
chained or muzzled, or in a secure enclosure at all times, or have it humanely
destroyed or shall turn it over to the animal shelter for humane destruction.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who receives such a notice shall have the right to
appeal this decision to the City Manager.
      (2)   The City Manager or his or her representative shall, upon such
appeal, conduct a hearing within ten days to determine if the animal is
vicious. If the animal is judged not to be vicious, it may be returned to the
owner.
      (3)   In the event of an appeal to the courts from the City Manager’s or
his or her representative’s decision, pending the appeal, the dog or cat shall
be confined at the animal shelter or with a veterinarian, the cost of which
shall be borne by the owner.
(1994 Code, § 10-204)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993) 
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.29  NOISY DOGS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to keep or harbor any dog which,
by loud and frequent barking, whining or howling, disturbs the peace and quiet
of any neighborhood.
(1994 Code, § 10-205)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993) 
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.30  NUISANCE DEFINED: ACTIONS CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE.
   (A)   The actions of a dog or cat constitute a nuisance when a dog or cat
disturbs the rights of, threatens the safety of or damages the property of or
injures the person or a member of the general public or interferes with the
ordinary use and enjoyment of his or her property.
   (B)   It shall be a civil offense for any person to own, keep, possess or
maintain a dog or cat in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. By
way of example and not a limitation, the following acts or actions by an owner
or possessor of an animal are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and,
therefore, unlawful:
      (1)   Failure to exercise sufficient restraint necessary to control a dog
or cat;
      (2)   Allowing or permitting a dog or cat to damage the property of any
one other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over garbage
containers or damaging gardens, shrubs, lawns, flowers or vegetables;
      (3)   Maintain a vicious dog or cat (see § 90.28 of this chapter);
      (4)   Maintaining dogs or cats in a unsanitary environment which results
in offensive odors or is dangerous to the animal or the public health, welfare
or safety;
      (5)   Maintaining property in a manner that is offensive, annoying or
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare because of the number, type,
variety, density or location of the dogs or cats on the property;
      (6)   Maintaining a dog or cat that is diseased or dangerous to the
public health;
      (7)   Maintaining a dog or cat that habitually or repeatedly chases,
snaps at, attacks or barks at pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles; and/or
      (8)   Failure to confine a female dog while in heat for 24 days in a
building or secure enclosure in such a manner that she will not be in contact
with another dog, or create a nuisance by attracting other dogs. This division
(B)(8) shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of dogs
within an enclosed area on the premises of the owner of the dog which is being
bred.
(1994 Code, § 10-206)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993) 
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.31  IGNORANCE OF DOG’S OR CAT’S HABITS NO DEFENSE.
   It shall be the duty of any person owning, maintaining or harboring any dog
or cat to maintain close personal supervision of said animal and ignorance of
the habits or character of the dog or cat on the part of such person shall be
no defense in actions arising under this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 10-207)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986)
§ 90.32  POUND TO BE PROVIDED.
   The City Manager shall establish a dog pound for keeping impounded dogs. The
pound may be operated directly by the city or it may be operated by a
veterinarian or other suitable person under a contract with the city.
(1994 Code, § 10-208)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986)
§ 90.33  IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Impoundment of animals running at large.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer or his or her
duly authorized representative to apprehend any animal found running at large
contrary to the provisions of this chapter and impound such animal in the city
animal shelter.
      (2)   The owner of an impounded animal shall be notified to appear within
seven days from the date of notice to the owner, to redeem the animal by
payment of the required fees. DAYS are defined as days the animal shelter is
open. All provisions of this section may be included in the contract with a
veterinarian for operation of a dog pound.
      (3)   Any animal not claimed within the times provided may be either
destroyed or sold.
      (4)   The impoundment of an animal under this section shall not relieve
the owner thereof from prosecution for permitting such animal to run at large
in violation of §
90.27 of this chapter.
      (5)   In addition to, or in lieu of, apprehending and impounding an
animal found at large, the animal control officer, upon determining the owner,
may return the animal to the owner and issue a summons requiring the owner to
appear in city court for determination of whether or not there has been a
violation within the meaning of §
90.27 of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 10-209)
   (B)   Impoundment and other fees in connection with animal shelter.
      (1)   The City Manager is directed to establish fees for the apprehension
of any animals running at large, for the impoundment of animals at the city
animal shelter, for the redemption of animals impounded under the provisions of
this chapter, and for the disposal of animals which are to be adopted by new
owners. The City Manager may set different fees for different sizes, sexes and
kinds of animals and different fees for registered and unregistered animals.
Such fees, in all events, shall be sufficient for the city to recover its costs
incurred in the administration of this chapter.
      (2)   Before any fee authorized by this section shall be levied or
amended, it must be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at
least five days before it shall become effective.
(1994 Code, § 10-210)
(Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)
§ 90.34  DISPOSITION OF FEES, CIVIL PENALTIES AND THE LIKE.
   All funds collected under the provisions of this chapter, including license
fees, redemption charges and civil penalties shall be paid into the General
Fund of the city.
(1994 Code, § 10-211)  (Ord. 409, passed 2-24-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)
PIT BULLS
§ 90.45  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   IMPOUNDMENT. The taking or picking up and confining of an animal by any
police officer, animal control officer or any other public officer under the
provisions of this subchapter.
   MUZZLE. A device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed
to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any
person or other animal.
   OWNER. Any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity owning,
harboring or possessing any pit bull, or in the case of a person under the age
of 18, that person’s parent or legal guardian. A pit bull shall be deemed to be
harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three or more consecutive days. This
definition shall not apply to any veterinary clinic or boarding kennel.
   PIT BULL. Any of the following dogs:
      (1)   The bull terrier breed of dog;
      (2)   The Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog;
      (3)   The American pit bull terrier breed of dog;
      (4)   The American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog;
      (5)   Dogs of mixed breed or of other breeds than above listed which
breed or mixed breed is known as pit bull, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers;
and
      (6)   Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being
predominantly of the breeds of dogs known as bull terrier, Staffordshire bull
terrier, American pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier, and any
other breed commonly known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers; or
a combination of any of these breeds.
   PREDOMINANTLY. Knowledge through identification procedures or otherwise, or
admission by owner, keeper or harborer, that the dog is more than 50% pit bull.
PREDOMINANTLY also means that the dog exhibits the physical characteristics of
a pit bull more than that of any other breed of dog.
   SANITARY CONDITION. A condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize
the possibility of disease transmission.
   UNDER RESTRAINT. The dog is secured by a leash, led under the control of a
person physically capable of restraining the dog and obedient to that person’s
commands, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner’s
premises.
(Ord. 732, passed 10-22-2012)
§ 90.46  RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any way possess a pit bull
dog within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, that, persons
owning such dogs at the time this chapter is adopted shall be allowed to keep
them; provided that, they comply with all of the provisions of this subchapter,
including §
90.47 of this chapter, within 30 days of the effective date of this subchapter.
(Ord. 732, passed 10-22-2012)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.47  STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The following standards and requirements apply to pit bull dogs located
within the corporate limits.
   (A)   Registration. Each owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of a pit bull
dog shall register such dog with the city.
   (B)   Leash. No person having charge, custody, control or possession of a
pit bull shall permit the dog to go outside its kennel, pen or other proper
enclosure unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four
feet in length. No person shall permit a pit bull dog to be kept on a chain,
rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person of
suitable age and discretion is in physical control of the leash. Such dogs may
not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings or
structures.
   (C)   Muzzle. It is unlawful for any owner or keeper of a pit bull to allow
the dog to be outside its kennel, pen or other proper enclosure unless it is
necessary for the dog to receive veterinary care. In such cases, the dog must
wear a properly fitted muzzle sufficient to prevent such dog from biting
persons or other animals. Such muzzle shall not interfere with the dog’s
breathing or vision.
   (D)   Confinement. Except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this
section, all pit bull dogs shall be securely confined indoors or confined in a
locked pen, kennel or other secure enclosure that is suitable to prevent the
entry of children and is designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Such pen,
kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the
sides. All structures used to confine pit bull dogs must be locked with a key
or combination lock when such animals are within the structure and the
structure must have a secure floor attached to the sides of the pen or the
sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All
structures erected to house pit bull dogs must comply with zoning and building
ordinances and regulations of the city. The enclosure shall include shelter and
protection from the elements and shall provide adequate exercise room, be
adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (E)   Confinement indoors. No pit bull dog may be kept on a porch, patio or
in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such
building on its own volition. In addition, no such dog may be kept in a house
or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors
are the only obstacles preventing the dog from exiting the structure.
   (F)   Signs. All owners, keepers, harborers or possessors of pit bull dogs
shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by
the public using the words “Beware of Dog”. In addition, a similar sign must be
posted on the kennel or pen of such animal.
   (G)   Insurance.
      (1)   All owners, keepers, harborers or possessors of pit bull dogs must
provide proof to the city of public liability insurance in a single incident
amount of $100,000 for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or
for damage to property owned by any persons which may result from owning,
possessing, keeping or maintaining of such animal.
      (2)   Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the
policy will be made unless ten days’ written notice is first given to the city.
   (H)   Identification photographs. All owners, keepers, possessors or
harborers of pit bull dogs must provide to the city two color photographs of
the dog clearly showing the color and approximate size of the animal.
   (I)   Reporting requirements. All owners, keepers, possessors or harborers
of pit bull dogs must, within ten days of the incident, report the following
information in writing to the city as required hereinafter:
      (1)   The removal from the city or death of a pit bull dog;
      (2)   The birth of offspring of a pit bull dog; or
      (3)   The new address of a pit bull dog owner should the owner move
within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 732, passed 10-22-2012)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.48  SALE OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, barter or in any other way transfer possession of a
pit bull dog to any person within the city unless the recipient person resides
permanently in the same household and on the same premises as the owner of such
dog; provided that, the owner of a pit bull dog may sell or otherwise dispose
of a pit bull dog or the offspring of such dog to persons who do not reside
within the city.
(Ord. 732, passed 10-22-2012)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.49  ANIMALS BORN OF REGISTERED DOGS.
   All offspring born of pit bull dogs within the city must be removed from the
city within six weeks of the birth of such animal.
(Ord. 732, passed 10-22-2012)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.50  REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTIONS.
   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any dog registered within the
city as a pit bull dog or any of those breeds defined by §
90.45 of this chapter is in fact a dog subject to the requirements of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 732, passed 10-22-2012)
§ 90.51  FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of a pit
bull dog within the city to fail to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter. Any dog found to be the subject of a violation of this subchapter
shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to
comply will result in the revocation of the license of such animal resulting in
the immediate removal of the animal from the city.
(Ord. 732, passed 10-22-2012)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 486, passed 4-1-1993; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 732, passed 10-22-
2012; Ord. 832, passed 4-22-2019)
CHAPTER 91:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
   
91.01   Public Officer; enforcement
   
91.02   Smoke, soot, cinders and the like
   
91.03   Stagnant water
   
91.04   Weeds
   
91.05   Dead animals
   
91.06   Health and sanitation nuisances
   
91.07   Overgrown and dirty lots
   
91.08   Unlawful disposal of rubbish
§ 91.01  PUBLIC OFFICER; ENFORCEMENT.
   The Public Officer shall be such municipal, county or state officer as the
City Manager shall appoint or designate to administer and enforce health and
sanitation regulations within the city.
(1994 Code, § 13-101)
§ 91.02  SMOKE, SOOT, CINDERS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to permit or cause the escape of
such quantities of dense smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, dust or
gases as to be detrimental to or to endanger the health, comfort and safety of
the public or so as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to
property or business.
(1994 Code, § 13-102)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.03  STAGNANT WATER.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to knowingly allow any pool of
stagnant water to accumulate and stand on his or her property without treating
it so as effectively to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes.
(1994 Code, § 13-103)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.04  WEEDS.
   (A)   Cutting grass and weeds; civil offense. Every owner or tenant of
property shall periodically cut the grass and other vegetation commonly
recognized as weeds on his or her property, and it shall be a civil offense for
any person to fail to comply with an order by the Codes Enforcement Officer to
cut such vegetation when it has reached a height of over one foot.
   (B)   Prohibited vegetation.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any property owner, occupant, or person in
control of any lot or parcel of land within the city to fail to eradicate on
any such lot or parcel of land any noxious weeds, ragweed, poison ivy, poison
oak, poison sumac, thistle,, kudzu or any random invasive privet hedge. A weed
may be added to or deleted from the list of noxious weeds by resolution of the
City Commission.
      (2)   Such noxious weeds may be destroyed by cutting or removal, by
spraying with a chemical compound/herbicide, by plowing under, or by such other
method as recommended by the University of Tennessee Agriculture Extension
Office.
(1994 Code, § 13-104)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 796, passed 11-28-
2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.05  DEAD ANIMALS.
   Any person owning or having possession of any dead animal not intended for
use as food shall promptly bury the same or notify the Public Officer and
dispose of such animal in such manner as the Public Officer shall direct.
(1994 Code, § 13-105)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.06  HEALTH AND SANITATION NUISANCES.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to permit any premises owned,
occupied or controlled by him or her to become or remain in a filthy condition,
or permit the use or occupation of same in such a manner as to create noxious
or offensive smells and odors in connection therewith, or to allow the
accumulation or creation of unwholesome and offensive matter or the breeding of
flies, rodents or other vermin on the premises to the menace of the public
health or the annoyance of people residing within the vicinity.
(1994 Code, § 13-106)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.07  OVERGROWN AND DIRTY LOTS.
   (A)   Prohibition. Pursuant to the authority granted to municipalities under
Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-113, it shall be unlawful for any owner of record of
real property to create, maintain or permit to be maintained on such property
the growth of trees, vines, grass, underbrush and/or the accumulations of
debris, trash, litter or garbage or any combination of the preceding elements
so as to endanger the health, safety or welfare of other citizens or to
encourage the infestation of rats and other harmful animals.
   (B)   Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to any and all
parcels of property located within the corporate limits of the city. There
shall be no limitation upon the application of this section.
   (C)   Violation.
      (1)   (a)   Citation. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to
create, maintain or permit the growth of trees, vines, grass, underbrush or the
accumulation of debris, trash, litter or garbage or any combination of the
preceding elements that would endanger the health, safety or welfare of other
citizens, or encourage the infestation of rats and other harmful insects and
animals. The officer is authorized to issue a citation (to be served in the
same manner as the notice set out below) for violations of this section and
shall give notice to the property owner to appear and answer the charges
against him, her or them in municipal court.
         (b)   Civil penalty. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $50 plus court costs for each separate violation
of this section. Each day the violation of this section continues shall be
considered a separate violation.
      (2)   Clean up at property owner’s expense. If the property owner of
record fails or refuses to remedy the condition within five to 30 days
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays (the time periods established
for compliance shall be at the discretion of the officer) after receiving a
citation or notice of violation, the officer shall immediately cause the
condition to be remedied or removed at a cost in conformity with reasonable
standards, and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the owner of the
property at a minimum charge of $75. Upon the filing of the notice with the
Office of the Register of Deeds for McMinn County, the costs shall be a lien on
the property in favor of the municipality, second only to liens of the state,
county and municipality for taxes, any lien of the municipality for special
assessments and any valid lien, right or interest in such property duly
recorded and perfected by filing prior to the filing of such notice. These
costs shall be placed on the tax rolls of the municipality as a lien and shall
be added to property tax bills to be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the costs,
they may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as delinquent
property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty and
interest as delinquent property taxes.
      (3)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies provided in this chapter are
not exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the city may have.
The Codes Enforcement Officer, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, may
elect to issue a citation, notice of violation or to clean up the property at
the owner’s expense.
   (D)   Notice to property owner. All notices by the Codes Enforcement Officer
served upon the owner of record in violation of the provisions of this section,
shall state in plain language to remedy any such condition within five to 30
days excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. The time periods
established for compliance shall be at the discretion of the officer.
      (1)   All notices shall be sent either by:
         (a)   Registered or certified United States mail, addressed to the
last known address of the owner of record as documented by the County Tax
Assessor;
         (b)   Hand delivered with the deliverer obtaining the owner’s
signature or with the delivers affidavit confirming receipt/delivery of the
notice; or
         (c)   If the whereabouts of such person is unknown and the same cannot
be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence, the officer shall make
an affidavit to that effect and then post such notice in conspicuous place on
the property or premises.
      (2)   The notice shall state that the owner of the property is entitled
to a hearing before the City Municipal Judge, and shall, at the minimum,
contain the following additional information:
         (a)   A brief statement that the owner is in violation of this section
(§
91.07) of the Etowah Municipal Code and that the property of such owner may be
cleaned up at the expense of the owner and a lien placed against the property
to secure the cost of the clean-up;
         (b)   The office, address and telephone number of the department or
person giving the notice;
         (c)   A cost estimate for remedying the noted condition, which shall
be in conformity with the standards of cost in the city as adopted by the City
Commission; and
         (d)   That the property owner may request a hearing.
      (3)   The first written notice to property owner shall serve as a
continuing notice as to the violation(s) for each calendar year.
         (a)   Said notice shall advise property owner/resident of the current
violation(s) and the set time frame as to when the violation(s) must be
rectified. If initial violations are not rectified within the time frame set
forth within the written notice the city codes enforcement officer shall cause
the violations to be corrected and any and all fees associated with shall be
applied as a lien to said property.
         (b)   If violation continues the property shall be automatically
placed on a bi- weekly lot maintenance schedule and each bi-weekly cost will be
also applied as a lien to said property until owner and/or legal representative
for property owner contacts code enforcement to correct all violations on a
permanent basis.
   (E)   Appeal. The owner of record who is aggrieved by the determination and
order of the public officer may appeal the determination and order to the City
Commission. The appeal shall be filed with the city within ten days following
the receipt of the notice issued pursuant to division (D) above. The failure to
appeal within this time shall, without exception, constitute a waiver of the
right to a hearing.
   (F)   Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by an order or act of the City
Commission under division (D) above may seek judicial review of the order or
act. The time period established in division (C) above shall be stayed during
the pendency of judicial review.
   (G)   Supplemental nature of this section. The provisions of this section
are in addition and supplemental to, and not in substitution for, any other
provision in the municipal charter, this municipal code of ordinances or other
applicable law which permits the city to proceed against an owner, tenant or
occupant of property who has created, maintained or permitted to be maintained
on such property the growth of trees, vines, grass, weeds, underbrush and/or
the accumulation of the debris, trash, litter or garbage or any combination of
the preceding elements, under its charter, any other provisions of this
municipal code of ordinances or any other applicable law.
(1994 Code, § 13-108)   (Ord. 569, passed 10-26-1998; Ord. 686, passed 8-25-
2008; Ord. 749, passed 12-16-2013; Ord. passed - -; Ord. 828, passed 11-26-
2018)
§ 91.08  UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH.
   In complying with the aforesaid sections of this chapter it shall be
unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having control of
property in the City of Etowah to rake up, cut up, or pile-up said weeds,
grass, vegetation, dead or broken tree limbs, dead trees, miscellaneous debris
including any and all construction debris into any ditch or natural drain,
rights-of-way, alley ways, sidewalks or at any place that might obstruct the
vision of the operators of vehicles and/or pedestrians or that might obstruct
the flow of storm water drainage. Approved debris shall be separated by brushy/
vegetation or manmade materials; said materials are to be placed three to five
feet from curb or edge of pavement. As to the disposal of construction debris
reference § 50.06 Construction and Remodeling Material; Mobile Construction
Trailers.
(Ord. 801, passed 5-22-2017)
CHAPTER 92:  JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Junkyards
Junk Vehicles
   
92.15   Definitions
   
92.16   Violations a civil offense
   
92.17   Exceptions
   
92.18   Enforcement
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Health and Sanitation; Nuisances, see
Ch. 91
   Slum clearance, see §§
150.01 through
150.12
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01  JUNKYARDS.
   All junkyards within the corporate limits shall be operated and maintained
subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   All junk stored or kept in such yards shall be so kept that it will
not catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may breed and so that it will not
constitute a place or places in which rats, mice or other vermin may be
harbored, reared or propagated.
   (B)   All such junkyards shall be enclosed within close-fitting plank or
metal solid fences touching the ground on the bottom and being not less than
six feet in height, such fence to be built so that it will be impossible for
stray cats and/or stray dogs to have access to such junkyards.
   (C)   Such yards shall be so maintained as to be in a sanitary condition and
so as not to be a menace to the public health or safety.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      JUNKYARD.
      (1)   JUNKYARD means an establishment or place of business that is
maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, or
for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard. JUNKYARD includes
scrap metal processors, used auto parts yards, yards providing temporary
storage of automobile bodies or parts awaiting disposal as a normal part of the
business operation, when the business will continually have like materials
located on the premises, garbage dumps and sanitary landfills.
      (2)   JUNKYARD does not include a recycling center.
(Tenn. Code Ann. § 54-20-103)
(1994 Code, § 13-301)  Penalty, see §
92.99
JUNK VEHICLES
§ 92.15  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED. Any motor vehicle that does not display current tags and/or where
an owner cannot show proof of insurance or any motor vehicle that has remained
illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours without consent
of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours.
   JUNK VEHICLE. A vehicle of any age that is damaged or defective in any one
or combination of any of the following ways that either makes the vehicle
immediately inoperable, or would prohibit the vehicle from being operated in a
reasonably safe manner upon the public streets and highways under its own power
if self-propelled, or while being towed or pushed, if not self-propelled:
      (1)   Flat tires, missing tires, missing wheels or missing or partially
or totally disassembled tires and wheels;
      (2)   Missing inoperative or partially or totally disassembled essential
part or parts of the vehicle’s drive train, including, but not limited to,
engine, transmission, clutch, transaxle, drive shaft, differential or axle;
      (3)   Extensive exterior body damage or missing or partially or totally
disassembled essential body parts, including, but not limited to, fenders,
doors, engine hood, bumper or bumpers, windshield or windows;
      (4)   Missing inoperative or partially or totally disassembled essential
interior parts, including, but not limited to, driver’s seat, steering wheel,
instrument panel, clutch pedal, brake pedal, gear shift lever;
      (5)   Missing inoperative or partially or totally disassembled parts
essential to the starting or running of the vehicle under its own power,
including, but not limited to, starter, generator or alternator, battery,
distributor, gas tank, carburetor or fuel injection system, spark plugs, brakes
or radiator;
      (6)   Interior is a container for metal, glass, paper, rags or other
cloth, wood, auto parts, machinery, waste or discarded materials in such
quantity, quality and arrangement that a driver cannot be properly seated in
the vehicle;
      (7)   Lying on the ground (upside down, on its side or at other extreme
angle), sitting on block or suspended in the air by any other method; and
      (8)   General environment in which the vehicle sits, including, but not
limited to, vegetation that has grown up around, in or through the vehicle, the
collection of pools of water in the vehicle and the accumulation of other
garbage or debris around the vehicle.
   PERSON. Any natural person, or any firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other organization of any kind and description.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property that is not public property, regardless of
how the property is zoned or used.
   TRAVELED PORTION OF ANY PUBLIC STREET OR HIGHWAY. The width of the street
from curb to curb, or where there are no curbs, the entire width of the paved
portion of the street, or where the street is unpaved, the entire width of the
street in which vehicles ordinarily use for travel.
   VEHICLE. Any machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to
travel along the ground by the use of wheels, treads, self-laying tracks,
runners, slides or skids, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles, motor scooters, go-carts, campers, tractors, trailers, tractor-
trailers, buggies, wagons and earth-moving equipment, and any part of the same.
(1994 Code, § 13-401)   (Ord. 584, passed 12-13-1999; Ord. 823, passed 8-27-
2018)
§ 92.16  VIOLATIONS A CIVIL OFFENSE.
   It shall be unlawful and a civil offense for any person:
   (A)   To park and/or in any other manner place and leave unattended on the
traveled portion of any public street or highway a junk vehicle for any period
of time, even if the owner or operator of the vehicle did not intend to
permanently desert or forsake the vehicle;
   (B)   To park or in any other manner place and leave unattended on the
untraveled portion of any street or highway, or upon any other public property,
a junk vehicle for more than 48 continuous hours, even if the owner or operator
of the vehicle did not intend to permanently desert or forsake the vehicle;
and/or
   (C)   To park, store, keep, maintain on private property a junk vehicle for
more than 60 days.
(1994 Code, § 13-402)  (Ord. 584, passed 12-13-1999)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17  EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be permissible for a person to park, store, keep and maintain
a junked vehicle on private property under the following conditions:
      (1)   The junk vehicle is completely enclosed within a building where
neither the vehicle, nor any part of it, is visible from the street or from any
other abutting property. However, this exception shall not exempt the owner or
person in possession of the property from any zoning, building, housing,
property maintenance and other regulations governing the building in which such
vehicle is enclosed; and/or
      (2)   The junk vehicle is parked or stored on property lawfully zoned for
the parking or storage of such vehicles. However, this exception shall not
exempt the owner or occupant of the property from any other zoning, building,
property maintenance and other regulations governing the manner in which such
vehicles can be kept on such property.
   (B)   No person shall park, store, keep and maintain on private property a
junk vehicle for any period of time if it poses an immediate threat to the
health and safety of citizens of the city.
(1994 Code, § 13-403)  (Ord. 584, passed 12-13-1999)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 7-63-101, the Codes Enforcement
Officer is authorized to issue an ordinance summons for violations of this
subchapter on private property. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall upon the
complaint of any citizen, or acting on his or her own information, investigate
complaints of junked vehicles on private property.
      (2)   If, after such investigation, the Codes Enforcement Officer finds a
junked vehicle on private property, he or she shall issue an ordinance summons.
The ordinance summons shall be served upon the owner or owners of the property,
and shall give notice to the same to appear and answer the charges against him,
her or them.
   (B)   If the offender refuses to sign the agreement to appear, the Codes
Enforcement Officer may:
      (1)   Request the city judge to issue a summons; or
      (2)   Request a police office to witness the violation.
   (C)   The police officer who witnesses the violation may issue the offender
a citation in lieu of arrest as authorized by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 7-63-101 et
seq. or if the offender refuses to sign the citation, may arrest the offender
for failure to sign the citation in lieu of arrest.
(1994 Code, § 13-404)  (Ord. 584, passed 12-13-1999)
§ 92.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(1994 Code, § 13-405)  (Ord. 584, passed 12-13-1999)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
111.   PERMITS AND SOLICITATIONS
      
112.   TAXICABS
      
113.   AMUSEMENTS
      
114.   PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES
      
115.   ALCOHOL
      
116.   MOBILE FOOD UNITS
CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   “Going out of business” sales
§ 110.01  “GOING OUT OF BUSINESS” SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent a sale as being a
“going out of business” sale. A “GOING OUT OF BUSINESS” SALE, for the purposes
of this section, shall be a fire sale, bankrupt sale, loss of lease sale or any
other sale made in anticipation of the termination of a business at its present
location. When any person, after advertising a “going out of business” sale,
adds to his or her stock or fails to go out of business within 90 days, he or
she shall prima facie be deemed to have violated this section.
(1994 Code, § 9-101)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 111:  PERMITS AND SOLICITATIONS
Section
Peddlers
   
111.01   Permit required
   
111.02   Exemptions
   
111.03   Permit applications
   
111.04   Issuance or refusal of permit
   
111.05   Appeal
   
111.06   Bond
   
111.07   Loud noises and speaking devices
   
111.08   Use of streets and site location
   
111.09   Exhibition of permit
   
111.10   Police officers to enforce
   
111.11   Permit revocation and suspension
   
111.12   Reapplication
   
111.13   Permit expiration and renewal
Charitable Solicitations
   
111.25   Permit required
   
111.26   Prerequisites for permit
   
111.27   Permit denial
   
111.28   Exhibition of permit
   
111.29   Trespassing
   
111.30   Violations
   
111.31   Permit fee
PEDDLERS
§ 111.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be a civil offense for any peddler, canvasser, solicitor or
transient merchant to ply his or her trade within the corporate limits without
first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter. No permit shall be used at any time by any person other than the
one to whom it is issued.
(1994 Code, § 9-201)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.02  EXEMPTIONS.
   The terms of this subchapter shall not be applicable to farmers selling
their own produce, to persons selling at wholesale to dealers, nor to newsboys,
nor to bona fide merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of
business, nor to bona fide charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic
organizations.
(1994 Code, § 9-202)
§ 111.03  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applicants for a permit under this subchapter must file with the city
a sworn written application containing the following:
      (1)   Name and physical description of applicant;
      (2)   Complete permanent home address and local address of the applicant
and, in the case of transient merchants, the local address from which proposed
sales will be made;
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold;
      (4)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship;
      (5)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
      (6)   A recent clear photograph approximately two inches square showing
the head and shoulders of the applicant;
      (7)   The names of at least two reputable local property owners who will
certify as to the applicant’s good moral reputation and business
responsibility, or in lieu of the names of references, such other available
evidence as will enable an investigator to evaluate the applicant’s moral
reputation and business responsibility;
      (8)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime or misdemeanor or for violating any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
      (9)   The last three cities or towns, if that many, where applicant
carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and, in the
case of transient merchants, the addresses from which such business was
conducted in those municipalities; and
      (10)   At the time of filing the application, a fee as set forth by the
City Commission shall be paid to the city to cover the cost of investigating
the facts stated therein.
   (B)   (1)   Solicitor permits and transient vendor permits shall be one and
the same as the same background and reference checks are required.
      (2)   All permit applications fees are due at time application is
submitted.
      (3)   All permit fees are non-refundable.
      (4)   The permit fee of solicitor/transient vendor shall be $50 and are
non-refundable.
(1994 Code, § 9-203)  (Ord. 364, passed - -; Ord. 824, passed 8-27-2018)
§ 111.04  ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Each applicant’s references and application information will be
verified by the Police Department within 72 hours of application. The Chief of
Police shall report its findings within the said 72 hours to applicant if
permit is approved or denied.
   (B)   If, as a result of such verification, the Chief of Police finds the
applicant’s moral reputation and/or business responsibility to be
unsatisfactory, the city shall notify the applicant is denied.
   (C)   If the Chief of Police upon verification that the morals of applicant
and the business responsibility of the applicant are satisfactory, the city
shall advise applicant that they have been approved for a permit and that they
will need to bring required bond to City Hall to have permit issued.
(1994 Code, § 9-204) (Ord. 824, passed 8-27-2018)
§ 111.05  APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the action of the city in the denial of a permit
shall have the right to appeal to the City Commission. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with the Mayor, within 14 days after notice of the action
complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the
appeal. The Mayor shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and
notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given to the appellant.
The notice shall be in writing and shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
applicant at his or her last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner
as a summons at least three days prior to the date set for hearing.
(1994 Code, § 9-205)
§ 111.06  BOND.
   Every permittee shall file with the city a surety bond running to the city
in the amount of $1,000. The bond shall be conditioned that the permittee shall
comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the
statutes of the state regulating peddlers, canvassers, solicitors, transient
merchants, itinerant merchants or itinerant vendors, as the case may be, and
shall guarantee to any citizen of the city that all money paid as a down
payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of
the permittee, and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing
business with said permittee that the property purchased will be delivered
according to the representations of the permittee. Action on such bond may be
brought by any person aggrieved and for whose benefit, among others, the bond
is given, but the surety may, by paying, pursuant to order of the Court, the
face amount of the bond to the Clerk of the Court in which the suit is
commenced, be relieved without costs of all further liability.
(1994 Code, § 9-206)
§ 111.07  LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.
   No permittee, nor any person in his or her behalf, shall shout, cry out,
blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound amplifying device upon any of the
sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon
private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced
therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the adjacent sidewalks,
streets, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such permittee proposes to
sell.
(1994 Code, § 9-207)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.08  USE OF STREETS AND SITE LOCATION.
   (A)   No permittee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the
public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location thereon, nor
shall any be permitted to operate in a congested area where the operation might
impede or inconvenience the public use of the streets. For the purpose of this
subchapter, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be
deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested and the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
   (B)   A written statement from the property owner shall be required
validating that the applicant has the authority to set up a vendor location on
a temporary basis at the site listed in the application.
(1994 Code, § 9-208)  (Ord. 824, passed 8-27-2018)   Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.09  EXHIBITION OF PERMIT.
   Permittees are required to exhibit their permits at the request of any
police officer or citizen.
(1994 Code, § 9-209)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.10  POLICE OFFICERS TO ENFORCE.
   It shall be the duty of all police officers to see that the provisions of
this subchapter are enforced.
(1994 Code, § 9-210)
§ 111.11  PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Permits issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be
suspended or revoked by the CityManager or Chief of Police for any violations
as set forth below:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the
application for permit, or made in the course of carrying on the business of
solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or
itinerant vendor;
      (2)   Any violation of this subchapter;
      (3)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor; or
      (4)   Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient
merchant, itinerant vendor, as the case may be, in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace
to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Suspension or revocation of a permit shall be given in writing,
setting forth the specific grounds of the complaint and violations. Persons
that have had permits revoked or suspended may appeal in writing to the City
Manager to request a hearing be set within ten days.
   (C)   When reasonably necessary in the public interest, the Mayor may
suspend a permit pending the revocation hearing.
(1994 Code, § 9-211)  (Ord. 824, passed 8-27-2018)
§ 111.12  REAPPLICATION.
   No permittee whose permit has been revoked shall make further application
until a period of at least six months has elapsed since the last revocation.
(1994 Code, § 9-212)
§ 111.13  PERMIT EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   Permits issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall expire 30 days
from issuance and may reapply for a renewal for a renewal fee of $25 for each
additional 30 days. Each renewal will require reapplication and verification of
said details. Applicant will also be required to submit written statement from
property owner that authorizes use of property location for the new period of
time as set forth in § 111.08.
(1994 Code, § 9-213)  (Ord. 824, passed 8-27-2018)
CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
§ 111.25  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall solicit contributions or anything else of value for any real
or alleged charitable or religious purpose without a permit from the city
authorizing such solicitation; provided, however, that, this section shall not
apply to any locally established organization or church operated exclusively
for charitable or religious purposes if the solicitations are conducted
exclusively among the members thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for
making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of
collections or contributions at the regular assemblies of any such established
organization or church.
(1994 Code, § 9-301)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.26  PREREQUISITES FOR PERMIT.
   The city shall, upon application, issue a permit authorizing charitable or
religious solicitations when, after a reasonable investigation, he or she finds
the following facts to exist:
   (A)   The applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and
integrity, or if the applicant is not an individual person, that every member,
managing officer or agent of the applicant has a good character or reputation
for honesty and integrity;
   (B)   The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under
responsible and reliable persons;
   (C)   The applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or
enterprise;
   (D)   The solicitation will not be a fraud on the public, but will be for a
bona fide charitable or religious purpose; and
   (E)   The solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the
charitable cause described by the applicant.
(1994 Code, § 9-302)
§ 111.27  PERMIT DENIAL.
   Any applicant for a permit to make charitable or religious solicitations may
appeal to the City Commission if he or she has not been granted a permit within
15 days after he or she makes application therefor.
(1994 Code, § 9-303)
§ 111.28  EXHIBITION OF PERMIT.
   Any solicitor required by this subchapter to have a permit shall exhibit
such permit at the request of any police officer or person solicited.
(1994 Code, § 9-304)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.29  TRESPASSING.
   It shall be a civil offense and deemed to be a trespass for any permittee
acting under this subchapter to fail to leave promptly the private premises of
any person who requests or directs him or her to leave.
(1994 Code, § 9-305)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.30  VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any provision of this subchapter or making a false or
fraudulent statement either in his or her application for a permit or in the
process of making a solicitation shall be subject to the civil penalty provided
for violations of this municipal code. In addition to or in lieu of any
pecuniary penalty, if a violator has been issued a permit, his or her permit
shall be cancelled and revoked by the Court.
(1994 Code, § 9-306)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)
§ 111.31  PERMIT FEE.
   There shall be no permit fee charges for said permits for charitable
solicitations. However, an application and verification shall be required.
(Ord. 824, passed 8-27-2018)
CHAPTER 112:  TAXICABS
Section
   
112.01   Franchise and privilege license required
   
112.02   Application and hearing requirements
   
112.03   Liability insurance or bond required
   
112.04   Franchise revocation or suspension
   
112.05   Mechanical conditions and cleanliness of vehicles; inspections
   
112.06   Driver’s license and permit
   
112.07   Drivers not to solicit business
   
112.08   Parking restricted
   
112.09   Drivers to use direct routes
   
112.10   Prohibited conduct
   
112.11   Transportation of more than one passenger at the same time
§ 112.01  FRANCHISE AND PRIVILEGE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to engage in the taxicab business
unless he or she has first obtained a taxicab franchise from the city and has a
currently effective privilege license.
(1994 Code, § 9-401)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.02  APPLICATION AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall be eligible to apply for a taxicab franchise if he or she
has a bad character or has been convicted of a felony within the last ten
years. Applications for taxicab franchises shall be made under oath and in
writing to the Chief of Police. Each applicant shall pay a one time application
fee of $500 per driver to cover the cost of obtaining a background check and
conducting a proper investigation of the application. The application shall
state the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the
proposed place of business, the number of cabs the applicant desires to
operate, the makes and models of said cabs and such other pertinent information
as the Chief of Police may require. The application shall be accompanied by at
least two affidavits of reputable local citizens attesting to the good
character and reputation of the applicant. Within ten days after receipt of an
application, the Chief of Police shall make a thorough investigation of the
applicant; determine if there is a public need for additional taxicab service;
present the application to the Mayor and City Commission; and make a
recommendation to either grant or refuse a franchise to the applicant. The City
Commission shall thereupon hold a public hearing at which time witnesses for
and against the granting of the franchise shall be heard. In deciding whether
or not to grant the franchise, the City Commission shall consider the public
need for additional service, the increased traffic congestion, parking space
requirements, and whether or not the safe use of the streets by the public,
both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved by the granting of such an
additional franchise. Those persons already operating taxicabs when this code
is adopted shall not be required to make applications under this section, but
shall be required to comply with all the other provisions of this chapter.
Additional fees for the renewal and replacement of permits shall be set
pursuant to a Fee Schedule established by the City Manager and on file at City
Hall.
(1994 Code, § 9-402)  (Ord. 804, passed 7-24-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03  LIABILITY INSURANCE OR BOND REQUIRED.
   No taxicab franchise shall be issued or continued in operation unless there
is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy or bond for each
vehicle authorized in an amount equal to that required by the state’s Financial
Responsibility Law as set out in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55, Ch. 12. The
insurance policy or bond required by this section shall contain a provision
that it shall not be cancelled, except after at least 20 days’ written notice
is given by the insurer to both the insured and the city.
(1994 Code, § 9-403)
§ 112.04  FRANCHISE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   The City Commission, after a public hearing, may revoke or suspend any
taxicab franchise for misrepresentations or false statements made in the
application therefor or for traffic violations or violations of this chapter by
the taxicab owner or any driver.
(1994 Code, § 9-404)
§ 112.05  MECHANICAL CONDITIONS AND CLEANLINESS OF VEHICLES; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Maintenance conditions. It shall be a civil offense for any person to
operate any taxicab in the city unless such taxicab is equipped with four-wheel
brakes, front and rear lights, safe tires, horn, muffler, windshield wipers and
rear vision mirror, all of which shall conform to the requirements of the State
Motor Vehicle Law. Each taxicab shall be equipped with a handle or latch or
other opening device attached to each door of the passenger compartment so that
such doors may be operated by the passenger from the inside of the taxicab
without the intervention or assistance of the driver. The motor and all
mechanical parts shall be kept in such condition or repair as may be reasonably
necessary to provide for the safety of the public and the continuous
satisfactory operation of the taxicab.
(1994 Code, § 9-405)
   (B)   Cleanliness of vehicles. All taxicabs operated in the city shall, at
all times, be kept in a reasonably clean and sanitary condition. They shall be
thoroughly swept and dusted at least once each day. At least once every week,
they shall be thoroughly washed and the interior cleaned with a suitable
antiseptic solution.
(1994 Code, § 9-406)
   (C)   Inspection of vehicles. All taxicabs shall be inspected at least
annually by a certified mechanic, at the cost of the applicant/driver, to
ensure that they comply with the requirements of this chapter with respect to
mechanical condition, cleanliness and the like. A certification of fitness
shall be submitted to City Hall in writing no later than ten days from the date
of inspection. Said certification will remain on file at City Hall until it
expires one calendar year from the date of inspection.
(1994 Code, § 9-407)
(Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 804, passed 7-24-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.06  DRIVER’S LICENSE AND PERMIT.
   (A)   License and permit required for drivers. No person shall drive a
taxicab unless he or she is in possession of a state special chauffeur’s
license and a taxicab driver’s permit issued by the Chief of Police.
(1994 Code, § 9-408)
   (B)   Qualifications for driver’s permit. No person shall be issued a
taxicab driver’s permit unless he or she complies with the following to the
satisfaction of the Chief of Police:
      (1)   Makes written application to the Chief of Police;
      (2)   Is at least 18 years of age and holds a state special chauffeur’s
license;
      (3)   Undergoes an examination by a physician and is found to be of sound
physique, with good eyesight and hearing and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo,
heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him or
her unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle;
      (4)   Is clean in dress and person and is not addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquor or drugs;
      (5)   Produces affidavits of good character from two reputable citizens
of the city who have known him or her personally and have observed his or her
conduct for at least two years next preceding the date of his or her
application;
      (6)   Has not been convicted of a felony, drunk driving, driving under
the influence of an intoxicant or drug, or of frequent minor traffic offenses;
and/or
      (7)   Is familiar with the state and local traffic laws.
(1994 Code, § 9-409)
   (C)   Revocation or suspension of driver’s permit. The City Commission,
after a public hearing, may revoke or suspend any taxicab driver’s permit for
violation of traffic regulations, for violation of this chapter, or when the
driver ceases to possess the qualifications as prescribed in division (B)
above.
(1994 Code, § 9-410) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.07  DRIVERS NOT TO SOLICIT BUSINESS.
   All taxicab drivers are expressly prohibited from indiscriminately
soliciting passengers or from cruising upon the streets of the city for the
purpose of obtaining patronage for their cabs.
(1994 Code, § 9-411)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.08  PARKING RESTRICTED.
   It shall be a civil offense to park any taxicab on any street except in such
places as have been specifically designated and marked by the city for the use
of taxicabs. It is provided, however, that, taxicabs may stop upon any street
for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers if such stops are made
in such manner as not unreasonably to interfere with or obstruct other traffic
and provided the passenger loading or discharging is promptly accomplished.
(1994 Code, § 9-412)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.09  DRIVERS TO USE DIRECT ROUTES.
   Taxicab drivers shall always deliver their passengers to their destinations
by the most direct available route.
(1994 Code, § 9-413)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.10  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   Taxicabs not to be used for illegal purposes. No taxicab shall be used
for or in the commission of any illegal act, business or purpose.
(1994 Code, § 9-414)
   (B)   Miscellaneous prohibited conduct by drivers. It shall be a civil
offense for any taxicab driver, while on duty, to be under the influence of, or
to drink, any intoxicating beverage or beer; to use profane or obscene
language; to shout or call to prospective passengers; to unnecessarily blow the
automobile horn; or to otherwise disturb the peace, quiet and tranquility of
the city in any way.
(1994 Code, § 9-415)
(Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.11  TRANSPORTATION OF MORE THAN ONE PASSENGER AT THE SAME TIME.
   No person shall be admitted to a taxicab already occupied by a passenger
without the consent of such other passenger.
(1994 Code, § 9-416)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 113:  AMUSEMENTS
Section
Game Rooms, Pool Halls and Video Arcades
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Prohibition in residential areas
   
113.03   Hours of operation
   
113.04   Minors not allowed; exception
GAME ROOMS, POOL HALLS AND VIDEO ARCADES
§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GAME. Any amusement machine, video or device operated by means of insertion
of a coin, token, prepaid card or similar object or pool or billiard tables for
the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is
charged. The term does not include vending machines that do not incorporate
gaming or amusement features or any coin-operated mechanical or electrical
musical device.
   GAME ROOM. Any place where games are displayed for use by the public and
fees from the use or play of the games are the primary source of income to the
proprietor, whether or not another business is conducted on the premises.
   POOL HALL. Any place where a game or games of billiards, bagatelle, pool or
other games played on tables requiring the use of cue and balls; the term does
not include any such table in a private residence.
   VIDEO ARCADE. Anyplace where games using computer technology and type of
video display are available for use by the public and fees from the use or play
of such games are the primary source of income to the proprietor, whether or
not another business is conducted on the premises.
(1994 Code, § 9-501)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 613, passed 5-28-2002)
§ 113.02  PROHIBITION IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to open, maintain, conduct or
operate any game room, pool hall or video arcade on any premises that are not
located in a commercial zoning district or closer than 100 feet in distance to
any church, school building or library.
(1994 Code, § 9-502)  (Ord. 472, passed 4-1-1993; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993;
Ord. 613, passed 5-28-2002)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.03  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to open, maintain, conduct or
operate any game room, pool hall or video arcade for public use or hire, except
as indicated in the following schedule: Monday through Saturday, 6:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m.; and Sunday, no operation permitted.
(1994 Code, § 9-503)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 613, passed 5-28-2002) 
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.04  MINORS NOT ALLOWED; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person engaged, regularly or otherwise,
in keeping a game room, pool hall or video arcade, or his or her employees,
agents, servants or other persons for them knowingly to permit any person under
the age of 16 to play on said games without first having obtained the written
consent of the parents or guardian of such minor; or, if the minor be in
attendance as a student at some educational institution, then the written
consent of the principal or person in charge of such school.
(1994 Code, § 9-504)  (Ord. 613, passed 5-28-2002)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 114:  PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES
Section
   
114.01   Title
   
114.02   Intent and purpose
   
114.03   Definitions
   
114.04   Property permitted to be sold
   
114.05   Permit required
   
114.06   Application required
   
114.07   Permit fee
   
114.08   Permit issuance; conditions
   
114.09   Days and hours of operation
   
114.10   Exceptions
   
114.11   Prior sale verification
   
114.12   Display of sale property
   
114.13   Display of permit
   
114.14   Advertising; signs
   
114.15   Public nuisance
   
114.16   Inspection; authority of inspector
   
114.17   Parking
   
114.18   Denial of permit or revocation of permit
   
114.19   Persons exempted from chapter
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01  TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as “Personal Property
Sales”.
(1994 Code, § 9-601)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)
§ 114.02  INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The City Commission of the city finds and declares that:
   (A)   The intrusion of non-regulated garage sales is causing annoyance to
the citizens and residential areas in the city, and congestion of the streets
in residential areas in the city;
   (B)   The provisions contained in this chapter are intended to prohibit the
infringement of any businesses in any established residential areas by
regulating the term and frequency of garage sales, so as not to disturb or
disrupt the residential environment of the area;
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter are designed to control the operation
of garage sales conducted in non-residential areas where the same are not
carried on a daily basis, but rather on an occasional basis;
   (D)   The provisions of this chapter do not seek to control sales by
individuals selling a few of their household or personal items; and
   (E)   The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained are enacted not
to prevent garage sales, but to regulate garage sales for the safety and
welfare of the city’s citizens.
(1994 Code, § 9-602)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)
§ 114.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in
the singular number the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
   GARAGE SALES. All general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on
any premises in any residential or non-residential zone, as defined by the
zoning ordinance, for the purpose of disposing of personal property including,
but not limited to, all sales entitled “garage”, “lawn”, “yard”, “attic”,
“porch”, “room”, “backyard”, “patio”, “flea market” or “rummage” sale. This
definition does not include the operation of such businesses carried on in a
non-residential zone where the person conducting the sales does so on a regular
day to day basis. This definition shall not include a situation where no more
than five specific items or articles are held out for sale and all
advertisement of such sale specifically names those items to be sold.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an
individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course
of living in, or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which
was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
(1994 Code, § 9-603)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)
§ 114.04  PROPERTY PERMITTED TO BE SOLD.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to sell or offer for sale, under
authority granted by this chapter, property other than personal property.
(1994 Code, § 9-604)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993) 
Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.05  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No garage sale shall be conducted unless and until the individuals desiring
to conduct such sale shall obtain a permit therefor from the city. Members of
more than one residence may join in obtaining a permit for a garage sale to be
conducted at the residence of one of them. Permits may be obtained for any non-
residential location.
(1994 Code, § 9-605)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.06  APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Prior to the issuance of any garage sale permit, the individual conducting
such sales shall complete the garage sale permit application fee as set forth
in §
111.07. The following information shall be required with the submittal of said
application:
   (A)   Full name and address of applicant;
   (B)   The location at which the proposed garage sale is to be held;
   (C)   The date or dates upon which the sale shall be held. Dates of any
other garage sales that said person has held in current calendar year;
   (D)   A written statement from applicant that they are the owner of said
property location where sale is to be held or a written statement from property
owner/landlord that they have granted permission for applicant to hold garage
sale at the property location; and
   (E)   By signing said application, applicant agrees to the rules and
regulations to hold such sale.
(1994 Code, § 9-606)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986; Ord. 822, passed 8-27-2018)
§ 114.07  PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   There shall be an administrative processing fee of $5 for the issuance
of residential garage sale permit. (Held on residential property owned or
rented by applicant.)
   (B)   There shall be an administrative fee of $25 for the issuance of any
permits to participate in the garage sale known as the 411 yard sale for any
property location other than residential property as set forth in division (A)
of this section.
(1994 Code, § 9-607)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986; Res. 1199, passed 5-21-2018;
Ord. 822, passed 8-27-2018)
§ 114.08  PERMIT ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Upon the completion and signing of the garage sale permit application,
the City Hall Administrative Clerk will issue the garage sale permit.
   (B)   The permit shall set forth and restrict the time and location of such
garage sale.
   (C)   Such permitted garage sales shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. for no more than two consecutive days (Friday/Saturday or
Saturday/Sunday) one time per quarter. The quarters will be January - March,
April - June, July - September, October - November. No exceptions shall be
permitted unless application presents proof of purchase of said property
location or a letter from landlord advising when lease began at said property.
(1994 Code, § 9-608)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986; Ord. 822, passed 8-27-2018)
§ 114.09  DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Such permitted garage sales shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:
00 p.m. for no more than two consecutive days (Friday/Saturday or Saturday/
Sunday) one time per quarter. The quarters will be January - March, April -
June, July - September, October - November. No exceptions shall be permitted
unless application presents proof of purchase of said property location or a
letter from landlord advising when lease began at said property.
(1994 Code, § 9-609)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986; Ord. 822, passed 8-27-2018) 
Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.10  EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   If sale not held because of inclement weather. If a garage sale is not
held on the dates for which the permit is issued or is terminated during the
first day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions, and an affidavit
by the permit holder to this effect is submitted, the City Manager may issue
another permit to the applicant for a garage sale to be conducted at the same
location within 30 days from the date when the first sale was to be held. No
additional permit fee is required.
   (B)   Third sale permitted. A third garage sale shall be permitted in a
calendar year if satisfactory proof of a bona fide change in ownership of the
real property is first presented to the City Manager or his or her duly
authorized representative.
(1994 Code, § 9-610)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)
§ 114.11  PRIOR SALE VERIFICATION.
   Once application for a garage sale permit has been made the administration
staff will verify the number of sale for property location and will only issue
permit if the maximum number of sales has not been reached. If maximum sales
have been reached the permit shall be refused unless applicant qualifies for
exception as set forth in §
114.10.
(1994 Code, § 9-611)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986; Ord. 822, passed 8-27-2018)
§ 114.12  DISPLAY OF SALE PROPERTY.
   Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in
a garage, carport and/or in a front, side or rear yard, but only in such areas.
No personal property offered for sale at a garage sale shall be displayed in
any public right-of-way. A vehicle offered for sale may be displayed on a
permanently constructed driveway within such front or side yard.
(1994 Code, § 9-612)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)
§ 114.13  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Any permit in possession of the holder or holders of a garage sale shall be
posted on the premises in a conspicuous place so as to be seen by the public, a
representative of the City Manager and the Chief Building Official or his or
her designee.
(1994 Code, § 9-613)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)
§ 114.14  ADVERTISING; SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs permitted. Only the following specified signs may be displayed
in relation to a pending garage sale:
      (1)   Two signs permitted. Two signs of not more than four square feet
shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence or non-
residential site where the garage sale is being conducted; or
      (2)   Directional signs. Two off-premises signs of not more than two
square feet each are permitted; provided that, the premises on which the garage
sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare, and permission to erect such
signs is received from the property owners on whose property such signs are to
be placed.
   (B)   Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be
exhibited for more than two days prior to the day such sale is to commence.
   (C)   Removal of signs. Signs must be removed each day at the close of the
garage sale activities.
(1994 Code, § 9-614)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.15  PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   The individual to whom such permit is issued and the owner or tenant
of the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the
premises during all hours of such sale or activity.
   (B)   No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the
said premises, or permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads
or streets in the area of such premises.
   (C)   All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of
the Police or Fire Departments of the city in order to maintain the public
health, safety and welfare.
(1994 Code, § 9-615)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.16  INSPECTION; AUTHORITY OF INSPECTOR.
   A police officer or any other public official designated by any city
ordinance to make inspections under the licensing or regulating ordinance, or
to enforce the same, shall have the right of entry to any premises showing
evidence of garage sale for the purpose of enforcement or inspection, and may
close the premises from such a sale or cite any individual who violates the
provisions of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 9-616)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)
§ 114.17  PARKING.
   All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable
laws and ordinances. Further, the Police Department may enforce such temporary
controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion created by any
garage sale.
(1994 Code, § 9-617)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.18  DENIAL OF PERMIT OR  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   False information. Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked
or any application for issuance of a permit may be refused by the City Manager
if the application submitted by the applicant contains any false, fraudulent or
misleading information.
   (B)   Revocation of permit. If an applicant or permit holder is found to be
in violation of any regulations as to garage sales and the permitting thereof
may have permit revoked, receive citations and/or both.
   (C)   Guilt of violation. If applicant or permit holder is cited and charged
with violations of regulations of this chapter shall be placed on a listing for
a period of two years and will not be allowed to receive any garage sale
permits for a period of two years.
(1994 Code, § 9-618)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993;
Ord. 822, passed 8-27-2018)
§ 114.19  PERSONS EXEMPTED FROM CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following:
   (A)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of
competent jurisdiction;
   (B)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials;
   (C)   Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile, or other business
establishment on a regular, day to day basis from or at the time of business
wherein such sale would be permitted by zoning regulations of the city or under
the protection of the non-conforming use section thereof or any other sale
conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor in which sale would be conducted
from property zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited by order ordinances;
and/or
   (D)   Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization when the proceeds from the sale are
used directly for the institution or organizations and the goods or articles
are not sold on a consignment basis.
(1994 Code, § 9-619)  (Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986)
§ 114.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99.
(Ord. 410, passed 3-10-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)
CHAPTER 115:  ALCOHOL
Section
Package Liquor Sales
   
115.01   Alcoholic beverages subject to regulation
   
115.02   Application for certificate
   
115.03   Applicant to agree to comply with laws
   
115.04   Applicant to appear before Mayor and Commission; duty to give
information
   
115.05   Action on application
   
115.06   Residency requirement
   
115.07   Applicants for certificate who have criminal record
   
115.08   Regulation of retail sales
   
115.09   License fee
   
115.10   Where establishments may be located
   
115.11   Retail stores to be on ground floor; entrances
   
115.12   Limitation on number of retailers
   
115.13   Sales for consumption on premises
   
115.14   Radios, amusement devices and seating facilities prohibited in retail
establishments
   
115.15   Inspection fee
   
115.16   Violations
Beer
   
115.30   Beer Board; established; meetings; proceedings; powers
   
115.31   “Beer” defined
   
115.32   Permit required for engaging in beer business
   
115.33   Privilege tax
   
115.34   Beer permits shall be restrictive
   
115.35   Limitation on number of permits
   
115.36   Interference with public health, safety and morals prohibited
   
115.37   Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders, employees and
persons engaged in the sale of beer
   
115.38   Revocation or suspension of beer permits
   
115.39   Loss of clerk’s certification for sale to minor
   
115.40   Violations
Intoxicating Liquor Sales (Liquor by the Drink)
   
115.55   Definition of alcoholic beverages
   
115.56   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises
   
115.57   Privilege tax on retail sale of alcohol for consumption on the
premises
   
115.58   Annual privilege tax to be paid to the city
   
115.59   Concurrent sales of liquor by the drink and beer
   
115.60   Advertisement of alcoholic beverages
 
   
115.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-208
PACKAGE LIQUOR SALES
§ 115.01  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SUBJECT TO REGULATION.
   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of selling, storing,
transporting, distributing or to purchase or possess alcoholic beverages within
the corporate limits of the city, except as provided by Tenn. Code Ann. Title
57, Ch. 3.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.02  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Before any certificate, as required by Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-208, or
a renewal, as required by Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-213, shall be signed by the
Mayor, or by a majority of the City Commission, an application in writing shall
be filed with the city on a form to be provided by the city, giving the
following information:
      (1)   Name, age and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Time of residence in the state;
      (3)   Occupation or business and length of time engaged in such
occupation or business;
      (4)   Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a violation of
any state or federal law or of the violation of this code or any city
ordinance, and the details of any such conviction;
      (5)   If employed, the name and address of employer;
      (6)   If in business, the kind of business and location thereof;
      (7)   The name of the proposed liquor store;
      (8)   The location of the proposed store for the sale of alcoholic
beverages;
      (9)   The name and address of the owner of the store;
      (10)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name, age and address of
each partner and his or her occupation, business or employer. If the applicant
is a corporation, the name, age and address of the stockholders and their
degrees of ownership of stock in the corporation; and
      (11)   Certain financial information pertinent to the applicant,
partnership, corporation and partners or stockholders.
   (B)   The information in the application shall be verified by the oath of
the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership or a corporation, the
application shall be verified by the oath of each partner or by the president
of the corporation.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)
§ 115.03  APPLICANT TO AGREE TO COMPLY WITH LAWS.
   The applicant for a certificate of compliance shall agree in writing to
comply with the state and federal laws and ordinances of the city and rules and
regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Commission of the state for sale of
alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)
§ 115.04  APPLICANT TO APPEAR BEFORE MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSION; DUTY TO GIVE
INFORMATION.
   An applicant for a certificate of compliance may be required to appear in
person before the City Commission for such reasonable examination as may be
desired by them.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)
§ 115.05  ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every application for a certificate of compliance shall be referred to
the Police Department for investigation and to the City Attorney for review,
each of whom shall submit his or her findings to the City Commission within 30
days of the date each application was filed.
   (B)   The City Commission may issue a certificate of compliance to any
applicant, which shall be signed by the Mayor or by a majority of the City
Commission.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)
§ 115.06  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
   The applicant for a certificate of compliance shall have been a bona fide
resident of the state for a period of not less than two years at the time his
or her application is filed. If the applicant is a partnership or a
corporation, the majority partner or stockholder must have been a bona fide
resident of the state not less than two years at the time the application is
filed. These requirements shall apply to all persons or entities whether they
are applying to obtain a license to open a new store or purchase an existing
store.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)
§ 115.07  APPLICANTS FOR CERTIFICATE WHO HAVE CRIMINAL RECORD.
   No certificate of compliance for the manufacture or sale at wholesale or
retail of alcoholic beverages, or for the manufacture or production of wine,
shall be issued to any person, (or if the applicant is a partnership, any
partner or, if the applicant is a corporation, any stockholder), who, within
ten years preceding the application for such certificate of compliance, has
been convicted of any felony or of any offense under the laws of the state or
of the United States prohibiting the sale, possession, transportation, storage
or otherwise handling of intoxicating liquors, or who has during such period
been engaged in business, alone or with others, in violation of such laws.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)
§ 115.08  REGULATION OF RETAIL SALES.
   (A)   (1)   Except for retailers licensed under Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-204,
no person, corporation or other entity shall, directly or indirectly, operate
any licensed retail establishment selling alcoholic spirituous beverages, not
including wine, for off-premises consumption in this state.
         (2)   INDIRECTLY means any kind of interest in such a retail business
by way of stock ownership, loan, partner’s interest or otherwise.
         (3)   A landlord shall be deemed to have an indirect interest in such
a retail business when the lease agreement is based upon a percentage of
profits or any other factor based upon sales of alcoholic beverages by the
tenant as distinguished from being simply an interest in land for a period of
time at a definite rate.
   (B)   Except as provided in this division (A) above, nothing shall prohibit
the holder of a retail license from having more than one retail license.
   (C)   In any municipality or county in which the issuance of two or more
retail licenses have been authorized under Tenn. Ann. Code § 57-3-208(c), no
retail licensee shall hold more than 50% of the licenses authorized for
issuance in such municipality or county.
   (D)   For five years beginning January 1, 2014, no retail license shall be
issued to any applicant for a new location that is within 1,500 feet of an
existing operating establishment holding a license issued pursuant to Tenn.
Code Ann. § 57-3-204 as of July 1, 2014, (an “existing licensed premises”) if
the applicant for such new retail license already holds one or more retail
licenses issued under Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-204, unless the Commission
receives the written consent from each retail licensee owning an existing
licensed premises within 1,500 feet of such new location. Notwithstanding any
law to the contrary, the holder of one or more retail licenses issued under
Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-204 may purchase the business or assets of an existing
licensed premises and obtain a retail license to operate such existing licensed
premises, as the same may be expanded or modified, from time to time. Nothing
in this division (D) shall be deemed to prohibit a retailer licensed under
Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-204 from obtaining a new or replacement license in
connection with the relocation of an existing licensed premises, as long as the
new location is within the jurisdiction of the municipality or county issuing
the certificate required under Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-208 for such existing
licensed premises.
(Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-406(a))
Editor’s note:
   Former § 115.08, derived from Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012, was removed and
replaced by state law during the 2015 codification.
§ 115.09  LICENSE FEE.
   There shall be an annual license fee which is required by this subchapter to
be paid by each licensee prior to the time of the issuance or renewal of a
local liquor store privilege license. In the event of co-licensees holding a
local liquor store privilege license for a single liquor store, only one
license fee is required. The license fee shall be $1,000 for first time
issuance and $500 for renewal.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.10  WHERE ESTABLISHMENTS MAY BE LOCATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain any retail
establishment for the sale, storage or distribution of alcoholic beverages in
the city, except at locations zoned for that purpose and any such liquor store
shall not be located within 300 feet of any church as measured along a straight
line from the property/boundary line of any such church to the property/
boundary line of the liquor store. No liquor store shall be located within 200
feet from any public park or school as measured along a straight line from the
property line of any such public park or school to the property/boundary line
of the liquor store. Further, no liquor store shall be located where the
operation of a liquor store at the premises contemplated by an application
would unreasonably interfere with public health, safety or morals.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.11  RETAIL STORES TO BE ON GROUND FLOOR; ENTRANCES.
   (A)   No retail store shall be located anywhere on premises in the city,
except on the ground floor thereof. Each such store shall have only one main
entrance; provided that, when a store is located on the corner of two streets,
such store may maintain a door opening on each such street; and, provided
further that, any salesroom adjoining the lobby of a hotel may maintain an
additional door into such lobby as long as the lobby is open to the public.
   (B)   (1)   All liquor stores shall be new construction or newly renovated
permanent construction. Plans must be approved by the Building Inspector,
Planning Commission and City Commission. No liquor stores shall be located in a
manufactured or other moveable or prefabricated type building. All liquor
stores shall have night lights surrounding the premises and shall be equipped
with a functioning burglar alarm system on the inside of the premises. The
minimum square footage of the interior of the liquor store shall be 1,200
square feet. Full, free and unobstructed vision shall be afforded to and from
the street and public highway or street to the interior of the liquor store by
the way of large windows in the front, and to the extent practicable, to the
sides of the building containing the liquor store.
      (2)   All liquor stores shall be subject to applicable zoning, land use,
building and life safety regulations, adopted by the city, unless specifically
provided otherwise.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.12  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF RETAILERS.
   No more than one retail license for each 1,334 persons, according to the
last federal or official supplementary census, shall be issued under this
subchapter.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)
§ 115.13  SALES FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES.
   No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption, or shall be consumed,
on the premises of the retail seller.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.14  RADIOS, AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND SEATING FACILITIES PROHIBITED IN RETAIL
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   No radios, television sets, pinball machines, slot machines or other devices
which tend to cause persons to congregate in such place shall be permitted in
any retail establishment. No seating facilities shall be provided for persons
other than employees.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.15  INSPECTION FEE.
   The city hereby imposes an inspection fee in the maximum amount allowed by
Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-501, or any subsequent versions of the same, on all
licensed retailers of alcoholic beverages located within the corporate limits
of the city.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)
§ 115.16  VIOLATIONS.
   Any violation of this subchapter shall constitute a civil offense and shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a penalty under the general penalty provision
of this code. Upon conviction of any person under this subchapter, it shall be
mandatory for the City Judge to immediately certify the conviction, whether on
appeal or not, to the State Alcoholic Beverage Commission. However, nothing
herein shall be construed to prevent the city from exercising any criminal or
civil remedies that it may have with respect to violations of this subchapter.
(Ord. 736, passed 12-27-2012)
BEER
§ 115.30  BEER BOARD; ESTABLISHED; MEETINGS; PROCEEDINGS; POWERS.
   (A)   Beer Board established. There is hereby established a Beer Board to be
composed of a board of Mayor and City Commissioners. The Mayor shall be the
Chairperson of the Beer Board.
(1994 Code, § 8-201)
   (B)   Meetings of the Beer Board. All meetings of the Beer Board shall be
open to the public. The Board shall hold regular meetings in the city hall at
such times as it shall prescribe. When there is business to come before the
Beer Board, a special meeting may be called by the Chairperson; provided, he or
she gives a reasonable notice thereof to each member. The Board may adjourn a
meeting at any time to another time and place.
(1994 Code, § 8-202)
   (C)   Record of Beer Board proceedings to be kept. The Recorder shall make a
record of the proceedings of all meetings of the Beer Board. The record shall
be a public record and shall contain at least the following: the date of each
meeting; names of the Board members present and absent; names of the members
introducing and seconding motions and resolutions and the like before the
Board; a copy of each such motion or resolution presented; the vote of each
member thereon; and the provisions of each beer permit issued by the Board.
(1994 Code, § 8-203)
   (D)   Requirements for Beer Board quorum and action. The attendance of at
least a majority of the members of the Beer Board shall be required to
constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. Matters before the
Board shall be decided by a majority of the members present if a quorum is
constituted. Any member present, but not voting, shall be deemed to have cast a
“nay” vote.
(1994 Code, § 8-204)
   (E)   Powers and duties of the Beer Board. The Beer Board shall have the
power and it is hereby directed to regulate the selling, storing for sale,
distributing for sale and manufacturing of beer within the city in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1994 Code, § 8-205)
(Ord. 415, passed 6-9-1986; Ord. 490, passed 6-29-1993)
§ 115.31  “BEER” DEFINED.
   The term BEER, as used in this subchapter, shall be in full conformance with
and be the same definition appearing in Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-101.
(1994 Code, § 8-206)  (Ord. 490, passed 6-29-1993; Ord. 792, passed 9-26-2016)
§ 115.32  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ENGAGING IN BEER BUSINESS.
   (A)   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful to operate any business engaged in the
sale, distribution, manufacture or storage of beer without a permit issued by
the county or city where such business is located under the authority herein
delegated to counties and cities.
      (2)   Permits shall be issued to the owner of the business or other
entity responsible for the premises for which the permit is sought, whether a
person, firm, corporation, joint-stock company, syndicate, association or
governmental entity where the governing body has authorized such sales of beer.
      (3)   A permit shall be valid:
         (a)   Only for the owner to whom the permit is issued and cannot be
transferred to another owner. If the owner is a corporation, a change in
ownership shall occur when control of at least 50% of the stock of the
corporation is transferred to a new owner;
         (b)   Only for a single location, except as provided in division (A)
(4) below, and cannot be transferred to another location. A permit shall be
valid for all decks, patios and other outdoor serving areas that are contiguous
to the exterior of the building in which the business is located and that are
operated by the business; and
         (c)   Only for a business operating under the name identified in the
permit application.
      (4)   Where an owner operates two or more restaurants or other businesses
within the same building, the owner may in the owner’s discretion operate some
or all such businesses pursuant to the same permit.
      (5)   A business can sell beer for both on-premises and off-premises
consumption at the same location pursuant to one permit.
      (6)   A permit holder must return a permit to the county or city that
issued it within fifteen (15) days of termination of the business, change in
ownership, relocation of the business or change of the business’s name;
provided, that notwithstanding the failure to return a beer permit, a permit
shall expire on termination of the business, change in ownership, relocation of
the business or change of the business’s name.
      (7)   In the case of beer wholesalers, as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. §
57-6-102, no county or city shall require a permit from a wholesaler unless
such wholesaler operates a warehouse in such county or city.
      (8)   Any person, firm, corporation, joint-stock company, syndicate, or
association engaged in the sale, distribution, or manufacture of beer without
the permit required by this part commits a Class A misdemeanor.
      (9) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as granting counties or
cities the authority to require the periodic renewal of beer permits.
   (B)   For the purpose of licensing, regulating and controlling the
transportation, storage, sale, distribution, possession, receipt and/or
manufacture of beer pursuant to this chapter, the counties of the state shall
be classified in two categories, one of which is hereby designated Class A
counties consisting of those counties not governed by metropolitan governments
as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 7-2-101, and the other category is hereby
designated Class B counties consisting of those counties governed by
metropolitan governments as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 7-2-101.
   (C)   When either “county” or “counties” is used in this chapter, it means
counties generally without reference to the classification of counties provided
for in this section, and the use of “county” or “counties” shall cause the
provision limited by the word “county” or “counties” to apply equally to Class
A counties and to Class B counties. When “county legislative body” or “county
legislative bodies” is used in this chapter, it means “metropolitan council” or
“metropolitan councils” when applicable to Class B counties.
   (D)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, distribute or manufacture
beer without having a valid certificate indicating that purchases of beer by
that person are “for resale” as that term is used in Tenn. Code Ann. § 67-6-102
(75)(A).
      (2)   Within ten days after being issued a permit to sell, distribute or
manufacture beer, a person shall file with the county or city issuing the
permit and with each person from whom the person buys beer a copy of a valid
certificate indicating that the purchases of beer are “for resale” as that term
is used in Tenn. Code Ann. § 67-6-102(75)(A), and shall subsequently maintain
at all times a valid resale certificate on file with the county or city issuing
the permit and with each person from whom the person buys beer.
   (E)   A city or county is authorized to seek criminal history background or
fingerprint checks on applicants. Criminal background checks may include
fingerprint checks against state and federal criminal records maintained by the
Tennessee Bureau of Investigation and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The
Tennessee bureau of investigation is authorized to assess fees for the searches
in accordance with the fee schedule established by the bureaus.
(Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-103)
   (F)   The application shall be made on such form as the Board shall
prescribe and/or furnish and, pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-104(a), shall
be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $250. Said fee shall be
in the form of a cashier’s check payable to the city. Each applicant must be a
person of good moral character and he or she must certify that he or she has
read and is familiar with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1994 Code, § 8-207)  (Ord. 415, passed 6-9-1986; Ord. 495, passed 9-13-1993)
§ 115.33  PRIVILEGE TAX.
   There is hereby imposed on the business of selling, distributing, storing or
manufacturing beer a privilege tax of $100. Any person, firm, corporation,
joint stock company, syndicate or association engaged in the sale,
distribution, storage or manufacture of beer shall remit the tax each
successive January 1 to the city. At the time a new permit is issued to any
business subject to this tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the
privilege tax on a prorated basis for each month or portion thereof remaining
until the next tax payment date.
(1994 Code, § 8-208)  (Ord. 490, passed 6-29-1993; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)
§ 115.34  BEER PERMITS SHALL BE RESTRICTIVE.
   All beer permits shall be restrictive as to the type of beer business
authorized under them. Separate permits shall be required for selling at
retail, storing, distributing and manufacturing. Beer permits for retail sale
of beer may be further restricted so as to authorize sales only for off-
premises consumption. A single permit may be issued for on-premise and off-
premise consumption. It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to engage
in any type or phase of the beer business not expressly authorized by his or
her permit. It shall likewise be unlawful for him or her not to comply with any
and all express restrictions or conditions in his or her permit.
(1994 Code, § 8-209)  (Ord. 490, passed 6-29-1993)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.35  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF PERMITS.
   The number of licenses for the sale of beer shall be limited to the number
as determined from time to time as necessary by the City Commission; provided
that, all requirements of this subchapter are complied with, all existing
permits for the sale of beer within the corporate limits of the city at the
date of the passage of the ordinance codified herein shall continue to be
renewed. A new permit may be issued to a qualified purchaser of an existing
establishment in which a permit is now held for the sale of beer, and the
permit used only within the establishment or building purchased.
(1994 Code, § 8-210)  (Ord. 490, passed 6-29-1993)
§ 115.36  INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND MORALS PROHIBITED.
   No permit authorizing the sale of beer will be issued when such business
would cause congestion of traffic or would interfere with schools, residences,
churches or other places of public gathering, or would otherwise interfere with
the public health, safety and morals. In no event will a permit be issued
authorizing the manufacture or storage of beer, or the sale of beer within 300
feet of any school, residence, church or other place of public gathering.
Provided, however, that within the boundaries of the C-1 Central Business
District, the distance shall be 200 feet from any school, residence, church or
other place of public gathering, and the L&N Depot Park, Gem Theater, and
Carnegie Library shall be removed from the definition of place of public
gathering. The distances shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest
point on the property line upon which sits the building from which the beer
will be manufactured, stored or sold to the nearest point on the property line
of the school, residence, church or other place of public gathering. No permit
shall be suspended, revoked or denied on the basis of proximity of the
establishment to a school, residence, church or other place of public
gathering, if a valid permit had been issued to any business on that same
location, unless beer is not sold, distributed or manufactured at that location
during any continuous six-month period.
(1994 Code, § 8-211)  (Ord. 415, passed 6-9-1986; Ord. 490, passed 6-29-1993;
Ord. 792, passed 9-26-2016)
§ 115.37  PROHIBITED CONDUCT OR ACTIVITIES BY BEER PERMIT HOLDERS, EMPLOYEES
AND PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE SALE OF BEER.
   It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder, employee or person engaged
in the sale of beer to:
   (A)   Employ any minor under 18 years of age in the sale, storage,
distribution or manufacture of beer;
   (B)   Sell the alcoholic beverages regulated by this subchapter, including,
but not limited to, beer, wine, malt beverages or any other alcoholic beverage,
nor shall he, she or it allow the same to be sold by agents, servants or
employees, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through
Saturday and may not be sold on Sundays between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:
00 p.m.;
   (C)   Allow any person under 21 years of age to loiter in or about his or
her place of business;
   (D)   Make or allow any sale of beer to any intoxicated person or to any
feeble-minded, insane or otherwise mentally incapacitated person;
   (E)   Allow drunken persons to loiter about his or her premises;
   (F)   Serve, sell or allow the consumption on his or her premises of any
alcoholic beverage with an alcoholic content of more than 5% by weight;
   (G)   Allow pool or billiard playing in the same room where beer is sold
and/or consumed; and/or
   (H)   Fail to provide and maintain separate sanitary toilet facilities for
men and women.
(1994 Code, § 8-212)  (Ord. 490, passed 6-29-1993; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993;
Ord. 532, passed 8-14-1995; Ord. 534, passed 10-23-1995; Ord. 734, passed 12-
17-2012)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.38  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF BEER PERMITS.
   (A)   The Beer Board shall have the power to revoke or suspend any beer
permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter when the holder thereof
is guilty of making a false statement or misrepresentation in his or her
application or of violating any of the provisions of this subchapter. However,
no beer permit shall be revoked or suspended until a public hearing is held by
the Board after reasonable notice to all the known parties in interest.
Revocation or suspension proceedings may be initiated by the Police Chief or by
any member of the Beer Board.
   (B)   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-608, the Beer Board shall not
revoke or suspend the permit of a “responsible vendor” qualified under the
requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-606 for a clerk’s illegal sale of beer
to a minor if the clerk is properly certified and has attended annual meetings
since the clerk’s original certification, unless the vendor’s status as a
certified responsible vendor has been revoked by the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission. If the responsible vendor’s certification has been revoked, the
vendor shall be punished by the Beer Board as if the vendor were not certified
as a responsible vendor. (CLERK means any person working in a capacity to sell
beer directly to consumers for off-premises consumption.) Under Tenn. Code Ann.
§ 57-5-608, the Alcoholic Beverage Commission shall revoke a vendor’s status as
a responsible vendor upon notification by the Beer Board that the Board has
made a final determination that the vendor has sold beer to a minor for the
second time in a consecutive 12-month period. The revocation shall be for three
years.
(1994 Code, § 8-213)  (Ord. 490, passed 6-29-1993)
§ 115.39  LOSS OF CLERK’S CERTIFICATION FOR SALE TO MINOR.
   If the Beer Board determines that a clerk of an off-premises beer permit
holder certified under Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-606, sold beer to a minor, the
Beer Board shall report the name of the clerk to the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission within 15 days of determination of the sale. The certification of
the clerk shall be invalid and the clerk may not reapply for a new certificate
for a period of one year from the date of the Beer Board’s determination.
(1994 Code, § 8-215)
§ 115.40  VIOLATIONS.
   Except as provided in §
115.99(B) of this chapter, any violation of this subchapter shall constitute a
civil offense and shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a penalty under the
general penalty provision of this code. Each day a violation shall be allowed
to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(1994 Code, § 8-216)
INTOXICATING LIQUOR SALES (LIQUOR BY THE DRINK)
§ 115.55  DEFINITION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine and every liquid
containing alcohol, spirits, wine and capable of being consumed by a human
being, other than patented medicine or beer, where the latter contains an
alcoholic content of 5% by weight, or less.
(1994 Code, § 8-301)  (Ord. 735, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 115.56  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON PREMISES.
   Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 4, inclusive, is hereby adopted so as to be
applicable to all sales of alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption
which are regulated by the said code when such sales are conducted within the
city limits. It is the intent of the Mayor and City Commission that the said
Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 4, inclusive, shall be effective in the city, the
same as if said code sections were copied herein verbatim.
(1994 Code, § 8-302)  (Ord. 735, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 115.57  PRIVILEGE TAX ON RETAIL SALE OF ALCOHOL FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE
PREMISES.
   Pursuant to the authority contained in Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-4-301, there is
hereby levied a privilege tax (in the same amounts levied by Tenn. Code Ann.
Title 57, Ch. 4, § 301, for the city’s General Fund to be paid annually as
provided in this chapter) upon any person, firm corporation, joint stock
company, syndicate or association engaging in the business of selling at retail
in the city on alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
(1994 Code, § 8-303)  (Ord. 735, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 115.58  ANNUAL PRIVILEGE TAX TO BE PAID TO THE CITY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or
association exercising the privilege of selling alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises in the city shall remit annually to the city the
appropriate tax described in §
115.57.
   (B)   Such payments shall be remitted not less than 30 days following the
end of each 12-month period from the original date of the license.
   (C)   Upon the transfer of ownership of such business or the discontinuance
of such business, said tax shall be filed within 30 days following such event.
   (D)   Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or
association failing to make payment of the appropriate tax when due shall be
subject to the penalty provided by law.
(1994 Code, § 8-304)  (Ord. 735, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 115.59  CONCURRENT SALES OF LIQUOR BY THE DRINK AND BEER.
   Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or association
which has received a license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city, pursuant
to Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 4, shall, notwithstanding the provisions of §
115.37(C) of this chapter, qualify to receive a beer permit from the city.
(1994 Code, § 8-305)  (Ord. 735, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 115.60  ADVERTISEMENT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   All advertisement of the availability of liquor for sale by those licensed
pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 4, shall be in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
(1994 Code, § 8-306)  (Ord. 735, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 115.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Definition.RESPONSIBLE VENDOR means a person, corporation or
other entity that has been issued a permit to sell beer for off-premises
consumption and has received certification by the State Alcoholic Beverage
Commission under the State Responsible Vendor Act of 2006, Tenn. Code Ann. §§
57-5-601 et seq.
      (2)   Penalty, revocation or suspension.
         (a)   The Beer Board may, at the time it imposes a revocation or
suspension, offer a permit holder that is not a responsible vendor the
alternative of paying a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500 for each offense of
making or permitting to be made any sales to minors, or a civil penalty not to
exceed $1,000 for any other offense.
         (b)   The Beer Board may impose on a responsible vendor a civil
penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each offense of making or permitting to be
made any sales to minors or for any other offense.
         (c)   If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative to revocation or
suspension, the holder shall have seven days within which to pay the civil
penalty before the revocation or suspension shall be imposed. If the civil
penalty is paid within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be deemed
withdrawn. Payment of the civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension by
a permit holder shall be an admission by the holder of the violation so charged
and shall be paid to the exclusion of any other penalty that the city may
impose.
(1994 Code, § 8-214)
CHAPTER 116:  MOBILE FOOD UNITS
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Requirements of mobile food units
   
116.03   Permit requirements
   
116.04   Operational requirements
   
116.05   Compliance with health regulations
 
   
116.99   Violations and penalties
§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. Any motorized vehicle or trailer attached to a motorized
vehicle that includes a self-contained kitchen in which food is prepared or
processed and from which food is sold or dispensed to the ultimate consumer.
   OPERATOR. Any person holding a mobile food unit permit or any person who is
engaged in the selling or offering for sale, of food, beverages, fruit or like
consumable products from a mobile food unit.
(Ord. 829, passed 1-28-2019)
§ 116.02  REQUIREMENTS OF MOBILE FOOD UNITS.
   Mobile food units shall meet all applicable requirements as follows:
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of a mobile food preparation
vehicle within the city without first having obtained all required business
licenses, a mobile food unit permit, and any permits, licenses and/or
certifications required by the jurisdictional county and/or the State of
Tennessee.
   (B)   No person shall sell, or offer for sale, any food, beverage, fruit, or
like consumable product from any mobile food unit unless:
      (1)   Such person obtains a mobile food unit permit from the city;
      (2)   Such sales are made from a mobile food unit under the control of a
mobile food unit operator; and
      (3)   The mobile food unit operator has obtained written permission from
the owner or lessee of the premises on which the mobile food unit is located to
operate a mobile food unit from the property.
   (C)   Mobile food units may only operate in the C-l Central Business
District, C-2 Highway Business District, and I-1 Industrial District.
Violations will be enforced by the codes enforcement officer or designee of the
City Manager.
   (D)   Mobile food units must be mobile and on wheels at all times during
operation. A trailer shall remain attached to its towing vehicle at all times.
   (E)   Mobile food units must be removed from authorized operating locations
in permitted zones when not in use and between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. This definition does not include vehicles operating under a special event
permit.
   (F)   The operator shall have posted the current price per unit or measure
for each type of item sold.
   (G)   Event operations of mobile food units will require a vendor permit.
(Ord. 829, passed 1-28-2019)  Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.03  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The title of this permit shall be the mobile food unit permit.
   (B)   A mobile food unit permit, as authorized by the State of Tennessee and
the City of Etowah, will not be issued to a person unless the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be specially designed as a mobile food unit and be
in compliance with all applicable health regulations and life safety
requirements for the jurisdictional county and the State of Tennessee;
      (2)   The driver of the vehicle must present a valid Tennessee driver's
license, current automobile insurance (including liability insurance for the
mobile food unit), and current vehicle registration as required by Tennessee
law and enforced by law enforcement authorities;
      (3)   Any person desiring a mobile food unit permit shall make written
application to the City of Etowah. (Applications available at City Hall);
      (4)   Name, home address, business address, and telephone number of the
applicant and the name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the
mobile food unit, if other than the applicant, to be used in the operator's
business;
      (5)   A description of the type of food, beverage, fruit, or like
consumable product to be sold; and
      (6)   The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN#), a brief description
including make and model, and at least two photographs of the mobile food unit.
   (C)   Before any permit is issued, the applicant must submit satisfactory
evidence that he or she has complied with the state business tax act and all
state statutes and regulations controlling health and dispensing of food.
Nothing herein shall excuse any applicant/operator from complying with all
applicable state statutes and municipal ordinances controlling health standards
and requirements and the operation of businesses.
   (D)   Upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the City of
Etowah shall issue to the applicant a mobile food unit permit authorizing the
operator to do business upon payment of a permit fee of $100; provided, the
applicant complies with the other provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   A permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for one year from
the date of issuance and shall be renewed on an annual basis (concurrent with
the renewal and issuance of business licenses) upon proper application and
payment of the permit fee. Each permit shall be valid for only one mobile food
unit. Each operator and/or applicant shall file an additional application and
pay an additional permit fee for each additional mobile food unit.
   (F)   All permits issued under this chapter shall be displayed inside the
mobile food unit at all times during the operation of the mobile food unit. The
permit shall be displayed in such a manner that it can be viewed from the
outside.
   (G)   All permits will be renewable at the cost of $75 per year.
(Ord. 829, passed 1-28-2019)  Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.04  OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Mobile food units are prohibited from operating within the limits of
the city, unless having obtained prior written permission with specific time
references.
   (B)   Mobile food units are prohibited from operating on private property,
except with prior written permission from the owner or lessee on which the
mobile food unit is located.
   (C)   Mobile food units must not be parked within ten feet of a public
right-of-way.
   (D)   Mobile food units may not sell or dispense anything between 8:01 p.m.
and 6:59 a.m.
   (E)   No mobile food unit shall be equipped with any external electronic
sound-amplifying device. No operator shall shout, make any noise, or use any
device for the purpose of attracting attention to the mobile food units or the
items it offers for sale.
   (F)   Mobile food units shall be limited to the sale of food and
nonalcoholic drinks. The sale of other merchandise or services will not be
permitted.
   (G)   Cooking must not be conducted while the vehicle is in motion.
   (H)   Signs which are permanently affixed to the mobile food unit shall
extend no more than six inches from the vehicle. All signs shall be attached to
or painted on the mobile food unit. Electronic signs are prohibited, as are
signs that flash, cause interference with radio, telephone, television or other
communication transmissions; produce or reflect motion pictures; emit visible
smoke, vapor, particles, or odor; are animated or produce any rotation, motion
or movement.
   (I)   The operator must provide for the sanitary collection of all refuse,
litter and garbage within ten feet of the mobile food unit which is generated
by the mobile food unit operation or the patrons using that service and shall
remove all such waste materials from the location before the vehicle departs.
   (J)   The operation of the mobile food unit is limited to the interior of
the unit. There shall be no outside seating implements in the form of benches,
tables, chairs or other furniture which may be used for eating or sitting.
   (K)   As a condition of issuance of any permit, the mobile food unit vendor,
agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City of Etowah and its
officials, officers, employees, representatives, and agents against liability
and/or loss arising from activities connected with and/or undertaken pursuant
to the permit. The City of Etowah is not liable for any business loss, property
loss, or other damage that may result from use of the permit or suspension or
revocation of the permit, or the discontinuance of the practice of permitting
such activity, and no such vendor shall maintain any claim or action against
the City of Etowah and/or its officials, officers, employees, or agents on
account of any suspension or revocation or discontinuance.
   (L)   Vendor will supply to the City of Etowah a notarized statement from
property owner of where they plan to conduct business. Mobile food unit
operators will not be permitted to change locations of mobile food units
without such notarized statement being received and until location has been
approved by the City Administration.
(Ord. 829, passed 1-28-2019)  Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.05  COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Operators of mobile food units shall comply with all regulations and
laws governing mobile food service establishments and food service
establishments adopted by the Department of Public Health the jurisdictional
county, and enacted by the State of Tennessee.
   (B)   Operators of mobile food units shall obtain all necessary health
certificates and permits and provide to the City of Etowah copies of said
certificates during application process.
(Ord. 829, passed 1-28-2019)  Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.99  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter or making a false or
fraudulent statement either in his or her application for a permit or in the
process of making a solicitation shall be subject to the civil penalty provided
for violations of this municipal code. In addition to or in lieu of any
pecuniary penalty, if a violator has been issued a permit, his or her permit
shall be cancelled and revoked by the Court.
(Ord. 829, passed 1-28-2019)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Registered sex offenders in parks and recreation facilities
   
130.02   Drinking alcohol on public grounds
   
130.03   Fortune telling and the like
   
130.04   Disturbing the peace
   
130.05   Anti-noise regulations
   
130.06   Firearms, weapons and missiles
   
130.07   Interference with traffic
   
130.08   Caves, wells, cisterns and the like
   
130.09   Posting notices and the like
   
130.10   Curfew for minors
   
130.11   Wearing masks
   
130.12   Barbed wire and electrically charged partition fences
   
130.13   Library rules
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01  REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS IN PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   It shall constitute a general offense against the regulations of the
city for any person or persons registered as a sex offender with the state and
or any other state or federal agency to knowingly enter into or on any public
park owned, operated or maintained by the city.
   (B)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be charged with posting
this regulation at the main entrance of each park.
   (C)   This section took effect ten days from and after its passage, the
public welfare requiring it.
(Ord. 707, passed 7-26-2010)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02  DRINKING ALCOHOL ON PUBLIC GROUNDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume, or have an open
container of beer or intoxicating liquor in or on any public street, alley,
avenue, highway, sidewalk, public park, public school ground or other public
place unless the place has an appropriate permit and/or license for on premises
consumption.
(1994 Code, § 11-101)  Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Arrest for public intoxication (cities may not pass separate legislation),
see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 39-17-310 and 33-10-203
§ 130.03  FORTUNE TELLING AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It shall be a civil offense for any person to hold himself or herself
forth to the public as a fortune teller, clairvoyant, hypnotist, spiritualist,
palmist, phrenologist or other mystic endowed with supernatural powers.
   (B)   No persons shall carry on, practice, teach or otherwise practice the
business or act of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life-reading, fortune-
telling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, mediumship,
etherealization, augury, necromancy, character reading or fortune telling by
handwriting analysis, the supposed possession or use of occult or psychic
powers or any other similar business or act, and demand or received directly or
indirectly, a fee, gift, donation or reward for the exercise or exhibition
thereof.
(1994 Code, § 11-201)  (Ord. 402, passed 8-12-1985; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993) 
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04  DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No person shall disturb, tend to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of
others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, and no person
shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by him
or her or under his or her control.
(1994 Code, § 11-301)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05  ANTI-NOISE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. Subject to the provisions of this section, the creating of
any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise is prohibited. Noise of
such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or
health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is
prohibited.
   (B)   Miscellaneous prohibited noises enumerated. The following acts, among
others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation
of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive,
namely:
      (1)   Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or other signal device on
any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle while not in motion
except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of
control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being
applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of
any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the
sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
      (2)   Radios, phonographs and the like. The playing of any radio,
phonograph or any musical instrument or sound device, including, but not
limited to, loudspeakers or other devices for reproduction or amplification of
sound, either independently of or in connection with motion pictures, radio or
television, in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours
between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of person in any office or hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel or other
type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity;
      (3)   Yelling, shouting, hooting and the like. Yelling, shouting,
hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any hospital, dwelling,
hotel or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity;
      (4)   Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity;
      (5)   Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to cause loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
      (6)   Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or
as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities;
      (7)   Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of
any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat
engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent
loud or explosive noises therefrom;
      (8)   Building operations. The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential area or
section or the construction or repair of streets and highways in any
residential area or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
health and safety, and then only with a permit from the Building Inspector
granted for a period while the emergency continues not to exceed 30 days. If
the Building Inspector should determine that the public health and safety will
not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any
building or the excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and if he or she shall further determine that loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest through delay, he or she
may grant permission for such work to be done between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. upon application being made at the time the permit for the work
is awarded or during the process of the work;
      (9)   Noises near schools, hospitals, churches and the like. The creation
of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital or adjacent to
any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in
session;
      (10)   Loading and unloading operations. The creation of any loud and
excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or
the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and other containers;
      (11)   Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or
other instrument or device emitting noise for the purpose of attracting
attention to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise; and
      (12)   Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of mechanical
loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for
advertising or other purposes.
   (C)   Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply to or
be enforced against:
      (1)   Municipal vehicles. Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon
necessary public business;
      (2)   Repair of streets and the like. Excavations or repairs of bridges,
streets or highways at night, by or on behalf of the city, the county or the
state, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impracticable to
perform such work during the day; or
      (3)   Non-commercial and non-profit use of loudspeakers or amplifiers.
         (a)   The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course
of public addresses which are non-commercial in character and in the course of
advertising functions sponsored by non-profit organizations. However, no such
use shall be made until a permit therefor is secured from the city.
         (b)   Hours for the use of an amplifier or public address system will
be designated in the permit so issued and the use of such systems shall be
restricted to the hours so designated in the permit.
(1994 Code, § 11-302)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06  FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES.
   (A)   Air rifles and the like. It shall be a civil offense for any person in
the city to carry or discharge any air gun, air pistol, air rifle, BB gun or
sling shot capable of discharging a bullet or pellet, whether propelled by
spring, compressed air, expanding gas, explosive or other force-producing means
or method.
(1994 Code, § 11-501)
   (B)   Throwing missiles. It shall be a civil offense for any person to throw
maliciously any stone, snowball, bottle or any other missile upon or at any
vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property or upon or at any
person.
(1994 Code, § 11-502)
   (C)   Discharging firearms in city prohibited. It shall be a civil offense
for any unauthorized person to discharge a firearm within the city.
(1994 Code, § 11-503)
(Ord. 359, passed - -; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07  INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit or engage in any activity
whatever on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground in such a
manner as to prevent, obstruct or interfere with the free passage of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic thereon.
(1994 Code, § 11-601)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.08  CAVES, WELLS, CISTERNS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to permit to be maintained on
property owned or occupied by him or her any cave, well, cistern or other such
opening in the ground, which is dangerous to life and limb without an adequate
cover or safeguard.
(1994 Code, § 11-701)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09  POSTING NOTICES AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall fasten, in any way, any show-card, poster or other
advertising device or sign upon any public or private property unless legally
authorized to do so.
(1994 Code, § 11-702)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.10  CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be a civil offense for any person under the age of 18 years
to be abroad between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied unless going directly to or from a lawful activity or
upon a legitimate errand for, or accompanied by, a parent, guardian or other
adult person having lawful custody of such minor;
      (2)   In the performance of a duty directed by such parent, guardian, or
other person, without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(1994 Code, § 11-703)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.11  WEARING MASKS.
   (A)   It shall be a civil offense for any person to appear on or in any
public way or place while wearing any mask, device or hood whereby any portion
of the face is so hidden or covered as to conceal the identity of the wearer.
   (B)   The following are exempted from the provisions of this section:
      (1)   Children under the age of 12 years;
      (2)   Workers while engaged in work wherein a face covering is necessary
for health and/or safety reasons;
      (3)   Persons wearing gas masks in civil defense drills and exercises or
emergencies; and
      (4)   Any person having a special permit issued by the city to wear a
traditional holiday costume.
(1994 Code, § 11-704)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.12  BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRICALLY CHARGED PARTITION FENCES.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person, firm or corporation to construct
or cause to be constructed a barbed wire partition fence within the corporate
limits. It shall also be a civil offense for any person, firm or corporation to
construct, cause to be constructed or to maintain any electrically charged
partition fence.
(1994 Code, § 11-705)  (Ord. 373, passed - -; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993) 
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.13  LIBRARY RULES.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to retain, or otherwise not
comply with the rules of the library with respect thereto, any book, newspaper,
magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property belonging in or to, or on
deposit with, the Carnegie Public Library, or any branch or bookmobile operated
in connection therewith, for a period exceeding 21 days after first notice, a
notification shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, with
the return card showing receipt by or refusal by the addressee, to the
borrower’s address on file with said library, said notification given after the
expiration of the time during which by the rules of said library such article
or other property may be kept. Such notice shall bear on its face a copy of
this section.
(1994 Code, § 11-706)  (Ord. 395, passed 5-28-1985; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993) 
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Each and every entry into the park, regardless of the time period
involved, shall constitute a separate offense under §
130.01 of this chapter.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
130.13 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be assessed a civil penalty not
to exceed $25.
(1994 Code, § 11-706)
(Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 707, passed 7-26-2010)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   STREETS AND ROADWAYS
      
152.   MOBILE HOMES
      
153.   FLOODS
      
154.   ZONING
      
155.   VACANT COMMERCIAL PROPERTY
CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Slum Clearance
   
150.01   Findings of City Commission
   
150.02   Definitions
   
150.03   “Public Officer” designated; powers
   
150.04   Initiation of proceedings; hearings
   
150.05   Orders to owners of unfit structures
   
150.06   When Public Officer may repair and the like
   
150.07   When Public Officer may remove or demolish
   
150.08   Lien for expenses; sale of salvaged materials; other powers not
limited
   
150.09   Basis for a finding of unfitness
   
150.10   Service of complaints or orders
   
150.11   Enjoining enforcement of orders
   
150.12   Additional powers of Public Officer; supplemental
Codes Adopted
   
150.25   Building Code
   
150.26   Plumbing Code
   
150.27   Electrical Code
   
150.28   Gas Code
   
150.29   International Property Maintenance Code 2012
   
150.30   Fire Code
   
150.31   Energy Conservation Code
   
150.32   Accessibility Code
 
   
150.99   Penalty
SLUM CLEARANCE
§ 150.01  FINDINGS OF CITY COMMISSION.
   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-21-101 et seq., the City Commission finds
that there exists in the city structures which are unfit for human occupation
due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other
conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or insanitary, or dangerous or
detrimental to the health, safety and morals, or otherwise inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the city.
(1994 Code, § 13-201)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. Title 13, Ch. 21
§ 150.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOVERNING BODY. The City Commission charged with governing the city.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Etowah, Tennessee, and the areas encompassed
within existing city limits or as hereafter annexed.
   OWNER. The holder of title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations, corporations and others
who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession
thereof.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of
any department or branch of the government of the city or state relating to
health, fire, building regulations or other activities concerning structures in
the city.
   PUBLIC OFFICER. The officer or officers who are authorized by this
subchapter to exercise the powers prescribed herein and pursuant to Tenn. Code
Ann. §§ 13-21-101 et seq.
   STRUCTURES. Any building or structure, or part thereof, used for human
occupation and intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
(1994 Code, § 13-202)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
§ 150.03  “PUBLIC OFFICER” DESIGNATED; POWERS.
   There is hereby designated and appointed a “Public Officer”, to be the
Building Inspector of the city, to exercise the powers prescribed by this
subchapter, which powers shall be supplemental to all others held by the
Building Inspector.
(1994 Code, § 13-203)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
§ 150.04  INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS; HEARINGS.
   Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the city charging that any structure is unfit
for human occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to the Public Officer (on
his or her own motion) that any structure is unfit for human occupation or use,
the Public Officer shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a
basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of, and
parties in interest of, such structure a complaint stating the charges in that
respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Public
Officer (or his or her designated agent) at a place therein fixed, not less
than ten days, nor more than 30 days, after the service of the complaint; and
the owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the time
and place fixed in the complaint; and the rules of evidence prevailing in
courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Public
Officer.
(1994 Code, § 13-204)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
§ 150.05  ORDERS TO OWNERS OF UNFIT STRUCTURES.
   If, after such notice and hearing as provided for in §
150.04 of this chapter, the Public Officer determines that the structure under
consideration is unfit for human occupancy or use, he or she shall state in
writing his or her finding of fact in support of such determination and shall
issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order:
   (A)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be made
at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not exceeding
50% of the reasonable value), requiring the owner, during the time specified in
the order, to repair, alter or improve such structure to render it fit for
human occupancy or use or to vacate and close the structure for human occupancy
or use; or
   (B)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of said structure cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not to
exceed 50% of the value of the premises), requiring the owner within the time
specified in the order to remove or demolish such structure.
(1994 Code, § 13-205)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
§ 150.06  WHEN PUBLIC OFFICER MAY REPAIR AND THE LIKE.
   If the owner fails to comply with the order to repair, alter or improve or
to vacate and close the structure as specified in the preceding section hereof,
the Public Officer may cause such structure to be repaired, altered or
improved, or to be vacated and closed; and the Public Officer may cause to be
posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard with the
following words: “This building is unfit for human occupancy or use; the use or
occupation of this building for human occupancy or use is prohibited and
unlawful.”
(1994 Code, § 13-206)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
§ 150.07  WHEN PUBLIC OFFICER MAY REMOVE OR DEMOLISH.
   If the owner fails to comply with an order, as specified above, to remove or
demolish the structure, the Public Officer may cause such structure to be
removed and demolished.
(1994 Code, § 13-207)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
§ 150.08  LIEN FOR EXPENSES; SALE OF SALVAGED MATERIALS; OTHER POWERS NOT
LIMITED.
   The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the Public Officer, as well
as reasonable fees for registration, inspections and professional evaluations
of the property, shall be assessed against the owner of the property, and
shall, upon the certification of the sum owed being presented to the municipal
tax collector, be a lien on the property in favor of the municipality, second
only to liens of the state, county and municipality for taxes, any lien of the
municipality for special assessments, and any valid lien, right or interest in
such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of
such notice. These costs shall be collected by the municipal tax collector at
the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected.  If the
owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to
the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes as set forth in
Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-5-2010 and 67-5-2410. In addition, the municipality may
collect the costs assessed against the owner through an action for debt filed
in any court of competent jurisdiction. The municipality may bring one action
for debt against more than one or all of the owners of properties against whom
the costs have been assessed, and the fact that multiple owners have been
joined in one action shall not be considered by the court as a misjoinder of
parties. If the structure is removed or demolished by the Public Officer, the
Public Officer shall sell the materials of such structure and shall credit the
proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Chancery Court by the Public
Officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such Court, and
shall be disbursed by such Court to the person found to be entitled thereto by
final order or decree of such Court. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise.
(1994 Code, § 13-208)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
§ 150.09  BASIS FOR A FINDING OF UNFITNESS.
   The Public Officer defined herein shall have the power and may determine
that a structure is unfit for human occupation and use if he or she finds that
conditions exist in such structure which are dangerous or injurious to the
health, safety or morals of the occupants or users of such structure, the
occupants or users of neighboring structures or other residents of the city;
such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of
the foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or
other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; and uncleanliness.
(1994 Code, § 13-209)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
§ 150.10  SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS OR ORDERS.
   Complaints or orders issued by the Public Officer pursuant to this
subchapter shall be served upon persons, either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such person is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the Public Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and
the Public Officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of
such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the same
once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper printed and published
in the city. In addition, a copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in
a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy
of such complaint or order shall also be filed for record in the Register’s
office of the county and such filing shall have the same force and effect as
other lis pendens notices provided by law.
(1994 Code, § 13-210)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
§ 150.11  ENJOINING ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS.
   (A)   Right to appeal. Any person affected by a notice, citation or order
issued by the Public Officer served pursuant to this subchapter or a notice
citation or order issued under the city property maintenance codes shall have
the right to appeal to the Administrative Hearing Officer, provided that a
written application for appeal is filed within ten days after hearing before
the Public Officer conducted pursuant to §
150.04 of this chapter.
      (1)   An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of the code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of the code are adequately satisfied by other means.
      (2)   Appeals of orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay
the enforcement of the order until the appeal is heard by the Administrative
Hearing Officer.
      (3)   All appeals to the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be
conducted in accordance with Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-1001 et seq. and Title
III, §
32.35 of the Etowah Municipal Code.
   (B)   Judicial review of final order. A person who is aggrieved by a final
decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer in a contested case is entitled
to judicial review in Chancery Court pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-1001
et seq. which shall be the only available method of judicial review.
Proceedings for judicial review of a final order are instituted by filing a
petition for review in the Chancery Court in the county where the municipality
lies. Such petition must be filed within 60 calendar days after the entry of
the final order that is the subject of the review. The Court may, upon the
filing of such suit, issue a temporary injunction restraining the Public
Officer from carrying out the provisions of the order pending a final
disposition of the cause.
   (C)   Exclusive remedy. The remedies provided herein shall be the exclusive
remedy and no person affected by an order of the Public Officer shall be
entitled to recover any damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the
Public Officer, or because of non-compliance by such person with any order of
the Public Officer.
(1994 Code, § 13-211)  (Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991; Ord. passed - -)
§ 150.12  ADDITIONAL POWERS OF PUBLIC OFFICER; SUPPLEMENTAL.
   (A)   The Public Officer, in order to carry out and effectuate the purposes
and provisions of this subchapter, shall have the following powers in addition
to those otherwise granted herein:
      (1)   To investigate conditions of the structures in the city in order to
determine which structures therein are unfit for human occupation or use;
      (2)   To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (3)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination;
provided that, such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
      (4)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and
employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter;
and
      (5)   To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this
subchapter to such officers and agents as he or she may designate.
(1994 Code, § 13-212)
   (B)   This subchapter shall not be construed to abrogate or impair the
powers of the city with regard to the enforcement of the provisions of its
charter or any other ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish
violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this subchapter shall be in
addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by the charter and other
laws.
(1994 Code, § 13-213)
(Ord. 468, passed 9-19-1991)
CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.25  BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Building Code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code
Ann. §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose of regulating the
construction, alteration, repair, use and occupancy, location, maintenance,
removal and demolition of every building or structure, the International
Building Code 2012, except for § 113 (Means of Appeal), to the extent that said
sections conflict with Tenn. Code. Ann. §§ 6-54-1001 et seq.,  the
Administrative Hearing Officer Act, and except for Ch. 27, but including
Appendices B, C, E, F, G, H, I, J and K-8, and the International Residential
Code 2012 with Appendices E, G, H, J, K and M, as prepared and published by the
International Code Council, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of the code and are hereinafter referred to as the “Building Code”.
(1994 Code, § 12-101)
   (B)   Modifications.
      (1)   Whenever the Building Code refers to the Chief Appointing Authority
or the Chief Administrator, it shall be deemed to be a reference to the City
Manager. When the Building Official or Codes Enforcement Officer is named it
shall, for the purposes of the Building Code, mean such person as the City
Manager shall have appointed or designated to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Building Code.
      (2)   The exceptions provided in Tenn. Code Ann. § 62-2-102(b) shall
apply to the requirements for construction documents as found in § 106-1. The
provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. § 62-2-102(b) are:
            (b)   It is unlawful for any person other than a registered
architect or engineer to prepare plans and specifications for any building or
structure other than the following:
               (1)   Structures classified as business, factory-industrial,
hazardous, mercantile, residential, and storage occupancies, as such
occupancies are defined in the 2012 edition of the International Building Code,
which are:
                  (A)   Less than three (3) stories in height; and
                  (B)   Less than five thousand square feet (5,000 sq. ft.) in
total gross area;
               (2)   One-family and two-family dwellings and domestic
outbuildings appurtenant thereto; or
               (3)   Farm buildings not designed or intended for human
occupancy.
            (c)   Nothing in this section shall prevent any awarding authority,
public or private, from requiring the services of a registered architect,
engineer or landscape architect for any project.
      (3)   The schedule of permit fees shall be set by resolution of the City
Commission as from time to time is necessary.
(1994 Code, § 12-102)
   (C)   Available in Recorder’s office. Pursuant to the requirements of the
Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of the Building Code has been placed on
file in the Recorder’s (Finance Director’s) office and shall be kept there for
the use and inspection of the public.
(1994 Code, § 12-103)
   (D)   Limitation on demolition permits. The required length of demolition
permits shall be 60 days for residential structures and 90 days for commercial
structures.
(1994 Code, § 12-104)
(Ord. 355, passed - -; Ord. 469, passed 9-19-1991; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993;
Ord. 497, passed 11-4-1993; Ord. 748, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 150.26  PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   Plumbing Code adopted.
      (1)   Pursuant to authority connected with the municipal water or
sewerage system, the International Plumbing Code 2012, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as the “Plumbing Code”.
      (2)   The fees for all plumbing work in the city shall be set by
resolution of the City Commission, as from time to time are necessary.
(1994 Code, § 12-201)
   (B)   Modifications. Whenever the Building Code refers to the Chief
Appointing Authority or the Chief Administrator, it shall mean the City
Manager. Whenever Plumbing Official or Inspector is named or referred to, it
shall mean the person appointed or designated by the City Manager to administer
and enforce the provisions of the Plumbing Code.
(1994 Code, § 12-202)
   (C)   Available in Recorder’s office. Pursuant to the requirements of Tenn.
Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of the Plumbing Code has been placed on file in
the Recorder’s (Finance Director’s) office and shall be kept there for the use
and inspection of the public.
(1994 Code, § 12-203)
   (D)   Violations. It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate or
fail to comply with any provision of the Plumbing Code as herein adopted by
reference and modified.
(1994 Code, § 12-204)
9-2-1993; Ord. 614, passed 5-28-2002; Ord. 748, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 150.27  ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   Electrical Code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code
Ann. §§ 6-54-501 et seq. and for the purpose of providing practical minimum
standards for the safeguarding of persons and of buildings and their contents
from hazards arising from the use of electricity, the International Electrical
Code, 2012 edition, as prepared by the National Fire Protection Association, is
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as a part of this code and
is hereinafter referred to as the “Electrical Code”.
(1994 Code, § 12-301)
   (B)   Available in Recorder’s office. Pursuant to the requirements of Tenn.
Code Ann. §§ 6-54-502, one copy of the Electrical Code has been placed on file
in the Recorder’s (Finance Director’s) office and shall be kept there for the
use and inspection of the public.
(1994 Code, § 12-302)
   (C)   Permit required for doing electrical work. No electrical work shall be
done within the city until a permit therefor has been issued by the Deputy
Electrical Inspector. The term “electrical work” shall not be deemed to include
minor repairs that do not involve the installation of new wire, conduits,
machinery, apparatus or other electrical devices generally requiring the
services of an electrician.
(1994 Code, § 12-303)
   (D)   Enforcement. The Electrical Inspector shall be such person as
designated by state statute. It shall be his or her duty to enforce compliance
with this section and the Electrical Code, as herein adopted by reference. He
or she is authorized and directed to make such inspections of electrical
equipment and wiring and the like as are necessary to ensure compliance with
the applicable regulations, and may enter any premises or building at any
reasonable time for the purpose of discharging his or her duties. He or she is
authorized to refuse or discontinue electrical services to any person or place
not complying with this section and/or the Electrical Code.
(1994 Code, § 12-304)
   (E)   Fees. The Electrical Inspector shall collect the same fees as are
authorized in Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-102-143 for electrical inspections by Deputy
Inspectors of the State Fire Marshal.
(1994 Code, § 12-305)
(Ord. 497, passed 11-4-1993; Ord. 748, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 150.28  GAS CODE.
   (A)   Title and definitions.
      (1)   This section and the code herein adopted by reference shall be
known as the “Gas Code of the City of Etowah” and may be cited as such.
      (2)   The following definitions are provided for the purpose of
interpretation and administration of the Gas Code.
         CERTAIN APPLIANCES. Conversion burners, floor furnaces, central
heating plants, vented wall furnaces, water heaters and boilers.
         CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL. A document or tag issued and/or attached by
the Inspector to the inspected material, piping or appliance installation,
filled out, together with date, address of the premises and signed by the
Inspector.
         GAS COMPANY. Any person distributing gas within the corporate limits
or authorized and proposing to so engage.
         INSPECTOR. The person appointed as Inspector, and shall include each
Assistant Inspector, if any, from time to time acting as such under this
section by appointment of the City Commission.
         PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation or any other
organized group of individuals.
(1994 Code, § 12-401)
   (B)   Purpose and scope. The purpose of the Gas Code is to provide minimum
standards, provisions and requirements for safe installation of consumers’ gas
piping and gas appliances. The Gas Code shall apply to the installation of gas
piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as
covered in this Code. All gas piping and gas appliances installed, replaced,
maintained or repaired within the corporate limits shall conform to the
requirements of this section and to the International Fuel Gas Code 2012, which
is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this section as if fully
set forth herein. One copy of the Gas Code shall be kept on file in the office
of the Finance Director for the use and inspection of the public.
(1994 Code, § 12-402)
   (C)   Use of existing piping and appliances. Notwithstanding any provision
in the Gas Code to the contrary, consumer’s piping installed prior to the
adoption of the Gas Code or piping installed to supply other than natural gas
may be converted to natural gas if the Inspector finds, upon inspection and
proper tests, that such piping will render reasonably satisfactory gas service
to the consumer and will not in any way endanger life or property; otherwise,
such piping shall be altered or replaced, in whole or in part, to conform with
the requirements of the Gas Code.
(1994 Code, § 12-403)
   (D)   Bond and license.
      (1)   No person shall engage in or work at the installation, extension or
alteration of consumer’s gas piping or certain gas appliances, until such
person shall have secured a license as hereinafter provided, and shall have
executed and delivered to the Utilities a good and sufficient bond in the penal
sum of $10,000, with corporate surety, conditioned for the faithful performance
of all such work, entered upon or contracted for, in strict accordance and
compliance with the provisions of the Gas Code. The bond herein required shall
expire on January 1 next following its approval by the Utilities and,
thereafter, on January 1 of each year a new bond, in form and substance as
herein required, shall be given by such person to cover all such work as shall
be done during such year.
      (2)   Upon approval of said bond, the person desiring to do such work
shall secure from the Utilities a non-transferable license, which shall run
until January 1 next succeeding its issuance, unless sooner revoked. The person
obtaining a license shall pay any applicable license fees to the Utilities.
      (3)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting an
individual from installing or repairing his or her own appliances or
installing, extending, replacing, altering or repairing consumer’s piping on
his or her own premises, or as requiring a license or a bond from an individual
doing such work on his or her own premises; provided, however, all such work
must be done in conformity with all other provisions of the Gas Code, including
those relating to permits, inspections and fees.
(1994 Code, § 12-404)
   (E)   Gas Inspector and assistants. To provide for the administration and
enforcement of the Gas Code, the Office of Gas Inspector is hereby created. The
Inspector, and such assistants as may be necessary in the proper performance of
the duties of the office, shall be appointed or designated by the City
Commission and the compensation for such office shall be determined at the time
of appointment.
(1994 Code, § 12-405)
   (F)   Powers and duties of Inspector.
      (1)   The Inspector is authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of the Gas Code. Upon presentation of proper credentials, he or she
may enter any building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of
making inspections or preventing violations of the Gas Code.
      (2)   The Inspector is authorized to disconnect any gas piping or fixture
or appliance for which a certificate of approval is required, but has not been
issued with respect to same, or which, upon inspection, shall be found
defective or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases
where such a disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping,
fixture or appliance disconnected by the Inspector, which notice shall state
that the same has been disconnected by the Inspector, together with the reason
or reasons therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove said
notice or reconnect said gas piping or fixture or appliance without
authorization by the Inspector and such gas piping or fixture or appliance
shall not be put in service or used until the Inspector has attached his or her
certificate of approval in lieu of his or her prior disconnection notice.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the Inspector to confer from time to time
with representatives of the local Health Department, the local Fire Department
and the gas company, and otherwise obtain from proper sources all helpful
information and advice, presenting same to the appropriate officials from time
to time for their consideration.
(1994 Code, § 12-406)
   (G)   Permits.
      (1)   No person shall install a gas conversion burner, floor furnace,
central heating plant, vented wall furnace, water heater, boiler, consumer’s
gas piping or convert existing piping to utilize natural gas without first
obtaining a permit to do such work from the Utilities; however, permits will
not be required for setting or connecting other gas appliances, or for the
repair of leaks in house piping.
      (2)   When only temporary use of gas is desired, the Inspector may issue
a permit for such use, for a period of not to exceed 60 days; provided, the
consumer’s gas piping to be used is given a test equal to that required for a
final piping inspection.
      (3)   Except when work in a public street or other public way is
involved, the gas company shall not be required to obtain permits to set
meters, or to extend, relocate, remove or repair its service lines, mains or
other facilities, or for work having to do with its own gas system.
(1994 Code, § 12-407)
   (H)   Inspections.
      (1)   A rough piping inspection shall be made after all new piping
authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has
been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached
thereto.
      (2)   A final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized
by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be
concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any
fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. This inspection shall
include a pressure test, at which time the piping shall stand an air pressure
equal to not less than the pressure of a column of mercury six inches in
height, and the piping shall hold this air pressure for a period of at least
ten minutes without any perceptible drop. A mercury column gauge shall be used
for the test. All tools, apparatus, labor and assistance necessary for the test
shall be furnished by the installer of such piping.
(1994 Code, § 12-408)
   (I)   Certificates. The Inspector shall issue a certificate of approval at
the completion of the work for which a permit for consumer piping has been
issued if, after inspection, it is found that such work complies with the
provisions of the Gas Code. A duplicate of each certificate issued covering
consumer’s gas piping shall be delivered to the gas company and used as its
authority to render gas service.
(1994 Code, § 12-409)
   (J)   Fees.
      (1)   The total fees for inspection of consumers gas piping at one
location (including both rough and final piping inspections) shall be $10 for
one to five outlets, inclusive, and $2 for each outlet above five.
      (2)   The fees for inspecting conversion burners, floor furnaces, boilers
or central heating plants shall be $10 for each unit.
      (3)   The fees for inspecting vented wall furnaces and water heaters
shall be $2 for each unit.
      (4)   If the Inspector is called back, after correction of defects are
noted, an additional fee of $5 shall be made for each such return inspection.
      (5)   Any and all fees shall be paid by the person to whom the permit is
issued.
(1994 Code, § 12-410)
   (K)   Non-liability. This section shall not be construed as imposing upon
the city any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by
any defect in any gas piping or appliance mentioned herein, or by installation
thereof, nor shall the city, or any official or employee thereof, be held as
assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection
authorized hereunder or the certificate of approval issued by the Inspector.
(1994 Code, § 12-412)
(Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 748, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 150.29  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 2012.
   (A)   Housing Code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann.
§§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose of securing the public
safety, health and general welfare through structural strength, stability,
sanitation, adequate light, HVAC and ventilation in residential dwellings,
apartment houses, rooming houses and buildings, structures or premises used as
such; and for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and for the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and
the demolition of such existing structures as provided herein and in Title 15,
Chapter 154 of the Etowah Municipal Code, the International Properly
Maintenance Code (2012 Edition), except for §§ 111.1 through 111.8 (Means of
Appeal) as prepared by the International Codes Council, is hereby adopted and
adopted by reference as a part of the Etowah Municipal Code and is hereinafter
referred to as the Housing Code.
(1994 Code, § 12-501)
   (B)   Modifications.
      (1)   Where the Housing Code refers to the Building Official, it shall
mean the person appointed or designated by the City Manager to administer and
enforce the provisions of the Housing Code. Where the Department of Law is
referred to, it shall mean the City Attorney.
      (2)   Where the Chief Appointing Authority is referred to, it shall mean
the City Manager.
(1994 Code, § 12-502)
   (C)   Available in Recorder’s office. Pursuant to the requirements of Tenn.
Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of the Housing Code with the above modifications
has been placed on file in the Recorder’s (Finance Director’s) office and shall
be kept there for the use and inspection of the public.
(1994 Code, § 12-503)
   (D)   Violations. It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate or
fail to comply with any provision of the Housing Code as herein adopted by
reference and modified.
9-2-1993; Ord. 497, passed 11-4-1993; Ord. 713, passed 5-23-2011; Ord. 748,
passed 12-16-2013)
§ 150.30  FIRE CODE.
   (A)   Fire Code adopted.
      (1)   Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-501
through 6-54-506, and for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the
International Fire Code 2012 edition, as prepared and adopted by the ICC, is
hereby adopted by reference and included as a part of this Code. Pursuant to
the requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of the International
Fire Code has been filed with the City Manager and is available for public use
and inspection. Said International Fire Code is adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein and shall be controlling with the
corporate limits.
      (2)   Excepted from said Fire Code adopted shall be § 903.2.8 of the
International Fire Code and any other sections which require automatic
sprinklers or sprinkler systems in any existing or new residential
construction.
(1994 Code, § 7-201)
   (B)   Open burning restriction. After the effective date of these
regulations, no person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of any
kind, except as specifically permitted herein.
(1994 Code, § 7-202)
   (C)   Permits. Open burning, as described in this section, may not be
conducted without permits. Fires used for cooking food, fires for ceremonial or
recreational purposes, including barbecues and outdoor fireplaces, and fires
set for the training and instruction of firefighters, do not need a permit.
This gant of exemption shall in no way relieve the person from the
consequences, damages or claims resulting from such burning. This exception
does not relieve the person of the responsibility of using fire-safe practices
nor from getting a permit from any other agency that may require such.
(1994 Code, § 7-203)
   (D)   Conditions. Open burning shall be allowed inside the corporate limits
of the city only when a valid permit has been obtained from the Fire
Department. Open burning of leaves, yard waste, refuse or trash shall not be
permitted in the city, and permits shall not be issued for such activities.
Prior to any other open burning, including disposal of construction debris or
land clearing, the person requesting the permit shall be certain that no
detriment to the public health or damage to the land, water or air will be
caused. The following conditions shall always be met:
      (1)   Open burning shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. until sundown;
      (2)   All fires must be completely extinguished by sundown;
      (3)   All fires must be attended to and under the direct supervision at
all times of a person or persons that have sufficient capability and equipment
to provide for complete extinguishment of the fire as needed;
      (4)   Prevailing winds at the time of ignition must be away from any
dwelling, structure, major highway or other populated area, the ambient air of
which may be significantly affected by smoke, fly ash or other air contaminates
from burning;
      (5)   Asphaltic material, or items containing natural or synthetic
rubber, shall not be burned or used to ignite the material to be burned or to
promote the burning of such material; and
      (6)   No burning shall be permitted within 30 feet of any structure or
dwelling.
(1994 Code, § 7-204)
   (E)   Application. To obtain a permit required by this section, the
applicant shall file an application with the Fire Department on the forms
prescribed by the Department. No fee shall be required to obtain an open
burning permit. All permits issued shall be displayed while the open burning is
in progress. The Fire Department shall have the authority to forbid, restrict
or suspend any and all burning when the Fire Chief or the senior fire officer
in charge has determined that conditions are unfavorable or hazardous for
outdoor fires.
(1994 Code, § 7-205)
(Ord. 412, passed 5-12-1986; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 497, passed 11-4-
1993; Ord. 585, passed 12-23-1999; Ord. 612, passed 5-28-2002; Ord. 619, passed
6-27-2002; Ord. 752, passed 1-27-2014)
§ 150.31  ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   (A)   Energy Conservation Code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506 and for the purpose of securing,
the public safety, health and general welfare through all matters governing the
design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency, the International
Energy Conservation Code 2012 is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
as a part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as the “Energy
Conservation Code”.
   (B)   Available in Recorder’s office. Pursuant to the requirements of Tenn.
Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of the Energy Conservation Code has been place
on file in the Recorder’s office (Finance Director’s) and shall be kept there
for the use and inspection of the public.
(Ord. 748, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 150.32  ACCESSIBILITY CODE.
   (A)   Accessibility Code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn.
Code Ann. §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506 and for the purpose of securing the
public safety, health and general welfare through all matters governing the
design and construction of buildings for accessibility for all citizens, the
ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities 2012 is hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this code and is hereinafter
referred to as the “Accessibility Code”.
   (B)   Available in Recorder’s office. Pursuant to the requirements of Tenn.
Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of the Accessibility Code has been placed on
file in the Recorder’s office (Finance Director’s) and shall be kept there for
the use and inspection of the public.
(Ord. 748, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 150.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate or fail to
comply with any provision of the Building Code and its amendments and the
Property Maintenance Code and its amendments as herein adopted by reference and
modified. Any person willfully violating any provision of this Code by not
gaining a building permit prior to construction shall, upon conviction, be
punished a fine of $50; provided that, each day that said violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   If the Building Inspector fails to make report(s), as required, to
the city, county, state or federal offices, upon conviction, he or she shall be
fined $50 and be on probation for six months for the first offense and may lose
his or her Building Inspector position on two or more violations, in the same
calendar year.
(1994 Code, § 12-105)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person do so or authorize any electrical
work or to use any electricity in such manner or under such circumstances as
not to comply with §
150.27 of this chapter and/or the requirements and standards prescribed by the
Electrical Code. Each day shall constitute a separate violation of same. Upon
conviction of any said violation, such persons shall be punished by levying a
fine not to exceed $50 per violation.
(1994 Code, § 12-306)
   (D)   Section 114 of the Gas Code is hereby deleted. Any person who shall
violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of the Gas Code shall be
guilty of a civil offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be a civil
penalty under the general penalty clause for this code of ordinances, or the
license of such person may be revoked, or both fine and revocation of license
may be imposed.
(1994 Code, § 12-411)
   (E)   It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate or fail to
comply with any provision of the energy conservation code as herein adopted by
reference. Any person willfully violating any provision of this code shall,
upon conviction, be punished a fine of $50; provided that, each day said
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
   (F)   It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate or fail to
comply with any provision of the Accessibility Code as herein adopted by
reference. Any person willfully violating any provision of this Code shall,
upon conviction, be punished a fine of $25; provided that, each day said
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 355, passed - -; Ord. 412, passed 5-12-1986; Ord. 469, passed 9-19-1991;
Ord. 452, passed 3-8-1990; Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993; Ord. 497, passed 11-4-
1993; Ord. 748, passed 12-16-2013)
CHAPTER 151:  STREETS AND ROADWAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Obstructing streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited
   
151.02   Trees projecting over streets and the like regulated
   
151.03   Trees and the like obstructing view at intersections prohibited
   
151.04   Projecting signs and awnings and the like restricted
   
151.05   Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted
   
151.06   Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited
   
151.07   Littering streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited
   
151.08   Obstruction of drainage ditches
   
151.09   Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean and the like
   
151.10   Parades and the like regulated
   
151.11   Animals and vehicles on sidewalks
   
151.12   Fires in streets and the like
Excavations and Cuts
   
151.25   Permit required
   
151.26   Applications
   
151.27   Fees
   
151.28   Deposit or bond
   
151.29   Manner of excavating; barricades and lights; temporary sidewalks
   
151.30   Restoration of streets and the like
   
151.31   Insurance
   
151.32   Time limits
   
151.33   Supervision
   
151.34   Driveway curb cuts
Uniform Property Numbering System
   
151.45   Uniform numbering system adopted
   
151.46   Assignment and display of numbers
   
151.47   Administration
   
151.48   Compliance
   
151.49   Violations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01  OBSTRUCTING STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use or occupy any portion of any public street, alley,
sidewalk or right-of-way for the purpose of storing, selling or exhibiting any
goods, wares, merchandise or materials.
(1994 Code, § 16-101)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.02  TREES PROJECTING OVER STREETS AND THE LIKE REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to allow any limbs
of trees on his or her property to project over any street or alley at a height
of less than 14 feet or over any sidewalk at a height of less than eight feet.
(1994 Code, § 16-102)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.03  TREES AND THE LIKE OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a civil offense for any property owner or occupant to have or
maintain on his or her property any tree, hedge, billboard or other obstruction
which prevents persons driving vehicles on public streets or alleys from
obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection.
(1994 Code, § 16-103)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.04  PROJECTING SIGNS AND AWNINGS AND THE LIKE RESTRICTED.
   Signs, awnings or other structures which project over any street or other
public way shall be erected subject to the requirements of the Building Code.
(1994 Code, § 16-104)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.05  BANNERS AND SIGNS ACROSS STREETS AND ALLEYS RESTRICTED.
   It shall be a civil penalty for any person to place or have placed any
banner or sign across any public street or alley, except when expressly
authorized by the City Commission after a finding that no hazard will be
created by such banner or sign.
(1994 Code, § 16-105)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.06  GATES OR DOORS OPENING OVER STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a civil penalty for any person owning or occupying property to
allow any gate or door to swing open upon or over any street, alley or sidewalk
except when required by law.
(1994 Code, § 16-106)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.07  LITTERING STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a civil penalty for any person to litter, place, throw, track or
allow to fall on any street, alley or sidewalk any refuse, glass, tacks, mud or
other objects or materials which are unsightly or which obstruct or tend to
limit or interfere with the use of such public ways and places for their
intended purposes.
(1994 Code, § 16-107)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.08  OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE DITCHES.
   It shall be a civil penalty for any person to permit or cause the
obstruction of any drainage ditch in any public right-of-way.
(1994 Code, § 16-108)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.09  ABUTTING OCCUPANTS TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN AND THE LIKE.
   The occupants of property abutting on a sidewalk are required to keep the
sidewalk clean. Also, immediately after a snow or sleet, such occupants are
required to remove all accumulated snow and ice from the abutting sidewalk.
(1994 Code, § 16-109)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.10  PARADES AND THE LIKE REGULATED.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person, club, organization or other
group to hold any meeting, parade, demonstration or exhibition on the public
streets without some responsible representative first
securing a permit from the city. No permit shall be issued by the city unless
such activity will not unreasonably interfere with traffic and unless such
representative shall agree to see to the immediate cleaning up of all litter
which shall be left on the streets as a result of the activity. Furthermore, it
shall be a civil offense for any person obtaining such a permit to fail to
carry out his or her agreement to immediately clean up the resulting litter
immediately.
(1994 Code, § 16-110)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.11  ANIMALS AND VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be a civil offense for any person to ride, lead or tie any
animal or ride, push, pull or place any vehicle across or upon any sidewalk in
such manner as to unreasonably interfere with or inconvenience pedestrians
using the sidewalk. It shall also be a civil offense for any person to
knowingly allow any minor under his or her control to violate this section.
   (B)   It shall be a civil offense for any person to ride or lead a horse on
any sidewalk in the city at any time. Horses may not be ridden or led upon any
street, highway or roadway within the city limits during the period from one-
half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, nor at any other times
when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any horse on
any such road or highway at a distance of 200 feet; provided, however, nothing
herein shall be deemed to prohibit riding or leading horses upon said street,
highway or roadway for one hour prior to a lawful parade in the city, during
said parade and for one hour after said parade.
(1994 Code, § 16-112)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.12  FIRES IN STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to set or contribute to any fire
in any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(1994 Code, § 16-113)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS
§ 151.25  PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person, firm, corporation, association
or others, to make any excavation in any street, alley or public place, or to
tunnel under any street, alley or public place without having first obtained a
permit as herein required, and without complying with the provisions of this
subchapter; and it shall also be a civil offense to violate, or vary from, the
terms of any such permit; provided, however, any person maintaining pipes,
lines or other underground facilities in or under the surface of any street may
proceed with an opening without a permit when emergency circumstances demand
the work to be done immediately and a permit cannot reasonably and practicably
be obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the
first regular business day on which the office of the Public Works Director is
open for business and said permit shall be retroactive to the date when the
work was begun.
(1994 Code, § 16-201)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was patterned substantially after the ordinance upheld by the
Tennessee Supreme Court in the case of City of Paris, Tennessee v. Paris-Henry
County Public Utility District, 207 Tenn. 388, 340 S.W.2d 885 (1960).
§ 151.26  APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Public Works Director, or
such person as he or she may designate to receive such applications, and shall
state thereon the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size
thereof, the purpose thereof, the person, firm, corporation, association or
others doing the actual excavating, the name of the person, firm, corporation,
association or others for whom the work is being done, and shall contain an
agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating
to the work to be done. Such application shall be rejected or approved by the
Public Works Director within 24 hours of its filing.
(1994 Code, § 16-202)
§ 151.27  FEES.
   (A)   The fee for such permits shall be $200. This fee is to cover the costs
of inspection of backfill, and an asphalt patch of up to 48 square feet. Any
excavation larger than 48 square feet shall require an additional fee, to be
determined by the Public Works Director based on the size of the excavation.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to the fee(s) set forth in division (A) above, there
shall be an additional fee imposed when any street cut results in any section
of a city street having street cut(s) that comprise 20% or more of any 500-foot
section of that street.
         (a)   This additional fee will be equal to the city’s cost of repaving
that 500-foot section of that city street.
         (b)   This additional fee will be paid by the entity making the street
cut. When more than one entity is responsible for the street cuts within a
particular 500-foot section, the additional fee shall be prorated between the
entities making the street cuts on a percentage basis. The percentage assessed
to each entity will be equal to their percentage of the total street cuts that
exist within a particular 500- foot section.
      (2)   This assessment is illustrated by the following example: assume
Entity A makes a street cut in a particular city street that results in 20% or
more of a 500-foot section of that city street having street cuts. Assume
further that after this last street cut is made there are a total of 15 street
cuts within that 500-foot section of that city street. Assume further that one
entity made ten of those street cuts and another entity made five. The first
entity would pay the city an amount equal to two-thirds of the city’s costs of
repaving that 500-foot section of the city street, and the second entity would
pay the remaining one-third.
   (C)   The additional fee set forth in division (B) above will not be charged
if that 500-foot section of that particular city street is already scheduled to
be repaved by the city within five years.
(1994 Code, § 16-203)  (Ord. 730, passed 8-27-2012)
§ 151.28  DEPOSIT OR BOND.
   (A)   No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor
has deposited with the Public Works Director a cash deposit. The deposit shall
be in the sum of $25 if no pavement is involved or $75 if the excavation is in
a paved area and shall insure the proper restoration of the ground and laying
of the pavement, if any. Where the amount of the deposit is clearly inadequate
to cover the cost of restoration, the Public Works Director may increase the
amount of the deposit to an amount considered by him to be adequate to cover
the said cost. From this deposit shall be deducted the expense to the city of
relaying the surface of the ground or pavement, and of making the refill if
this is done by the city or at its expense. The balance shall be returned to
the applicant without interest after the tunnel or excavation is completely
refilled and the surface or pavement is restored.
   (B)   In lieu of a deposit, the applicant may deposit with the Public Works
Director a surety bond in such form and amount as the Public Works Director
shall deem adequate to cover the costs to the city if the applicant fails to
make proper restoration.
(1994 Code, § 16-204)
§ 151.29  MANNER OF EXCAVATING; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS; TEMPORARY SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, association or others making any
excavation or tunnel shall do so according to the terms and conditions of the
application and permit authorizing the work to be done.
   (B)   Sufficient and proper barricades and lights shall be maintained to
protect persons and property from injury by or because of the excavation being
made. If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall
be constructed and provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users.
(1994 Code, § 16-205)
§ 151.30  RESTORATION OF STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   Any person, firm, corporation, association or others making any excavation
or tunnel in or under any street, alley or public place in the city shall
restore said street, alley or public place to its original condition, except
for the surfacing, which shall be done by the city, but shall be paid for
promptly upon completion by such person, firm, corporation, association or
others for which the excavation or tunnel was made. In case of unreasonable
delay in restoring the street, alley or public place, the Public Works Director
shall give notice to the person, firm, corporation, association or others that
unless the excavation or tunnel is refilled properly within a specified
reasonable period of time, the city will do the work and charge the expense of
doing the same to such person, firm, corporation, association or others. If,
within the specified time, the conditions of the above notice have not been
complied with, the work shall be done by the city, an accurate account of the
expense involved shall be kept, and the total cost shall be charged to the
person, firm, corporation, association or others who made the excavation or
tunnel.
(1994 Code, § 16-206)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.31  INSURANCE.
   (A)   In addition to making the deposit or giving the bond hereinbefore
required to ensure that proper restoration is made, each person applying for an
excavation permit shall file a certificate of insurance indicating that he or
she is insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as
against claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the
performance of the work, whether such performance be by himself or herself, his
or her subcontractor or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him or her.
   (B)   Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards and underground
work by equipment on the street, and shall include protection against liability
arising from completed operations. The amount of the insurance shall be
prescribed by the Public Works Director in accordance with the nature of the
risk involved; provided, however, that, the liability insurance for bodily
injury shall not be less than $100,000 for each person and $300,000 for each
accident, and for property damages not less than $25,000 for any one accident,
and a $75,000 aggregate.
(1994 Code, § 16-207)
§ 151.32  TIME LIMITS.
   (A)   Each application for a permit shall state the length of time it is
estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work until the restoration
of the surface of the ground or pavement, or until the refill is made ready for
the pavement to be put on by the city if the city restores such surface
pavement.
   (B)   It shall be a civil offense to fail to comply with this time
limitation unless permission for an extension of time is granted by the Public
Works Director.
(1994 Code, § 16-208)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.33  SUPERVISION.
   The Public Works Director shall from time to time inspect all excavations
and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other public
place in the city and see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
subchapter. Notice shall be given to him or her at least ten hours before the
work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences.
(1994 Code, § 16-209)
§ 151.34  DRIVEWAY CURB CUTS.
   No one shall cut, build or maintain a driveway across a curb or sidewalk
without first obtaining a permit from the Public Works Director. Such a permit
will not be issued when the contemplated driveway is to be so located or
constructed as to create an unreasonable hazard to pedestrian and/or vehicular
traffic. No driveway shall exceed 35 feet in width at its outer or street edge,
and when two or more adjoining driveways are provided for the same property, a
safety island of not less than ten feet in width at its outer or street edge
shall be provided. Driveway aprons shall not extend out into the street.
(1994 Code, § 16-210)  Penalty, see §
10.99
UNIFORM PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM
§ 151.45  UNIFORM NUMBERING SYSTEM ADOPTED.
   A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings, as shown
on the map identified by the title “Etowah, Tennessee-Property Numbering
System”, which is filed in the office of the Building Inspector, is hereby
adopted for use in the city. This map and all explanatory matter thereon are
hereby adopted and made a part of this subchapter.
(1994 Code, § 16-301)
§ 151.46  ASSIGNMENT AND DISPLAY OF NUMBERS.
   (A)   All properties or parcels of land within the corporate limits of the
city shall hereafter be identified by reference to the uniform numbering system
adopted herein; all existing numbers of property and buildings shall be changed
to conform to the system herein adopted within 90 days of the property owner’s
receipt of the notice of change from the city.
   (B)   The numbering of buildings on each street shall begin at the base
lines indicated on the map titled “Etowah, Tennessee-Property Numbering
System”. All numbers shall be assigned on the basis of one number for each ten
feet of frontage along the street. Grid lines, as shown on the property
numbering map, indicate the point at which numbers will change from one hundred
to the next higher hundred. All buildings on the south side of east-west
streets and east of north-south streets shall bear odd numbers, and all
buildings on the north side of east-west streets and west side of north-south
streets shall bear even numbers.
   (C)   All buildings facing streets not extending through to the base line
shall be assigned the same relative numbers as if the said streets had extended
to the said base line.
   (D)   Each principal building shall bear a number assigned to the frontage
on which the front entrance is located. In case a lot is occupied by more than
one dwelling unit, with the exception of a mobile home park, each dwelling unit
shall be assigned a separate number. If a principal building or group complex
is occupied by more than one business, each separate front entrance of said
principal building or group complex shall bear a separate number.
(1994 Code, § 16-302)
§ 151.47  ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for administering and
enforcing the numbering system. In the performance of this responsibility, he
or she shall be guided by the provisions of §
151.46 of this chapter.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall keep a record of all numbers assigned
under this subchapter.
(1994 Code, § 16-303)
§ 151.48  COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Numerals indicating the official number for each principal building or
for each front entrance of a principal building or group complex shall be
posted in such a manner as to be visible from the street on which the property
fronts.
   (B)   Within 90 days after notice from the city of the new street number, it
shall be the responsibility of the individual property owner to secure and post
the appropriate set of numerals which shall be at least three inches high.
   (C)   Whenever any house, building or structure shall be erected or located
in the city after the adoption of said uniform system of house and building
numbering, in order to preserve the continuity and uniformity of numbers of the
houses, buildings and structures, it shall be the duty and responsibility of
the owner to procure the correct numerals as designated by the Building
Inspector and immediately to post said numerals. No building permit shall be
issued for any house, building or structure until the owner has applied for and
been assigned by the Building Inspector the official number of the premises.
Final approval of any structure erected, repaired, altered or modified after
the effective date of the provisions of this subchapter shall be withheld by
the Building Inspector until permanent and proper numerals have been properly
posted.
(1994 Code, § 16-304)
§ 151.49  VIOLATIONS.
   Any violation of this subchapter shall be a civil offense.
(1994 Code, § 16-305)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)
CHAPTER 152:  MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES
Section
Mobile Homes
   
152.01   State tax sticker required
   
152.02   Restrictions on the use of mobile homes outside zoned and licensed
trailer courts
   
152.03   Prohibition against the use of mobile homes outside zoned and licensed
trailer courts
   
152.04   Permits
   
152.05   Violations
Manufactured Homes
   
152.20   General appearance and compatibility standards
MOBILE HOMES
§ 152.01  STATE TAX STICKER REQUIRED.
   It shall be a civil offense for any mobile home to be used, placed or stored
within the city limits or serviced by the utilities of said city, unless there
is posted near the door of said mobile home a valid state tax sticker.
(1994 Code, § 14-301)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)
§ 152.02  RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF MOBILE HOMES OUTSIDE ZONED AND LICENSED
TRAILER COURTS.
   It shall be a civil offense for any mobile home to be used, stored or placed
on any lot, or serviced by the utilities of the city, where said mobile home is
outside any duly zoned and licensed trailer court, within the said city, unless
the owner thereof or his or her authorized representative shall first obtain a
permit where it can be readily seen on said mobile home. No such permit will be
issued unless all the space requirements of the Zoning Code of said city are
met.
(1994 Code, § 14-302)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)
§ 152.03  PROHIBITION AGAINST THE USE OF MOBILE HOMES OUTSIDE ZONED AND
LICENSED TRAILER COURTS.
   Notwithstanding §§
152.01 and
152.02 of this chapter, no mobile home shall be used, placed or stored on any
lot, outside a duly zoned and licensed trailer court, within said city after
12-31-1965. However, the owner of any mobile home already placed on a lot on or
before such date will be sold a temporary numbered permit by the Building
Inspector of said city, giving the owner or occupant of said mobile home a
period not to exceed 24 months to remove such mobile home and fully comply with
all requirements and ordinances of the city. Any mobile home removed during
this 24-month period will not be returned to said lot or replaced on said lot
by any other mobile home. As an exception, any mobile home owned by the
occupant and placed on a lot also owned by the occupant on or before 12-31-
1965, and fully complying with the requirements of the laws of said city will
be permitted to remain as long as the conditions described in this chapter
continue to exist; however, if at any time the ownership of either the lot or
mobile home shall change, or the laws of the city be violated or the owner-
occupant ceases to reside in said mobile home, said mobile home owner will be
given a period not to exceed 30 days in which to remove said mobile home and to
comply with all provisions of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 14-303)
§ 152.04  PERMITS.
   The temporary numbered permit mentioned in §
152.03 of this chapter shall be sold by the Building Inspector of said city for
the sum of $3 per calendar year.
(1994 Code, § 14-304)
§ 152.05  VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
civil offense and subject to and punishable under the general penalty clause
for this code.
(1994 Code, § 14-305)  (Ord. 494, passed 9-2-1993)
MANUFACTURED HOMES
§ 152.20  GENERAL APPEARANCE AND COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS.
   (A)   Definitions: see Etowah Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
   (B)   Permitted locations: modular manufactured homes, as defined, shall be
permitted in all residential districts subject to the requirements and
limitations set forth herein and which apply generally to residential use in
such zoning classifications, including minimum lot size, setbacks, percentage
of lot coverage and off-street parking requirements.
   (C)   The manufactured or modular home must be connected to a public water
and sewage system; provided that where public water or sewer is not available,
private well and septic tank installations approved by the State Department of
Environment and Conservation may be utilized.
   (D)   Manufactured homes qualifying as single-family dwellings shall have
the same appearance as required for site built homes and shall be built in two
or more sections.
   (E)   All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed.
   (F)   Within 30 days of siting a manufactured home, a brick or cinder block
skirting compatible with the home’s exterior siding shall be securely placed
around the structure from the bottom of the home to the ground. Also, steps of
a type approved by the Building Inspector shall be installed within said time
limit, as necessary.
   (G)   The manufactured home shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the Manufactured Home Anchoring Act (Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-36-
401).
   (H)   Where installation of the electric meter on a separate pole, not on
the structure, is approved by the Deputy State Fire Marshal/Electrical
Inspector, said pole shall be at the rear of the manufactured home; provided,
where the City Utilities Board cannot place the meter pole at the rear of the
structure, said pole shall be at the side of the structure and shall have an
opaque panel fence on the front and open side of the pole eight feet high. The
space to the rear of the pole shall be left open for emergency access and for
meter readings.
   (I)   Where applicable, all site-built additions to the manufactured home
shall meet the requirements of the Etowah Building Code, as amended.
(Ord. 562, passed 2-9-1998)
CHAPTER 153:  FLOODS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Statutory authorization
   
153.02   Findings of fact
   
153.03   Statement of purpose
   
153.04   Objectives
   
153.05   Definitions
   
153.06   Application
   
153.07   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
   
153.08   Development permit requirement
   
153.09   Compliance
   
153.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.11   Interpretation
   
153.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
153.13   Conflict with other ordinances
   
153.14   Severability
Administration
   
153.25   Administrator; duties, responsibilities
   
153.26   Permit procedures
   
153.27   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
153.28   Variances; conditions
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
153.40   General standards
   
153.41   Specific standards
   
153.42   Standards for special flood hazard areas with established base flood
elevations and floodways designated
   
153.43   Standards for areas of special flood hazard Zones AE with established
base flood elevations but without floodways designated
   
153.44   Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and
floodways (A Zones)
   
153.45   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH Zones)
   
153.46   Standards for areas protected by flood protection system (A-99 Zones)
   
153.47   Standards for unmapped streams
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-201 through 13-
7-210, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
of its citizenry.
(1994 Code, § 14-401)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The city’s Mayor and its legislative body wishes to maintain
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and, in order to do
so, must meet the NFIP regulations found in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3.
   (B)   Areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which could
result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (C)   Flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities; by uses in
flood hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods; or construction which is
inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise unprotected from flood
damages.
(Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas.
   (B)   This chapter is designed to:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to flooding or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood
heights or velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community
facilities, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion; and
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.04  OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect human life, health, safety and property;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in flood-prone areas;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood- prone areas to minimize blight in flood areas;
   (G)   To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a
flood-prone area; and
   (H)   To maintain eligibility for participation in the NFIP.
(Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.05  DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and
to give this chapter its most reasonable application given its stated purpose
and objectives.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A subordinate structure to the principal structure on
the same lot and, for the purpose of this chapter, shall conform to the
following:
      (1)   Accessory structures shall only be used for parking of vehicles and
storage;
      (2)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
      (3)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood
waters;
      (4)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement, which otherwise may result in damage to other
structures; and
      (5)   Utilities and service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or otherwise protected from intrusion of flood
waters.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter or height of a building.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the local enforcement officer’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with 1% or greater annual chance of flooding to an
average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD. The land within a community
which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The
area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After
the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard area in
preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further refined.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. This term is also referred to as the 100-YEAR FLOOD or the 1%
ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD.
   BASEMENT. Any portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of
the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood water, pilings, columns, piers or shear walls adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
base flood event.
   EMERGENCY FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM or EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The program as
implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with § 1336 of the Act (42
U.S.C. § 4056). It is intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of
insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the initial
FIRM.
   EROSION. The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. This peril
is not per se covered under the program.
   EXCEPTION. A waiver from the provisions of this chapter which relieves the
applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order or other
determination made or issued pursuant to this chapter.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the initial floodplain management code
or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community’s
participation in the NFIP.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, final site grading or
the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a
basis for that community’s participation in the NFIP.
   EXISTING STRUCTURES. See EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION. A determination by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) of the water surface elevations of the base flood,
that is, the flood level that has a 1% or greater chance of occurrence in any
given year.
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-
related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
FEMA, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard or the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by FEMA, evaluating
flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevation of the
base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. (See definition of FLOODING.)
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area
within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities and
structures and their contents.
   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of
a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA or FLOOD-RELATED EROSION PRONE AREA. A land area
adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the
composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven
currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.
   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program
of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion
damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood-
related erosion control works and floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings and the hydrological effect
of urbanization of the watershed.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state’s inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on the city’s inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
         (a)   By the approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that, such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP. The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for a community issued by FEMA.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It
is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the
floodplain. For the purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management
ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of this chapter or the effective date of the initial floodplain management
ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain.
   100-YEAR FLOOD. See BASE FLOOD.
   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association or any other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies.
   REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING. Base flood waters will not inundate the land
or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that
any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or
proposed structures.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined
into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99.
   SPECIAL HAZARD AREA. An area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A,
AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual START means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including
a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage
of excavation; and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
   STATE COORDINATING AGENCY. The Tennessee Department of Economic and
Community Development’s, Local Planning Assistance Office, as designated by the
Governor of the state at the request of FEMA to assist in the implementation of
the NFIP for the state.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration or other
improvement of a structure in which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the initial
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the
structure should be:
         (a)   The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the
initial improvement; or
         (b)   In the case of substantial damage, the value of the structure
prior to the damage occurring.
      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been pre-identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions and not solely
triggered by an improvement or repair project; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that, the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR SUBDIVISIONS.
Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets,
utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities
and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION.
      (1)   The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
      (2)   A structure or other development without the elevation certificate,
other certification or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is
presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988
or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
(1994 Code, § 14-402)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.06  APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas within the incorporated area of the
city.
(1994 Code, § 14-403)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified on the city, as identified by
FEMA, and in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM), Community Panel Numbers 47107C0306D, 47107C0307D, 47107C0308D and
47107C0309D, dated 9-28-2007, along with all supporting technical data, are
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 14-403)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.08  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   A development permit shall be required in conformity with this chapter prior
to the commencement of any development activities.
(1994 Code, § 14-403)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.09  COMPLIANCE.
   No land, structure or use shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(1994 Code, § 14-403)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010) 
Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
conflicts or overlaps with another regulatory instrument, whichever imposes the
more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(1994 Code, § 14-403)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.11  INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal, any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(1994 Code, § 14-403)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(1994 Code, § 14-403)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.13  CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   In case of conflict between this chapter or any part thereof, and the whole
or part of any existing or future ordinance of the city, the most restrictive
shall in all cases apply.
(Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.14  SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter shall be held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
holding shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of
this chapter which is not of itself invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.25  ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Building Inspector is hereby appointed as the Administrator to
implement the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Duties of the Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Review all development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, and that proposed building
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding;
      (2)   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is
required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344;
      (3)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Economic
and Community Development, Local Planning Assistance Office, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to FEMA;
      (4)   For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/
analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community FIRMs
through the Letter of Map Revision process;
      (5)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
      (6)   Record the elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the highest
adjacent grade, where applicable, of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new and substantially improved buildings, in accordance with §
153.26 of this chapter;
      (7)   Record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the
highest adjacent grade, where applicable to which the new and substantially
improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with §
153.26 of this chapter;
      (8)   When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure,
obtain certification of design criteria from a state registered professional
engineer or architect, in accordance with §
153.26 of this chapter;
      (9)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in this chapter;
      (10)   When base flood elevation data and floodway data have not been
provided by FEMA, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources,
including data developed as a result of these regulations, as criteria for
requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other development
in Zone A on the city’s FIRM meet the requirements of this chapter; and
      (11)   Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter
in the office of the Administrator and shall be open for public inspection.
Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in a
separate file or marked for expedited retrieval within combined files.
(1994 Code, § 14-404)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.26  PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be made to the
Administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development
activities. The development permit may include, but is not limited to, the
following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale and showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and
drainage facilities.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required.
      (1)   Application stage.
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor, including basement, of all buildings where base flood elevations are
available, or to certain height above the highest adjacent grade when
applicable under this chapter;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential building will be floodproofed where base flood elevations are
available, or to certain height above the highest adjacent grade when
applicable under this chapter;
         (c)   A FEMA floodproofing certificate from a state registered
professional engineer or architect that the proposed non-residential
floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in §§
153.40 and
153.41 of this chapter; and
         (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered relocated as a result of proposed development.
      (2)   Construction stage.
         (a)   Within AE Zones where base flood elevation data is available,
any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of, a state registered land
surveyor and certified by same. The Administrator shall record the elevation of
the lowest floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for
a non-residential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under
the direct supervision of, a state registered professional engineer or
architect and certified by same.
         (b)   Within approximate A Zones, where base flood elevation data is
not available, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the
measurement of the lowest floor of the building relative to the highest
adjacent grade. The Administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest
floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a non-
residential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the
direct supervision of, a state registered professional engineer or architect
and certified by same.
         (c)   For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
permit holder shall provide to the Administrator an as-built certification of
the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level upon the completion of the
lowest floor or floodproofing.
         (d)   Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification
shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The Administrator shall review the above
referenced certification data. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said
corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the
project.
(1994 Code, § 14-404)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.27  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   Authority. The City Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Procedure. Meetings of the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
held at such times, as the Board shall determine. All meetings of the Municipal
Board of Zoning Appeals shall be open to the public. The Municipal Board of
Zoning Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure and shall keep records of
applications and actions thereof, which shall be a public record. Compensation
of the members of the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall be set by the
legislative body.
   (C)   Appeals; how taken. An appeal to the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals
may be taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by any
governmental officer, department or bureau affected by any decision of the
Administrator based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this chapter.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals
a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. In all cases where an
appeal is made by a property owner or other interested party, a fee as set
forth in the current city fee schedule for the cost of publishing a notice of
such hearings shall be paid by the appellant. The Administrator shall transmit
to the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals all papers constituting the record
upon which the appeal action was taken. The Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals
shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest and decide the same
within a reasonable time which shall not be more than ten business days from
the date of the hearing. At the hearing, any person or party may appear and be
heard in person or by agent or by attorney.
   (D)   Powers. The Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following
powers:
      (1)   Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged by the applicant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit,
decision, determination or refusal made by the Administrator or other
administrative official in carrying out or enforcement of any provisions of
this chapter; and
      (2)   Variance procedures.
         (a)   In the case of a request for a variance, the following shall
apply.
            1.   The City Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
            2.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures as defined, herein, upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
deviation from the requirements of this chapter to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
         (b)   In passing upon such applications, the Municipal Board of Zoning
Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
            1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other property to
the injury of others;
            2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion;
            3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage;
            4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
            5.   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the
case of a functionally dependent use;
            6.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
            7.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
            8.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            9.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
            10.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems and streets and
bridges.
         (c)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes
of this chapter, the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to effectuate
the purposes.
         (d)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 14-406)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.28  VARIANCES; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard and the factors
listed in §
153.27 of this chapter.
   (B)   Variances shall only be issued upon: a showing of good and sufficient
cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship; or a determination that the granting of a variance will
not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (C)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the issuance of a Variance to construct a structure below the base
flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance (as
high as $25 for $100) coverage, and that such construction below the base flood
elevation increases risks to life and property.
   (D)   The Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and
report any variances to FEMA upon request.
(1994 Code, § 14-406)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 153.40  GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage. They must be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building
that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of new construction, as contained in this chapter.
   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building
that is not in compliance with the provision of this chapter shall be
undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further extended or replaced.
   (K)   All new construction and substantial improvement proposals shall
provide copies of all necessary federal and state permits, including § 404 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development proposals
shall meet the standards of §
153.41 of this chapter.
   (M)   When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are
partially located in an area of special flood hazard, the entire structure
shall meet the standards for new construction.
   (N)   When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are
located in multiple flood hazard risk zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with
multiple base flood elevations, the entire structure shall meet the standards
for the most hazardous flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation.
(1994 Code, § 14-405)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.41  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions, in addition
to those set forth in §
153.40 of this chapter are required.
   (A)   Residential structures.
      (1)   In AE Zones where base flood elevation data is available, new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential building (or
manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation
perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to
facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior
walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division (C) below.
      (2)   Within approximate A Zones where base flood elevations have not
been established and where alternative data is not available, the Administrator
shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated to a level of at
least three feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in §
153.05 of this chapter). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood
hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in
accordance with the standards of division (C) below.
   (B)   Non-residential structures.
      (1)   In AE Zones, where base flood elevation data is available, new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-
residential building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
or floodproofed to no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood
elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic
forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the
standards of division (C) below.
      (2)   In approximate A Zones, where base flood elevations have not been
established and where alternative data is not available, new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or non-residential
building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or
floodproofed to no lower than three feet above the highest adjacent grade (as
defined in §
153.05 of this chapter). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood
hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in
accordance with the standards of division (C) below.
      (3)   Non-residential buildings located in all A Zones may be
floodproofed, in lieu of being elevated; provided that, all areas of the
building below the required elevation are water-tight, with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and are built with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy. A state registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall
provide such certification to the Administrator as set forth in §
153.26 of this chapter.
   (C)   Enclosures. All new construction and substantial improvements that
include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls
below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls.
      (1)   Designs for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a state professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the finished grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of flood waters in
both directions.
      (2)   The enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for
parking of vehicles, storage or building access.
      (3)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or
partitioned into separate rooms in such a way as to impede the movement of
flood waters and all such partitions shall comply with the provisions of this
section.
   (D)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
      (1)   All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on:
         (a)   Individual lots or parcels;
         (b)   In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions; or
         (c)   In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions, must meet all the requirements of new construction.
      (2)   All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that either:
         (a)   In AE Zones, with base flood elevations, the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated on a permanent foundation to no lower than one
foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or
         (b)   In approximate A Zones, without base flood elevations, the
manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength) that are at least
three feet in height above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in §
153.05 of this chapter).
      (3)   Any manufactured home, which has incurred substantial damage as the
result of a flood, must meet the standards of §
153.40 of this chapter and this section.
      (4)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      (5)   All recreational vehicles placed in an identified special flood
hazard area must either:
         (a)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking
system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or
         (c)   The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new
construction.
   (E)   Standards for subdivisions and other proposed new development
proposals. Subdivisions and other proposed new developments, including
manufactured home parks, shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals
will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      (1)   All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
      (2)   All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
      (4)   In all approximate A Zones, it is required that all new subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured
home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
the lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. (See §
153.44 of this chapter.)
(1994 Code, § 14-405)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.42  STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WITH ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD
ELEVATIONS AND FLOODWAYS DESIGNATED.
   (A)   (1)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
153.07 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways.
      (2)   A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of flood waters, debris or erosion potential.
      (3)   In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to
allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights and
velocities.
   (B)   Therefore, the following provisions shall apply.
      (1)   Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill material, new
construction, substantial improvements or other development within the
regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted; however, provided, it is
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed
encroachments or new development shall not result in any increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood elevation, velocities or floodway widths
during the occurrence of a base flood discharge at any point within the
community. A state registered professional engineer must provide supporting
technical data, using the same methodologies as in the effective Flood
Insurance Study for the city and certification thereof.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where
permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions
of §§
153.40 and
153.41 of this chapter.
(Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.43  STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD ZONES AE WITH ESTABLISHED
BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT WITHOUT FLOODWAYS DESIGNATED.
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
153.07 of this chapter, where streams exist with base flood data provided but
where no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions
apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill material, new construction and
substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard,
unless certification by a state registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by
technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
   (B)   New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where
permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions
of §§
153.40 and
153.41 of this chapter.
(Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.44  STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS AND
FLOODWAYS (A ZONES).
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
153.07 of this chapter, where streams exist, but no base flood data has been
provided and where a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions
shall apply.
   (A)   The Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from any federal, state or other
sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations (see
division (B) below), as criteria for requiring that new construction,
substantial improvements or other development in approximate A Zones meet the
requirements of §§
153.40 and
153.41 of this chapter.
   (B)   Require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions)
greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include within
such proposals base flood elevation data.
   (C)   Within approximate A Zones, where base flood elevations have not been
established and where such data is not available from other sources, require
the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or floodproofed to a level of at
least three feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in § 153.05 of
this chapter). All applicable data including elevations or floodproofing
certifications shall be recorded as set forth in §
153.26 of this chapter. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in
accordance with the standards of §
153.41 of this chapter.
   (D)   Within approximate A Zones, where base flood elevations have not been
established and where such data is not available from other sources, no
encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within
an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater,
measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a state
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. The engineering
certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard
hydraulic engineering principles.
   (E)   New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where
permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions
of §§
153.40 and
153.41 of this chapter. Within approximate A Zones, require that those
divisions of §
153.41 of this chapter dealing with the alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, assuring watercourse carrying capacities are maintained and
manufactured homes provisions are complied with as required.
(Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.45  STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO AND AH ZONES).
   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
153.07 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These
areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate.
   (B)   Therefore, the following provisions, in addition to those set forth in
§§
153.40 and
153.41 of this chapter, apply.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
and non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to at least one foot above as many feet as the depth number specified
on the FIRMs, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth
number is specified on the FIRM, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
elevated to at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings
sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of §
153.41 of this chapter.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be floodproofed
and designed water-tight to be completely floodproofed to at least one foot
above the flood depth number specified on the FIRM, with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. If no depth number is specified on the FIRM, the structure shall be
floodproofed to at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. A state
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the provisions of this chapter and shall provide such certification
to the Administrator as set forth above and as required in accordance with §
153.41 of this chapter.
      (3)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to guide
flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.46  STANDARDS FOR AREAS PROTECTED BY FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM (A-99
ZONES).
   (A)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
153.07 of this chapter are areas of the 100-year floodplain protected by a
flood protection system, but where base flood elevations have not been
determined.
   (B)   Within these areas (A-99 Zones), all provisions of §§
153.25,
153.26 and
153.40 through
153.47 of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.47  STANDARDS FOR UNMAPPED STREAMS.
   (A)   Located within the city are unmapped streams where areas of special
flood hazard are neither indicated nor identified.
   (B)   Adjacent to such streams, the following provisions shall apply.
      (1)   No encroachments including fill material or other development
including structures shall be located within an area of at least equal to twice
the width of the stream, measured from the top of each stream bank, unless
certification by a state registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the locality.
      (2)   When a new flood hazard risk zone, and base flood elevation and
floodway data is available, new construction and substantial improvements shall
meet the standards established in accordance with §§
153.25,
153.26 and
153.40 through
153.47of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 14-405)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
§ 153.99  PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable
as other misdemeanors as provided by law. Any person who violates this chapter
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon adjudication
therefor, be fined as prescribed by state statutes and, in addition, shall pay
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the city from taking such other lawful actions to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(1994 Code, § 14-403)  (Ord. 514, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 703, passed 5-24-2010)
CHAPTER 154:  ZONING
Section
   
154.01   Zoning regulations adopted by reference
§ 154.01  ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Land use within the city shall be governed by Ord. 424, titled “City of
Etowah, Tennessee, Zoning Ordinance”, and any amendments thereto. The city’s
zoning regulations are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as
if set out in full.
(1994 Code, §-14-201)  (Ord. 424, passed 3-19-1987; Ord. 504, passed 2-28-1994;
Ord. 520, passed 12-12-1994; Ord. 523, passed 2-27-1995; Ord. 547, passed 9-9-
1996; Ord. 549, passed 11-11-1996; Ord. 550, passed 1-27-1997; Ord. 561, passed
10-13-1997; Ord. 564, passed 5-11-1998; Ord. 582, passed 11-22-1999; Ord. 586,
passed 4-24-2000; Ord. 587, passed 4-24-2000; Ord. 589, passed 5-22-2000; Ord.
593, passed 6-20-2000; Ord. 598, passed 9-25-2000; Ord. 601, passed 10-23-2000;
Ord. 602, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 603, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 608, passed 7-
23-2001; Ord. 609, passed 5-28-2002; Ord. 618, passed 6-27-2002; Ord. 634,
passed 10-27-2003; Ord. 637, passed 2-23-2004; Ord. 657, passed 2-27-2006; Ord.
666, passed 9-25-2006; Ord. 667, passed 2-26-2007; Ord. 684, passed 8-25-2008;
Ord. 702, passed 5-24-2010; Ord. 728, passed 8-27-2012; Ord. 754, passed 3-24-
2014; Ord. 765, passed 1-26-2015; Ord. 771, passed 5-14-2015; Ord. 773, passed
9-28-2015; Ord. 774, passed 9-28-2015; Ord. 790, passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 808,
passed 9-25-2017; Ord. 809, passed 9-25-2017; Ord. 811, passed 12-18-2017; Ord.
812, passed 11-28-2017; Ord. 813, passed 2-26-2018; Ord. 816, passed 5-21-2018;
Ord. 836, passed 7-22-2019)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 424, and any amendments thereto, are published as separate documents
and are of record in the office of the city.
CHAPTER 155:  VACANT COMMERCIAL PROPERTY
Section
   
155.01   General provisions
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Required screening specifications
§ 155.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   These general provisions shall govern vacant commercial store-fronts within
the corporate limits of the City of Etowah.
(Ord. 830, passed 1-28-2019)
§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS.
   The following words terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   DOOR. A swinging or sliding panel that closes an opening in a wall and
provides passage through it.
   TRANSPARENT. Easily seen through so that bodies, objects and materials
situated beyond or behind the glass can be clearly seen.
   VACANT. Buildings or individual storefronts that are not open to the public
or to clientele for a period of more than 30 consecutive days due to lack of
business operation, repair or renovation and/or not being used for the display
or merchandising of any product.
   WINDOW.  An opening in an exterior wall to admit light and/or air typically
with glazing in a frame that may or may not be operable.
(Ord. 830, passed 1-28-2019)
§ 155.03  REQUIRED SCREENING SPECIFICATIONS.
   All transparent windows and doors in commercial uses that are vacant, which
are visible from the right-of-way regardless of floor elevation are required to
be screened to prevent the interior of the building from being viewed from the
public right-of-way. Decorative window treatments that were in place during the
business occupancy such as shutters, shades, curtains, Venetian or vertical
blinds may be used if they prevent viewing of the interior of the building from
the public right-of-way. Decorative window treatments must have a clean and
neat appearance and be kept good repair.
   (A)   Screening Material Requirements.
      (1)   Paper. Paper is not to be used unless it is for a temporary basis
and the vacancy is for fewer than 30 days. Paper shall be no less than 60 lb.
weight. Each piece of screening material shall have a width and a length
sufficient to completely screen the opening from its lowest point to a level no
less than the height of the window or door opening or a level and have a
seamless appearance. Screening material shall be maintained in a clean and neat
appearance and be affixed to the interior side of the window or door. Screen
material utilizing tape must have a continuous edging.
      (2)   Blackout/ window masking paint. Screening material for glass
surfaces shall include a city approved paint which is specifically designed to
provide temporary privacy for vacated glassed areas as an alternative to paper
on vacated store windows, or glassed areas under construction.
      (3)   Artwork/photography. Screening material shall include artwork or
photography including but not limited to historical pictures of the City of
Etowah, historical post cards of the City of Etowah, artwork of a professional
nature, designs or drawings provided by the City of Etowah, and seasonal or
promotional pictures and artwork. As an alternative, and if available, windows
and doors may be covered by printed materials provided by the City of Etowah.
   (B)   Timing. Approved window screening material is required to be installed
within ten business days of vacancy.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the placement of otherwise
legal signs or screening materials in windows, including, but not limited to,
realty/for sale signs, announcing/coming-soon signs, contractor signs, seasonal
window treatments, decorative displays of merchandise currently available
within the city, merchandise of the future tenant of the vacant store, signage
advertising the future tenant, public service displays or festival and current
holiday displays.
(Ord. 830, passed 1-28-2019)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
         
II.   ANNEXATIONS AND DEANNEXATIONS
         
III.   CLOSINGS AND VACATIONS
         
IV.   ZONINGS AND REZONINGS
         
V.   ADMINISTRATION
TABLE I:  FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
151, 153 - -        Agreeing for Tennessee Gas Company to furnish gas service
                    to the city
                  (1994 Code, § 19-101)
502      2-14-1994  Granting a cable television franchise to Mid-Tennessee
                    Cable Limited Partnership
                  (1994 Code, § 9-701)
519      11-28-1994 Authorizing Mayor to amend the Social Security agreement
                    with the State Old Age and Survivors Insurance Agency
546      8-12-1996  Approving a water purchase contract with the City of
                    Englewood
                   
 
TABLE II:  ANNEXATIONS AND DEANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
513 7-11-1994  Annexing certain territory (0.095 acres) and incorporating the
               same within the corporate boundaries of the city
559 9-22-1997  Annexing certain territory (Thacker Lane) and incorporating the
               same within the corporate boundaries of the city
               Annexing certain territory (North Industrial Park) and
578 9-20-1999  incorporating the same within the corporate boundaries of the
               city
579 9-20-1999  Deannexing certain territory on the northern edge of the city
               (North Industrial Park)
               Annexing certain territory (E.M. Armstrong annexation, North
588 4-24-2000  Industrial Park) and incorporating the same within the corporate
               boundaries of the city
642 6-29-2004  Annexing the Hillside Apartments and incorporating the same
               within the corporate boundaries of the city
               Annexing certain territory (Highway 30 East, Parcel 187.01,
679 3-24-2008  containing 13.18 acres) and incorporating the same within the
               corporate boundaries of the city
               Annexing certain territory (known as the Etowah Utilities
746 11-25-2013 Substation on S.R. 310) and incorporating the same within the
               corporate boundaries of the city
              
 
TABLE III:  CLOSINGS AND VACATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
524 4-11-1995  Closing a street/alley
529 6-27-1995  Closing a street/alley
533 8-14-1995  Abandoning a street and authorizing a quit claim deed
557 7-14-1997  Closing a street (northernmost end of Illinois Avenue)
558 9-22-1997  Closing a street (Gentry Street lying between Highway 411 and
               Hoffman Street)
570 10-26-1998 Closing a street (alley located south from an unopened portion
               of 12th Street intersecting with Indiana Avenue)
625 5-12-2003  Closing a street (14th Street between Pennsylvania Avenue and
               the alley between Pennsylvania Avenue and Georgia Avenue)
650 5-23-2005  Vacating an alley (from 11th Street to 12th Street between
               Tennessee Avenue and Ohio Avenue)
689 1-26-2009  Vacating an alley (from Louisiana Avenue to Georgia Avenue)
690 1-26-2009  Vacating a road (unopened Louisiana Avenue)
               Abandoning an unnamed and unopened right-of-way (along North
731 10-22-2012 Iowa Avenue and bordering on McMinn County Tax Map 107J, Group
               D, Parcels 2.00, 3.00, 4.00 and 5.00)
              
 
TABLE IV:  ZONINGS AND REZONINGS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
506 4-11-1994  Rezoning property (fronting on the southern side of Highway 30)
               from R-3 High Density Residential to C-2 Highway Business
               Rezoning property (fronting on the southern side of Cardin
510 6-13-1994  Street) from C-2 Highway Business and M-1 Medical to R-1 Low
               Density Residential
517 10-24-1994 Rezoning property (two lots, fronting on Ohio Avenue, addressed
               as 820 Ohio Avenue) from C-1 to R-1
535 11-13-1995 Rezoning property (one lot, fronting on Ohio Avenue) from C-1 to
               R-2 Medium Density Residential
536 3-11-1996  Rezoning property (one lot, fronting on Ohio Avenue) from R-
               2 Medium Density Residential to C-1
537 3-11-1996  Rezoning property (one lot, fronting on Ohio Avenue) from C-1 to
               R-1 Low Density Residential
538 4-8-1996   Rezoning property (North Industrial Park) from C-2 Highway
               Business to I-1 light Industrial
539 4-8-1996   Rezoning property (Morgan property) from R-1 Low Density
               Residential to C-2 Highway Business
540 5-13-1996  Rezoning property (Woods Memorial Hospital) from R-1 Low Density
               Residential to M-1 Medical
541 5-28-1996  Rezoning property (Duckett property) from MD Medical to R-1 Low
               Density Residential
545 7-8-1996   Rezoning property (Lipps property) from R-1 Low Density
               Residential to R-2 Medium Density Residential
548 10-14-1996 Zoning property (Massingale property) as C-2 Highway Business
551 1-27-1997  Rezoning property (Hoffman Avenue and Cardin Street) from R-
               1 Low Density Residential to R-3 High Density Residential
552 2-10-1997  Zoning property (Dynasty Spas property on Highway 30) as I-
               1 Light Industrial
560 10-13-1997 Zoning property (Thacker Lane) as R-2 Medium Density Residential
581 11-22-1999 Rezoning property (North Industrial Park) from I-1 Light
               Industrial to I-2 Heavy Industrial
583 11-22-1999 Rezoning property (J.D. Skipper property) from R-3 High Density
               Residential to C-2 Highway Business
597 6-27-2000  Rezoning property from M-D Medical to R-1 Low Density
               Residential
599 9-25-2000  Zoning property (Armstrong annexation) as I-2 Heavy Industrial
617 6-25-2002  Rezoning property (Helen Wilson and Harley Bowers property) from
               R-2 Medium Density Residential to C-2 Highway Commercial
               Rezoning property (Cantrell property, east of Tennessee Avenue,
621 10-28-2002 south of North Toomey Crossing Street on Highway 411 North) from
               I-1 Light Industrial to C-2 Highway Commercial
               Rezoning property (Glenmore Weaver Subdivision Phase 2, on Old
622 10-28-2002 Athens Pike Road, approximately 0.10 mile north of S.R. 30) from
               R-1 Low Density Residential to R-2 Medium Density Residential
632 8-25-2003  Rezoning property (Dorthea Davis property) from R-2 medium
               Density Residential to C-2 Highway Business
               Rezoning property (Bernard Lipps property, 1011 Louisiana
638 3-22-2004  Avenue) from R-1 Low Density Residential to R-2 Medium Density
               Residential
               Rezoning property (Walter S. Green property and Bordwine Funeral
641 6-29-2004  Home property) from R-2 Medium Density Residential to C-
               2 Highway Business
649 12-13-2004 Zoning property (Hillside annexed area) as R-3 High Density
               Residential
651 4-25-2005  Rezoning property (East Tennessee Industrial Warehouse) from R-
               2 Medium Density Residential to I-1 Light Industrial
656 3-27-2006  Rezoning property (about 0.70 acre) from R-2 Medium Density
               Residential to C-2 Highway Business
658 3-27-2006  Rezoning property (east of Lawrence Street and along Haren
               Court) from R-1 Low Density Residential to C-2 Highway Business
665 9-25-2006  Rezoning property (15th and Tennessee Avenue) from R-1 Low
               Density Residential to C-2 Highway Business
680 3-24-2008  Zoning property on Highway 30 East (Parcel 187.01, 13.18 acres)
               as C-2 Highway Business
681 3-24-2008  Rezoning property on Highway 30 East (Parcel 192, nine acres)
               from I-1 Industrial to C-2 Commercial
701 11-23-2009 Adopting an amended version of the official zoning map of the
               city
               Zoning property on Highway 310 (including a section of the CSX
747 11-25-2013 Railroad right-of-way and an approximately 1,700-foot section of
               Highway 310) as C-2 Highway Business
               Rezoning property (Cardin Street) from R-1 Low Density
762 6-23-2014  Residential and M-D Medical District to R-2 Medium Density
               Residential
               Rezoning property on Ohio Avenue from C-1 Central Business
               District to R-1 Low Density Residential District, encompassing
767 9-22-2014  parcels 037.00 through 043.00 on the western side of Ohio Avenue
               from 10th Street on the south to 9th Street on the north and
               excluding parcel 044.00, which is a commercial business and
               shall remain C-l Central Business District
               Rezoning property on Grady Road, McMinn County Tax Map 107B,
769 11-17-2014 Group G, Parcels 003.00 (portion) and 005.00 from M-D Medical
               District to R-1 Low Density Residential District
799 4-24-2017  Rezoning 1.07 acres of property on Cardin Street from R-2 Medium
               Density Residential District to M-D Medical District
              
 
TABLE V:  ADMINISTRATION
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
505  3-7-   Setting the qualifications and meetings of the Charter Commission (temporary
     1994   commission)
508  5-23-  Amending Ord. 505, allowing the Charter Commission to set the time and day of
     1994   meetings (temporary commission)
     2-24-  Establishing a Department of Community Development under the authority of
756  2014   Charter Art. XVIII, § 2; this ordinance was passed before the new Charter was
            adopted. The new Charter created the department/position like all the others
           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Tennessee Code Annotated
References to 1994 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TENNESSEE CODE ANNOTATED
 
Tenn. Code Ann. Cites Code Section
Title 2, Ch. 10                     35.120
2-10-122                            35.120
2-10-124                            35.120
6-54-107                            35.120
6-54-108                            35.120
6-54-113                            91.07
6-54-120                            35.145
6-54-306                            10.99
6-54-501 et seq.                    150.27
                                    150.25,
6-54-501 through 6-54-506           150.29—
                                    150.32
                                    150.25—
                                    150.27,
6-54-502                            150.29,
                                    150.30—
                                    150.32
6-54-1001 et seq.                   36.01,
                                    150.11
6-54-1002                           36.01
6-54-1006                           36.01
6-56-106                            Charter,
                                    Art. XVIII, Sec. 9
6-56-301 through 307                Ch. 34
7-2-101                             115.32
7-31-107 through 7-31-111           Charter,
                                    Art. III, Sec. 1
Title 7, Ch. 32                     Charter,
                                    Art. III, Sec. 1
Title 7, Ch. 33                     Charter,
                                    Art. III, Sec. 1
7-63-101 et seq.                    70.15,
                                    92.18
7-63-101                            92.18
8-47-101 et seq.                    35.120
8-50-501 et seq.                    35.120
12-3-1201                           Ch. 34
12-3-1202                           Ch. 34
12-3-1207                           Ch. 34
12-3-1208                           Ch. 34
12-3-1209                           Ch. 34
12-4-101                            35.120
12-4-102                            35.120
12-4-106                            Ch. 34
Title 13                            31.03
13-4-101                            31.03
13-7-201 through 13-7-210           153.01
Title 13, Ch. 21                    150.01
13-21-101 et seq.                   150.01,
                                    150.02
16-18-302                           71.29
16-18-304                           Charter,
                                    Art. XIX, Sec. 5
16-18-306                           Charter,
                                    Art. XIX, Sec. 2
27-5-101                            32.35
27-8-101 et seq.                    51.29
Title 29, Ch. 16                    Charter,
                                    Art. III, Sec. 1
29-116-114                          Charter,
                                    Art. III, Sec. 1
33-10-203                           130.02
39-14-102(3)                        32.07
39-16-101 et seq.                   35.120
39-16-401 et seq.                   35.120
39-17-310                           130.02
40-24-104                           Charter,
                                    Art. XIX, Sec. 2
40-24-105                           Charter,
                                    Art. XIX, Sec. 2
40-24-105(d)(2)                     32.07
47-22-101                           32.07
49-2-201                            Charter,
                                    Art. XVII, Sec. 4
49-11-602(3)                        71.99
Title 50                            35.059
Title 50, Ch. 3                     35.058
54-5-108                            71.10
54-20-103                           92.01
Title 55                            71.29
Title 55, Ch. 8                     71.27
55-8-143                            71.02,
                                    71.49
55-8-153                            71.01
55-8-101(22)                        71.28
Title 55, Ch. 9                     71.03
Title 55, Ch. 10, parts 1 through 5 71.27
55-10-106                           71.27
Title 55, Ch. 12                    71.27,
                                    112.03
55-12-111                           71.27
55-16-103                           70.19
55-16-103 through 55-16-109         70.19
Title 55, Ch. 50                    71.27
55-50-801 through 55-50-805         70.20
Title 57, Ch. 3                     115.01
57-3-204                            115.08
                                    Ch. 115,
57-3-208                            115.02,
                                    115.08
57-3-208(c)                         115.08
57-3-213                            115.02
57-3-406(a)                         115.08
57-3-501                            115.15
                                    115.56,
Title 57, Ch. 4                     115.59,
                                    115.60
57-4-301                            115.57
Title 57, Ch. 4, § 301             115.57
57-5-101                            115.31
57-5-103                            115.32
57-5-104(a)                         115.32
57-5-601 et seq.                    115.99
57-5-606                            115.38,
                                    115.39
Title 57, Ch. 6                     34.16
57-6-102                            115.32
62-2-102(b)                         150.25
67-4-701 et seq.                    34.15
67-4-1401 through 67-4-1425         34.17
67-5-2010                           150.08
67-6-102(75)(A)                     115.32
68-36-401                           152.20
68-102-108                          Charter,
                                    Art. XVI, Sec. 6
68-102-143                          150.27
68-221-201                          51.03
69-3-115(a)                         51.29
69-3-115(a)(1)(F)                   51.29
69-3-123 et. seq.                   51.29
69-3-123(a)(3)                      51.29
69-3-125                            51.29
                                    
 
REFERENCES TO 1994 CODE
 
1994 Code 2015 Code
1-101  30.01
1-102  30.02
1-103  30.03
2-101  31.02
2-102  31.02
2-103  31.02
3-101  32.01
3-201  32.02
3-202  32.03
3-203  32.04
3-204  32.05
3-205  32.06
3-302  32.20
3-303  32.21
3-402  32.35
3-403  32.36
4-101  35.035
4-102  35.036
4-103  35.037
4-104  35.038
4-105  35.039
4-106  35.040
4-107  35.041
4-201  35.001
4-202  35.002
4-203  35.003
4-204  35.004
4-205  35.005
4-206  35.006
4-207  35.007
4-208  35.008
4-209  35.009
4-210  35.010
4-211  35.011
4-212  35.012
4-213  35.013
4-214  35.014
4-215  35.015
4-216  35.016
4-217  35.017
4-218  35.018
4-219  35.019
4-220  35.020
4-221  35.021
4-222  35.022
4-301  35.055
4-302  35.056
4-303  35.057
4-304  35.058
4-305  35.059
4-306  35.060
4-307  35.061
4-401  35.075
4-402  35.076
4-403  35.077
4-404  35.078
4-405  35.079
4-406  35.080
4-407  35.081
4-408  35.082
4-409  35.083
4-501  35.095
4-502  35.096
4-503  35.097
4-504  35.098
4-505  35.099
4-506  35.100
4-507  35.101
4-508  35.102
4-509  35.103
4-510  35.104
4-511  35.105
4-512  35.106
4-513  35.107
4-514  35.108
5-101  34.01
5-201  34.15
5-202  34.15
5-301  34.16
5-401  34.30
5-402  34.31
5-403  34.32
5-404  34.33
5-405  34.34
5-406  34.35
5-407  34.36
5-408  34.37
5-409  34.38
5-410  34.39
5-411  34.40
5-412  34.41
5-413  34.42
5-414  34.43
5-415  34.44
5-416  34.45
5-417  34.46
5-418  34.47
6-101  33.01
6-102  33.02
6-103  33.03
7-201  150.30
7-202  150.30
7-203  150.30
7-204  150.30
7-205  150.30
8-201  115.30
8-202  115.30
8-203  115.30
8-204  115.30
8-205  115.30
8-206  115.31
8-207  115.32
8-208  115.33
8-209  115.34
8-210  115.35
8-211  115.36
8-212  115.37
8-213  115.38
8-214  115.99
8-215  115.39
8-216  115.40
8-301  115.55
8-302  115.56
8-303  115.57
8-304  115.58
8-305  115.59
8-306  115.60
9-101  110.01
9-201  111.01
9-202  111.02
9-203  111.03
9-204  111.04
9-205  111.05
9-206  111.06
9-207  111.07
9-208  111.08
9-209  111.09
9-210  111.10
9-211  111.11
9-212  111.12
9-213  111.13
9-301  111.25
9-302  111.26
9-303  111.27
9-304  111.28
9-305  111.29
9-306  111.30
9-401  112.01
9-402  112.02
9-403  112.03
9-404  112.04
9-405  112.05
9-406  112.05
9-407  112.05
9-408  112.06
9-409  112.06
9-410  112.06
9-411  112.07
9-412  112.08
9-413  112.09
9-414  112.10
9-415  112.10
9-416  112.11
9-501  113.01
9-502  113.02
9-503  113.03
9-504  113.04
9-601  114.01
9-602  114.02
9-603  114.03
9-604  114.04
9-605  114.05
9-606  114.06
9-607  114.07
9-608  114.08
9-609  114.09
9-610  114.10
9-611  114.11
9-612  114.12
9-613  114.13
9-614  114.14
9-615  114.15
9-616  114.16
9-617  114.17
9-618  114.18
9-619  114.19
9-701  TSO Table I
10-101 90.01
10-102 90.02
10-103 90.03
10-104 90.04
10-105 90.05
10-106 90.05
10-107 90.05
10-108 90.06
10-109 90.06
10-110 90.07
10-111 90.08
10-112 90.09
10-113 90.10
10-114 90.11
10-201 90.25
10-202 90.26
10-203 90.27
10-204 90.28
10-205 90.29
10-206 90.30
10-207 90.31
10-208 90.32
10-209 90.33
10-210 90.33
10-211 90.34
11-101 130.02
11-201 130.03
11-301 130.04
11-302 130.05
11-501 130.06
11-502 130.06
11-503 130.06
11-601 130.07
11-701 130.08
11-702 130.09
11-703 130.10
11-704 130.11
11-705 130.12
11-706 130.13,
       130.99
12-101 150.25
12-102 150.25
12-103 150.25
12-104 150.25
12-105 150.99
12-201 150.26
12-202 150.26
12-203 150.26
12-204 150.26
12-301 150.27
12-302 150.27
12-303 150.27
12-304 150.27
12-305 150.27
12-306 150.99
12-401 150.28
12-402 150.28
12-403 150.28
12-404 150.28
12-405 150.28
12-406 150.28
12-407 150.28
12-408 150.28
12-409 150.28
12-410 150.28
12-411 150.99
12-412 150.28
12-501 150.29
12-502 150.29
12-503 150.29
13-101 91.01
13-102 91.02
13-103 91.03
13-104 91.04
13-105 91.05
13-106 91.06
13-108 91.07
13-201 150.01
13-202 150.02
13-203 150.03
13-204 150.04
13-205 150.05
13-206 150.06
13-207 150.07
13-208 150.08
13-209 150.09
13-210 150.10
13-211 150.11
13-212 150.12
13-213 150.12
13-301 92.01
13-401 92.15
13-402 92.16
13-403 92.17
13-404 92.18
13-405 92.99
14-101 31.03
14-102 31.03
14-103 31.03
14-201 154.01
14-301 152.01
14-302 152.02
14-303 152.03
14-304 152.04
14-305 152.05
14-401 153.01
14-402 153.05
14-403 153.06,
       153.07
       153.08—
14-403 153.12,
       153.99
14-404 153.25,
       153.26
       153.40,
14-405 153.41,
       153.47
14-406 153.27,
       153.28
15-101 71.03
15-102 71.04
15-103 71.05
15-104 71.06
15-105 71.07
15-106 71.08
15-107 71.09
15-108 71.10
15-109 71.11
15-110 71.12
15-111 71.13
15-112 71.14
15-113 71.15
15-114 71.16
15-115 71.17
15-116 71.18
15-117 71.19
15-118 71.20
15-119 71.21
15-120 71.22
15-121 71.23
15-122 71.24
15-123 71.25
15-124 71.26
15-125 71.27,
       71.99
15-126 71.28,
       71.99
15-127 71.29
15-201 70.01
15-202 70.02
15-203 70.03
15-204 70.04
15-301 71.01
15-302 71.01
15-303 71.01
15-304 71.01
15-305 71.01
15-401 71.02
15-402 71.02
15-403 71.02
15-404 71.02
15-405 71.02
15-501 71.40
15-502 71.41
15-503 71.42
15-504 71.43
15-505 71.44
15-506 71.45
15-507 71.46
15-508 71.47
15-509 71.48
15-510 71.49
15-601 72.01
15-602 72.02
15-603 72.03
15-604 72.04
15-605 72.05
15-606 72.06
15-607 72.07,
       72.99
15-701 70.15
15-702 70.16
15-703 70.17
15-704 70.18
15-705 70.19
15-706 70.20
15-801 73.01,
       73.99
15-802 73.02
15-803 73.03
15-804 73.04
16-101 151.01
16-102 151.02
16-103 151.03
16-104 151.04
16-105 151.05
16-106 151.06
16-107 151.07
16-108 151.08
16-109 151.09
16-110 151.10
16-112 151.11
16-113 151.12
16-201 151.25
16-202 151.26
16-203 151.27
16-204 151.28
16-205 151.29
16-206 151.30
16-207 151.31
16-208 151.32
16-209 151.33
16-210 151.34
16-301 151.45
16-302 151.46
16-303 151.47
16-304 151.48
16-305 151.49
17-101 50.01
17-102 50.02
17-103 50.03
17-104 50.04
17-105 50.05
17-106 50.05
17-107 50.06
17-108 50.07
17-109 50.08
17-110 50.09
17-111 50.10
17-112 50.11
17-113 50.12
17-114 50.99
17-115 50.13
18-201 52.01
18-202 52.02
18-203 52.03
18-204 52.04
18-205 52.05
18-206 52.06
18-207 52.07
18-208 52.08
18-209 52.09
18-210 52.10
18-211 52.25
18-212 52.26
18-213 52.27
18-214 52.28
18-215 52.29
18-216 52.30
18-217 52.45
18-218 52.46
18-219 52.47
18-220 52.48
18-221 52.49
18-222 52.50
18-223 52.51
18-224 52.52
18-225 52.53
18-226 52.54
18-227 52.55
18-228 52.56
18-229 52.57
18-230 52.58
18-231 52.59
18-232 52.60
18-233 52.61
18-234 52.62
18-235 52.63
18-236 52.64
18-237 52.65
18-238 52.66
18-239 52.67
18-240 52.68
18-241 52.69
19-101 TSO Table I
       
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
591      - -         35.075—
                     35.082
1106     - -2014     30.04
1199     5-21-2018   114.07
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-         - -               91.07
-         - -               150.11
151       - -               TSO Table I
153       - -               TSO Table I
348       - -               70.20
353       - -               72.01
355       - -               150.25,
                            150.99
359       - -               130.06
364       - -               111.03
373       - -               130.12
390       - -               30.01
299       1-2-1964          Charter
389       Ratified 8-2-1984 Charter
393       4-8-1985          32.03
395       5-28-1985         130.13
400       7-22-1985         31.02
402       8-12-1985         130.03
404       9-9-1985          34.30—
                            34.47
406       9-23-1985         31.01
407       11-25-1985        35.001—
                            35.022
                            90.01—
                            90.11,
409       2-24-1986         90.25,
                            90.27—
                            90.34
                            114.01—
410       3-10-1986         114.19,
                            114.99
412       5-12-1986         150.30,
                            150.99
                            115.30,
415       6-9-1986          115.32,
                            115.36
                            52.01—
                            52.10,
421       12-18-1986        52.25—
                            52.30,
                            52.45—
                            52.69
                            50.01—
                            50.03,
                            50.05—
434       1-7-1987          50.07,
                            50.09—
                            50.12,
                            50.99
                            52.01—
                            52.10,
423       3-5-1987          52.25—
                            52.30,
                            52.45—
                            52.69
425       3-5-1987          90.01,
                            90.04
424       3-19-1987         154.01
452       3-8-1990          150.99
457       10-4-1990         34.30—
                            34.47
468       9-19-1991         150.01—
                            150.12
469       9-19-1991         150.25,
                            150.99
472       4-1-1993          113.02
                            90.25,
486       4-1-1993          90.26,
                            90.99
                            115.30,
490       6-29-1993         115.31,
                            115.33—
                            115.38
492       7-9-1993          50.08
495       9-13-1993         115.32
                            32.02—
                            32.04,
                            33.03,
                            70.04,
                            70.15,
                            71.01,
                            71.03,
                            71.07,
                            71.09,
                            71.15,
                            71.16,
                            71.19,
                            71.23,
                            71.24,
                            90.05,
                            90.07,
                            90.10,
                            90.25—
                            90.30,
                            90.33,
                            90.34,
                            90.99,
                            91.02—
                            91.04,
                            91.06,
                            111.01,
                            111.29,
                            111.30,
                            112.01,
494       9-2-1993          112.05,
                            112.08,
                            112.10,
                            113.01—
                            113.03,
                            114.04,
                            114.18,
                            114.99,
                            115.33,
                            115.37,
                            130.03,
                            130.06,
                            130.08,
                            130.10—
                            130.13,
                            130.99,
                            150.25,
                            150.28,
                            150.30,
                            150.99,
                            151.03,
                            151.05—
                            151.08,
                            151.10,
                            151.11,
                            151.25,
                            151.32,
                            151.49,
                            152.01,
                            152.02,
                            152.05
496       9-23-1993         50.04,
                            50.05
                            150.25,
                            150.27,
497       11-4-1993         150.29,
                            150.30,
                            150.99
498       11-4-1993         71.01
502       2-14-1994         TSO Table I
504       2-28-1994         154.01
505       3-7-1994          TSO Table V
506       4-11-1994         TSO Table IV
507       4-25-1994         72.07,
                            72.99
508       5-23-1994         TSO Table V
510       6-13-1994         TSO Table IV
513       7-11-1994         TSO Table II
                            153.01,
                            153.05—
                            153.12,
                            153.25—
514       8-8-1994          153.28,
                            153.40,
                            153.41,
                            153.47,
                            153.99
515       8-22-1994         35.145
516       8-22-1994         Charter
517       10-24-1994        TSO Table IV
519       11-28-1994        TSO Table I
520       12-12-1994        154.01
523       2-27-1995         154.01
524       4-11-1995         TSO Table III
527       6-27-1995         35.095—
                            35.108
529       6-27-1995         TSO Table III
532       8-14-1995         115.37
533       8-14-1995         TSO Table III
534       10-23-1995        115.37
535       11-13-1995        TSO Table IV
536       3-11-1996         TSO Table IV
537       3-11-1996         TSO Table IV
538       4-8-1996          TSO Table IV
539       4-8-1996          TSO Table IV
540       5-13-1996         TSO Table IV
541       5-28-1996         TSO Table IV
545       7-8-1996          TSO Table IV
546       8-12-1996         TSO Table I
547       9-9-1996          154.01
548       10-14-1996        TSO Table IV
549       11-11-1996        154.01
550       1-27-1997         154.01
551       1-27-1997         TSO Table IV
552       2-10-1997         TSO Table IV
557       7-14-1997         TSO Table III
558       9-22-1997         TSO Table III
559       9-22-1997         TSO Table II
560       10-13-1997        TSO Table IV
561       10-13-1997        154.01
562       2-9-1998          152.20
564       5-11-1998         154.01
569       10-26-1998        91.07
570       10-26-1998        TSO Table III
573       3-22-1999         30.01
578       9-20-1999         TSO Table II
579       9-20-1999         TSO Table II
581       11-22-1999        TSO Table IV
582       11-22-1999        154.01
583       11-22-1999        TSO Table IV
                            92.15—
584       12-13-1999        92.18,
                            92.99
585       12-23-1999        150.30
586       4-24-2000         154.01
587       4-24-2000         154.01
588       4-24-2000         TSO Table II
589       5-22-2000         154.01
593       6-20-2000         154.01
597       6-27-2000         TSO Table IV
595       8-28-2000         50.13
598       9-25-2000         154.01
599       9-25-2000         TSO Table IV
601       10-23-2000        154.01
602       11-27-2000        154.01
603       11-27-2000        154.01
608       7-23-2001         154.01
031102.37 5- -2002          71.27,
                            71.99
609       5-28-2002         154.01
612       5-28-2002         150.30
613       5-28-2002         113.01—
                            113.04
614       5-28-2002         150.26
617       6-25-2002         TSO Table IV
618       6-27-2002         154.01
619       6-27-2002         150.30
621       10-28-2002        TSO Table IV
622       10-28-2002        TSO Table IV
625       5-12-2003         TSO Table III
                            73.01—
628       5-27-2003         73.04,
                            73.99
629       7-28-2003         35.076
631       7-28-2003         35.055—
                            35.061
632       8-25-2003         TSO Table IV
634       10-27-2003        154.01
637       2-23-2004         154.01
638       3-22-2004         TSO Table IV
641       6-29-2004         TSO Table IV
642       6-29-2004         TSO Table II
649       12-13-2004        TSO Table IV
650       5-23-2005         TSO Table III
651       4-25-2005         TSO Table IV
657       2-27-2006         154.01
656       3-27-2006         TSO Table IV
658       3-27-2006         TSO Table IV
665       9-25-2006         TSO Table IV
666       9-25-2006         154.01
667       2-26-2007         154.01
669       4-23-2007         35.120—
                            35.130
671       5-29-2007         32.02—
                            32.07
                            71.03—
674       6-26-2007         71.29,
                            71.99
676       8-27-2007         35.075—
                            35.082
679       3-24-2008         TSO Table II
680       3-24-2008         TSO Table IV
681       3-24-2008         TSO Table IV
684       8-25-2008         154.01
686       8-25-2008         91.07
689       1-26-2009         TSO Table III
690       1-26-2009         TSO Table III
694       6-22-2009         34.17
                            51.01—
                            51.10,
699       10-26-2009        51.25 —
                            51.35 ,
                            Ch. 51, App. A
701       11-23-2009        TSO Table IV
702       5-24-2010         154.01
                            153.01—
                            153.14,
                            153.25—
703       5-24-2010         153.28,
                            153.40—
                            153.47,
                            153.99
707       7-26-2010         130.01,
                            130.99
710       10-11-2010        31.01
713       5-23-2011         150.29
715       6-13-2011         34.02
719       8-22-2011         30.01
720       2-27-2012         50.06,
                            50.99
721       4-23-2012         34.60—
                            34.65
727       6-25-2012         36.01
728       8-27-2012         154.01
730       8-27-2012         151.27
731       10-22-2012        TSO Table III
                            90.45—
732       10-22-2012        90.51,
                            90.99
735       12-10-2012        115.55—
                            115.60
734       12-17-2012        115.37
                            115.01—
736       12-27-2012        115.07,
                            115.09—
                            115.16
                            50.01,
744       10-29-2013        50.07,
                            50.99
745       11-25-2013        71.24
746       11-25-2013        TSO Table II
747       11-25-2013        TSO Table IV
                            150.25—
                            150.29,
748       12-16-2013        150.31,
                            150.32,
                            150.99
749       12-16-2013        91.07
750       12-16-2013        90.27
752       1-27-2014         150.30
756       2-24-2014         TSO Table V
754       3-24-2014         154.01
757       4-28-2014         Charter; ratified 8-7-2014
759       5-6-2014          35.146
762       6-23-2014         TSO Table IV
765       1-26-2015         154.01
767       9-22-2014         TSO Table IV
769       11-17-2014        TSO Table IV
771       5-14-2015         154.01
775       6-22-2015         34.30—
                            34.47
777       6-22-2015         35.075—
                            35.083
773       9-28-2015         154.01
774       9-28-2015         154.01
782       9-28-2015         Adopting Ordinance
                            51.03,
                            51.09,
                            51.25,
                            51.26,
784       4-25-2016         51.28,
                            52.03,
                            52.04,
                            52.27,
                            52.45,
                            52.66
790       9-26-2016         154.01
791       9-26-2016         32.03
792       9-26-2016         115.31,
                            115.36
796       11-28-2016        91.04
                            50.05,
797       11-28-2016        50.06,
                            50.08
799       4-24-2017         TSO Table IV
801       5-22-2017         91.08
804       7-24-2017         112.02,
                            112.05
807       8-28-2017         50.06,
                            50.08
808       9-25-2017         154.01
809       9-25-2017         154.01
810       12-18-2017        90.04
811       12-18-2017        154.01
812       11-28-2017        154.01
813       2-26-2018         154.01
816       5-21-2018         154.01
821       7-23-2018         73.02
                            114.06—
822       8-27-2018         114.09,
                            114.11,
                            114.18
823       8-27-2018         92.15
                            111.03,
                            111.04,
824       8-27-2018         111.08,
                            111.11,
                            111.13,
                            111.31
826       10-22-2018        50.01,
                            50.14
827       10-22-2018        31.02
828       11-26-2018        91.07
                            116.01—
829       1-28-2019         116.05,
                            116.99
830       1-28-2019         155.01—
                            155.03
831       5-20-2019         90.06
832       4-22-2019         90.26,
                            90.99
836       7-22-2019         154.01
                           
 

Etowah Zoning Ordinance 1-1
Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
SECTION
1.01. AUTHORITY FROM STATE ENABLING LEGISLATION
1.02. TITLE
1.03. PURPOSE
1.04. ENACTMENT
1.01. AUTHORITY FROM STATE ENABLING LEGISLATION.
An Ordinance, in pursuance of the authority in Sections 13-7-201--13-7-401, Tennessee Code Annotated, to provide for the establishment of districts within the corporate limits of the City of Etowah, Tennessee; to regulate within such districts the location, height, and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot which may be occupied; the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; and the uses of buildings and structures for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, soil conservation, water supply conservation, or other purposes.
1.02. TITLE.
This Ordinance shall be known as The Zoning Ordinance of Etowah, Tennessee, dated 1986. the zoning map shall be referred to as the Zoning Map of Etowah, Tennessee, and all explanatory matter thereon are hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance, subject to amendment as provided for in Section 6.09. of this Ordinance.
1.03. PURPOSE.
The zoning regulations and districts contained in this Ordinance have been carefully prepared and defined in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the following purposes:
1. To protect the public health by providing through setback requirements and other means adequate light and air between buildings and through density standards the avoidance of extreme concentrations of population
2. To provide safety by lessening congestion in the streets through adequate access control provisions; fire hazards through adequate setbacks; and flood hazards through land use controls for identified flood areas
3. To foster convenience by establishing a reasonable relationship of one land use to another and by considering the locational requirements of each land use for highway access and proximity to related uses
4. To promote general livability by calling for the provision of utilities and other public facilities
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 1-2
5. To enhance prosperity and general welfare by preserving the character of existing development through the denial of proposed detrimental uses and through the required use of buffer strips where needed
These regulations and district boundaries have been made with consideration to the character of each district and its peculiar uses; and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land within the City of Etowah.
1.04. ENACTMENT.
For the purposes just stated the Etowah City Commission does Ordain and Enact into law the following articles and sections:
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 2-1
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION
2.01. SCOPE
2.02. DEFINITIONS
2.01. SCOPE.
To carry out the provisions and intentions of this Ordinance, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural; and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation as well as an individual; the term "shall" is always mandatory and not directory; and the word "may" is permissive; the word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
2.02. DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be interpreted as such throughout this Ordinance. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
Access. The right to cross between public and private property, thereby permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property.
Accessory Building. A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of a main building and located on the same lot therewith.
Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings and located upon the same lot therewith.
Adult. Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older. (Added 11-27-00)
Adult-Oriented Establishments. Sexually explicit establishments which cater to an exclusively or predominantly adult clientele, including but not limited to: adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture and video establishments, adult cabaret, escort agency, sexual encounter center, massage parlor, rap parlor, sauna, and any premises to which the public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, videos, or other visual media, as defined in TCA 7-51-1102 and TCA 7-51-1401, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. It also includes, without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio,
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-2
encounter studio, sensitivity studio, model studio, escort service, or any other term of like import as well as other enterprises which regularly feature materials, acts or displays involving complete nudity, specified sexual activities, or exposure of specified anatomical areas: (Added 11-27-00)
1. Specified anatomical areas including less than completely and opaquely covered:
a. Human genitals and pubic region
b. Buttocks
c. Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
d. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; and/or sexual excitement or enticement.
2. Specified sexual activities include:
a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal
b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy
c. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts
Agriculture. The tilling of soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, and gardening, but not including the keeping or raising of domestic animals or fowl, except household pets, and not including agricultural industry or business, such as fruit-or vegetable-packing plants, animal hospitals, or similar uses.
Animal Husbandry. The science of breeding, feeding, and tending domestic animals, especially farm animals.
Automobile Wrecking. The dismantling, storage, sale, or dumping of used motor vehicles, trailers, or parts thereof (also see "wrecked auto yard").
Average Ground Elevation. The elevation of the mean finished grade at the front of a structure.
Basement. A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of its height is above the average ground elevation or when subdivided and used for commercial activities.
Board. Etowah Board of Zoning Appeals.
Boarding or Rooming House. Any dwelling not divided into separate apartments, but in which three (3) or more persons either individually or as families are housed for rent with or without meals.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-3
Buffer Strip. A greenbelt planted strip not less than ten (10) feet in width. Such a greenbelt shall be composed of one (1) row of evergreen trees, spaced not more than forty (40) feet apart and not less than two (2) rows of shrubs or hedges, spaced not more than five (5) feet apart within the row and which grow to a height of five (5) feet or more after one full growing season and which shrubs will eventually grow to not less than ten (10) feet.
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls, including mobile homes, and similar structures whether stationary or movable.
Building Area. The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps.
Building Inspector. The Etowah Building Inspector or his authorized representative appointed by the Etowah City Manager.
Building, Main, or Principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building of the lot on which it is situated.
Building Setback Line. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line and a building on a lot within which no building or other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided.
Campground. A parcel of land used or intended to be used or rented for occupancy by campers or for occupancy by travel trailers, tents or movable or temporary dwellings, rooms, or sleeping quarters of any kind.
Club. (Added 2/23/04) A building(s) or facility owned or operated by an association, not-for-profit corporation, or persons for a social, education, or recreational purpose, characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues and regular meetings but not operated for profit or that renders a service(s) that is customarily carried on as a business, provided that vending machines, snack bars, merchandising or other commercial activities are provided only for the membership of said club. For the purposes of this ordinance this definition excludes churches, synagogues or other houses of worship.
Commercial Feed Lot. Any parcel of land on which one hundred (100) or more cattle, fowl, or hogs are being kept and fed for the purpose of slaughter and sale on the commercial food market.
Country Club. A chartered, non-profit membership club with facilities catering primarily to its membership and providing one or more of the following recreational or social amenities: golf, horse riding, clubhouse, pool, dining facilities, and bar.
Day Nursery. Any place, home, or institution which receives six (6) or more young children, conducted for cultivating the normal aptitude for exercise, play observation, initiation, and instruction.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-4
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
District. Any section or sections of Etowah, Tennessee, for which the regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height, and coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform.
Dwelling. A permanent building or portion thereof used for residential purposes, which contains at least a kitchen, bathroom facilities, and a sleeping area. In no case shall the term dwelling include any of the following: motor homes, travel trailers, portable buildings, trailer coaches, storage buildings, single-wide modular homes regulated elsewhere in this ordinance, or any other structure not designed specifically for permanent residential dwelling. (Amended 9-26-2016 Ord. #790)
Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building designed for occupancy by two (2) or more families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units with each unit having its own bedroom, kitchen, and bathroom facilities. (Amended 9-26-2016 Ord. #790)
Dwelling, Single-Family. A building designed to be occupied exclusively by one (1) family as defined in this ordinance. (Amended 9-26-2016 Ord. #790)
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms, a single kitchen, and a bath designed as a unit for occupancy by only one (1) family for cooking, living, and sleeping purposes.
Family. One or more persons occupying one dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, no such family shall contain over five (5) persons.
Flat Lot. A lot which lies behind the land or lots which front a street. The flag lot takes it access from the street via a narrow strip which is part of the flag lot and is not shared with any other lot or parcel. The name "flag lot" derives from the appearance of the lot on a plat; i.e., a flag (building site) with a flagpole (access strip).
Flea Market. Any premises, open air or under roof, where the principle use is the occasional or periodic sale of new and used household goods, clothing and apparel, personal effects, tools, works of art or craft, small household appliances and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities, broken lots or parcels, but not in bulk, for use or consumption by the immediate purchaser. Sales of prepared foods for immediate consumption or home baked goods may be allowed. This shall not include sidewalk sales, and occasional yard sales and charity sales held on the owner’s or sponsor’s premises or on a public sidewalk immediately adjacent to said premises. (Added 04-24-00)
Flood-Related Terms:
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-5
Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Base Flood or 100-Year Flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from 1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and 2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the Areas of Special Flood Hazard and the Risk Premium Zones applicable to the community.
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
Floodway Fringe. The land areas lying outside the floodway but within the area subject to the base flood.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements.
Substantial Improvement. For a structure built prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either 1) before the improvement or repair is started, or 2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either 1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Floor Area. The sum of the gross floor area for each of the several stories under roof measured from the exterior limits or faces of a building or structure.
Gasoline Service Station. Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is utilized for the retail sale of gasoline, oil (but not butane or propane fuels), and automobile accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, car washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but not including painting or major repair.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-6
Grade, Finished. The completed surfaces of lawns, walks, and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
Health Department. The McMinn County Office of the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment.
Height of Building. The vertical distance from the average ground elevation or finished grade at the building line, whichever is highest, to the highest point of the building.
Home Occupation. See Chapter 4, Section 4.06.
Hospital. See "Medical Facilities".
Junkyard or Salvage Yard. A lot, land, or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collection, storage, and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storing, and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof (in the latter case, may include a "wrecked auto yard").
Loading Space. A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the parking, loading, or unloading of a vehicle.
Lot. A piece, parcel, or plot of land in one ownership, which may include one (1) or more lots of record, occupied or to be occupied by one (1) principal building and its accessory buildings including the open spaces required under this Ordinance.
Lot Area. The total horizontal surface area of land included within the lot lines.
Lot, Corner. A lot of which at least two (2) adjoining sides abut on a street, provided that the interior angles at the intersection of two such sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot Coverage. The lot area covered by all buildings located therein including the area covered by all overhanging roofs.
Lot Depth. The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
Lot Frontage. That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Lines. the boundaries dividing a given lot from the street, an alley, adjacent lots, or public water bodies.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-7
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the Office of the County Register of Deeds, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the Office of the County Register of Deeds prior to the date of passage of the Etowah Subdivision Regulations.
Lot Width. The width of a lot at the building setback line measured at right angles to its depth.
Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in two (2) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width, or forty (40) feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. A manufactured home for the purpose of the Ordinance does not include a manufactured unit to be used in conjunction with a commercial or industrial activity. (Amended 10-23-00)
Medical Facilities:
Convalescent, Rest, or Nursing Home. A health facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation.
Dental Clinic or Medical Clinic. A facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human out-patients provided, however, that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions.
Dental Office or Doctor's Office. Same as dental or medical clinic.
Hospital. An institution providing health services primarily for human in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facility.
Public Health Center. A facility primarily utilized by a health unit for the provision of public health services.
Minimum Floor Elevation. The lowest elevation permissible for the construction, erection, or other placement of any floor including a basement floor.
Mobile Home. A factory-manufactured structure or housing unit, which is not self-propelled, but which is built on one chassis and is transported in one section. It is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For the purposes of this ordinance, it does not include recreational vehicles or travel/camping trailers. (Whether or not a foundation is added shall not change this definition of a mobile home.) See also “Modular Building Unit” below. (Amended 10-23-00)
Mobile Home Park. Any area, tract, site, or plot of land whereupon two (2) or more mobile homes as herein defined are placed, located, or maintained, or intended to be placed, located, or
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-8
maintained and shall include all accessory buildings used or intended to be used as part of the equipment thereof.
Mobile Home Subdivision. A subdivision with individual lot ownership planned for mobile homes and which meets all requirements of the Etowah Subdivision Regulations.
Modular Building Unit. As defined in Tennessee Code Annotated Section 68-36-303:
A structural unit or preassembled component unit including the necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, and other service systems, manufactured off-site and transported to the point of use for installation or erection, with or without other specified components, as a finished building and not designed for ready removal to another site [italics added]. This term applies only to units intended or used for residential occupancy;
and in Etowah a modular building unit shall have a permanent foundation and the general appearance of a conventionally-constructed single-family home. Further, as allowed in Tennessee Code Annotated Section 13-24-201, modular homes shall not include units which are constructed as a single self-contained unit and which are mounted on a single chassis. Nor shall modular homes include self-propelled motor homes or recreational vehicles or campers. Furthermore, a modular home is one which can have under code an electric meter mounted directly on the exterior wall of the unit.
Non-Conforming Use. A building, structure, or use of land existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
Noxious Matter. Material (in gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate, or any other form) which is capable of causing injury to living organisms, or chemical reactions or detrimental effects on the social, economic, or psychological well-being of individuals.
Off-Street Parking Space. A yard, space, or area off the road right-of-way, which space shall be accessible to a road and shall be arranged and maintained for the purpose of providing standing space for vehicles while at rest or while being utilized to load or unload merchandise or other materials incidental to the occupancy.
Open Space: An area on the same lot with a main building which is open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by structures from the ground to the sky except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance. Open space lines shall coincide or be parallel to the building setback lines on the same lot.
Parking Lot. An off-street facility including parking spaces along with adequate provisions for drives and aisles for maneuvering and getting access, and for entrance and exit, designed so as to be usable.
Parking Space. An off-street space available for parking one (1) motor vehicle and having an area of not less than one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet (nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet),
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-9
exclusive of passageways and driveways giving access thereto, and having direct access to a street or alley.
Patio Home. A patio home for the purpose of the Etowah Zoning Ordinance shall be defined as a single-family residential dwelling of one (1) or more floors, which does not have any common walls shared with an adjacent unit or units, but which is located to one side of a less-than-standard width lot. That is, these homes have a "zero foot" setback on one side to maximize the amount of usable outdoor lot area on the other side for a patio, landscaped garden, or other outdoor living area.
Permanent Foundation (Manufactured Homes and Modular Building Units). (Added 5/14/2015) The foundation of all manufactured homes and modular building units will be considered permanent, and compliant with all local codes when:
1. The axle and all related transportation hardware is removed from the structure,
2. Piers of solid/filed masonry or reinforced concrete are installed as foundation supports for the structure,
3. The structure is permanently strapped or tied to the piers,
4. The exterior perimeter foundation wall (skirt), whether the exterior walls of the building structure are load bearing or non-load bearing, is constructed of masonry units or reinforced concrete and finished with an approved veneer.
The sole use of jacks as foundation supports is prohibited. The use of metal sheet, plastic sheet, lattice board, or any material other than masonry units/reinforced concrete for skirting (or perimeter foundation wall) is prohibited.
Planned Unit Development (PUD). A development such as an apartment complex, shopping center, or medical center which is planned as a unit and which may require certain dimensional features that vary from those normally allowed.
Planning Commission. The Etowah Regional Planning Commission.
Plat. A map, plan, layout, or other drawing indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties or lots.
Principal Use. The specific primary purpose for which land or a building is used.
Public Uses. Public parks, schools, and administrative, cultural, and service buildings not including public land or buildings devoted solely to storage and maintenance of equipment and materials.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities classified as "recreational vehicles" are: travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, and motor homes defined below.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-10
Travel Trailer. A vehicular unit, mounted on wheels, designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use and of such size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motorized vehicle, and with a living area of less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet, excluding built-in equipment (such as wardrobes, closets, cabinets, kitchen units, or fixtures) and bath and toilet rooms.
Camping Trailer. A vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible, partial side walls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use.
Truck Camper. A structure either factory-built or homemade which fits into the bed of a truck (usually a pickup truck) and designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use.
Motor Home. A vehicular unit designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use built on or permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van which is an integral part of the completed vehicle.
Residential Occupancy. The use of a building, structure, or vehicle for living purposes.
Right-of-Way. The strip of public land provided for a public road. The right-of-way is generally wider than the actual road surface.
Roadway. The actual road surface including necessary road shoulders and drainage facilities including ditches and curbing and guttering, which is utilized to transport motor vehicles.
Sanitary Sewer System. A municipal or community sewage collection, treatment, and disposal system of a type approved by the Health Department.
Sanitary Landfill. An area or site utilized by a public or private entity for disposal of solid waste or refuse in a manner which meets the regulations imposed upon the operation and maintenance of sanitary landfill sites by the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment.
Setback. The required distance between the front, side, or rear lot lines, and the nearest portion of the principal structure.
Shopping Center or Complex. A group of businesses, shops, stores, and/or professional services which are planned, developed, and managed as a unit sharing elements such as parking, access drives, and often common walls, often developed as a Planned Unit Development.
Sign. Includes any writing, printing, numbering, painting, display, emblem, drawing, picture, or other device designed, used, or intended for announcing, advertising, or drawing attention to, whether placed on or attached to the ground, rocks, trees, tree stumps, or other natural structures or on buildings, structures, milestones, signboards, billboards, wallboards, roofboards, frames,
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-11
supports, fences, or other manmade objects. Any of the above constitutes a sign within a building only when illuminated and placed in a window.
Billboard. An off-site sign with a sign area of over one hundred (100) square feet, or an on-site with a sign area of over two hundred (200) square feet.
Business Sign. An on-site sign of less than two hundred (200) square feet in sign area used to announce the name of a business or profession at that location and may include services offered, the hours of operation, the partners involved or other such information.
Flashing Sign. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign on which artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times in use.
Ground Sign. Any sign not attached to any part of any building and which is supported by uprights or braces, placed upon the ground.
Off-Site Sign. A sign which promotes a cause or a candidate or which directs attention to an attraction, business, commodity, or service to be, or being, conducted, sold, rented, leased, or otherwise offered for use or disposition elsewhere than on the premises.
On-Site Sign. Any sign other than an off-site sign.
Portable Sign. A sign that is not mounted to any permanent structure, but is instead usually attached to a movable trailer or stand.
Projecting Sign. Any sign extending over the public sidewalk or beyond the street right-of-way boundary
Roof Sign. Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon the roof of any building.
Sign Area. The area of the sign, excluding the structural elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
Temporary Sign. Any sign which is by reason of construction or purpose intended to be displayed for a short period of time. Unless specifically stated elsewhere in this Ordinance, a period of six (6) months is the maximum time limit for the display of a temporary sign.
Wall Sign. Any sign on any surface or place that may be affixed parallel to, or printed on, the wall of any building.
Special Exception. Any use which is specifically permitted if the owner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board that he will meet certain enumerated safeguards or qualifying conditions for the special exception.
Storm Sewer. A municipal or community collection and disposal system for the handling and control of rainwater drainage.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-12
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above; or any portion of a building between the topmost floor and the roof which is used for human occupancy or in which the floor area with eight (8) feet or more of head clearance equals fifty (50) percent or more of floor area of the next story below. Provided it is not used as a dwelling unit, a top floor in which the floor area with eight (8) feet or more of head clearance equals less than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the story next below shall be a "half story". A basement shall be considered as a story if more than half of its height is above the average ground level from which the "height of building" is measured or if it is used for commercial purposes.
Street. Any public or private thoroughfare which is intended for the use of vehicles, and usually also provides access to adjacent property. Type of streets are defined as follows.
Major Thoroughfare: A major street serving as part of the principal network for cross-city and through traffic movement. A major thoroughfare has higher traffic volumes, usually has a wide right-of-way and should be designated as a major thoroughfare in the 1967 Etowah Transportation Plan.
Collector Street: A street that serves a collection and distribution function carrying traffic from the local streets to the major thoroughfares or to other local streets.
Local Street: The network of streets which primarily provide access to abutting property, i.e., neighborhood streets, generally two-lane with low traffic volumes and low traffic speeds.
Cul-de-sac: A dead-end street, usually a local street.
Alley: A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
Structure. Any combination of materials, including buildings and mobile homes, constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to anything having location on the ground and including, among other things, signs, billboards, and fences.
Swimming Pool. A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a depth of more than twenty-four (24) inches below the level of the surrounding land or any above surface pool having said depth, used and maintained for swimming and bathing. (Amended 04-24-00)
Telecommunications Structure. (Added) A building, tower, or other structure and equipment used for the transmission, re-transmission, broadcast, or promulgation of telephone, telegraph, radio, television, or other electronic communications signals. (See Code 47 in the Standard Land Use Coding.) (Amended 5/28/02)
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-13
Townhouse, Residential. A single-family residential dwelling of one or more floors on a lot by itself and having or appearing to have a common wall with an adjacent similar unit or units.
Toxic Materials. Materials (gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate, or any other form) which are capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction even when present in very small amounts.
Travel Trailer Park. A parcel or area of land designed and equipped to accommodate travel trailers for short periods of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days.
Usable Floor Space. Floor space used for retail sale or display, including permanent outdoor motor vehicle sales areas and outdoor plant sales areas at nurseries.
Use. The purpose for which land or a building or other structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
Wrecked Auto Yard. Any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five (5) motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically feasible to make operative, are placed, located, or found.
Yard, Front. The required open space, unoccupied by buildings, between the road or street right-of-way line and the principal building.
Yard, Rear. The required space, unoccupied except by a building of accessory use as herein provided, extending from the rear of the principal building to the rear lot line the full width of the lot.
Yard, Side. The space, unoccupied except as herein provided, measured between the side lot line and the nearest point of the principal building and between the front yard and the rear yard.
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-14
SECTION
3.01. CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS
3.02. ZONING DISTRICT MAP
3.03. ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
3.04. SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS
3.01. CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following zoning districts are hereby established in the Town of Etowah, Tennessee:
District Abbreviation Zoning District Name
R-1 Low Density Residential
R-2 Medium Density Residential
R-3 High Density Residential
MH Mobile Home
C-1 Central Business
C-2 Highway Business
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
AG Agricultural
MD Medical
FL Flood Hazard
3.02. ZONING DISTRICT MAP.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Ordinance are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled Zoning Map of Etowah, Tennessee. The zoning map or its amendments shall be dated with the effective date of the ordinance that adopts the zoning map or zoning map amendment. Certified copies of the adopted zoning map or zoning map amendment shall be maintained at City Hall in Etowah, Tennessee, and shall be available for inspection by the public at all reasonable times, as long as this Ordinance remains in effect.
3.03. ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning map or zoning map amendment, the district boundaries are lot lines, center lines of streets or alleys, or the corporate limits of the City of Etowah as they exist at the time of the enactment of this Zoning Ordinance. Questions concerning the exact locations of district boundaries shall be determined by the Etowah Board of Zoning Appeals. Where a district boundary line divides a lot existing at the time this Ordinance takes effect and the major portion of said lot is in the less restricted district, the regulations relative to that district may extend as well to such portion of said lot as is not more than twenty (20) feet within the more restricted district.
3.04. SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
The following regulations shall apply in the eleven (11) zoning districts established in Section 3.01. of this Ordinance.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-15
3.04.1. R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
A. District Description. This residential district is intended to be used for single-family residential areas with fairly low population densities. Additional permitted uses include uses and facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element.
B. Uses Permitted. In the R-1 Low Density Residential District, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted:
1. Single-family dwellings, including modular homes, but not mobile homes
2. Residential townhouses and patio homes as regulated in Section 4.16.
3. Non-commercial nurseries, gardens, and greenhouses provided that no greenhouse heating plant shall be operated within twenty-five (25) feet of any side or rear lot line
4. Churches or similar places of worship, but not including temporary missions or revival tents, provided that:
a) There is a planted evergreen buffer strip at least twenty (20) feet wide along the property line, except lines bordering on streets, and
b) The building is located not less than fifteen (15) feet from the buffer zone or thirty-five (35) feet from any property lines.
5. Church schools (Nursery through grade 12), provided that:
a) The school is located in or adjacent to an existing church building or worship with which the school will be a part,
b) There is a planted evergreen buffer strip at least thirty (30) feet wide along the property lines, except the lines bordering on streets, and
c) The building is located not less than fifteen (15) feet from the buffer zone or forty-five (45) feet from any property lines.
6. Public schools, colleges, and other public educational institutions, provided that:
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-16
a) There is a planted evergreen buffer strip at least thirty (30) feet wide along the property lines, except the lines bordering on streets, and
b) The building is located not less than fifteen (15) feet from the buffer zone or forty-five (45) feet from any property lines.
7. Utility facilities necessary for the provision of public services
8. Customary accessory buildings, including private garages and non-commercial workshops, provided they are located in the rear yard and not closer than five (5) feet to any lot line, or fifteen (15) feet from any existing building on an adjacent lot
9. Planned unit developments (PUD's) provided they follow the regulations in Section 4.09.
10. Golf courses and country clubs only as planned unit development
11. Cemeteries, subject to Planning Commission review to ascertain that the provisions of Section 4.14. have been met
12. Customary incidental home occupations subject to Planning Commission review to ascertain that the requirements of Section 4.06. will be met
13. Radio, television, and communications towers provided the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the proposed site is essential to their transmission needs
C. Dimensional Regulations. All uses permitted in the R-1 Low Density Residential District shall comply with the following requirements, except as provided in Chapter 5 "Exceptions and Modifications".
1. Front Yard. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
2. Rear Yard. The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be twenty (20) feet for the principal structure.
3. Side Yard. The side yards shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet for one- and two-story structures, plus five (5) additional feet of side yard for each additional story over two.
If the side yard abuts a local street, alley, or cul-de-sac the side yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
If the side yard abuts a major thoroughfare or collector road the side yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-17
4. Land Area. No lot or parcel of land shall be reduced in size to provide separate lots or building sites of less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area except where sanitary sewer service is available, in which case the minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. However, where there is an existing lot of record of less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, this lot may be utilized for the construction of one (1) single-family dwelling providing the lot in question has a public water supply and sanitary sewer service providing that said lot of record is not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet in area.
5. Maximum Lot Coverage. On any lot or parcel of land the area occupied by all buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total area of such lot or parcel.
6. Lot Width. No lot shall be less than one hundred (100) feet at the building setback line.
7. Height Requirements. No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, except as provided in Section 5.03.
8. Required Street Frontage and Orientation of Principal Structures.
(Added 8/20/2012 – Ord. #728)
All principal structures shall be positioned on the lot so that the front façade and front door face a dedicated local street for which and E911 address can be given. On corner lots, one of the streets shall be designated as the front street, and the principal structure shall face this street or shall be angled toward the intersection of both streets. Under no condition shall the back of the principal structure face or angle toward a street or be visible from the street providing access except as provided above for corner lots. In no case shall an accessory structure be located in the front yard or closer to any street than the principal structure. Accessory structures shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure and are subject to all building setbacks.
9. Minimum Square Footage Requirements for Residential Structures & Dwelling Units. (Added 9-26-2016 - Ord. #790)
Single-family dwellings in the R-1 Low Density Residential Zoning District shall have a gross floor area of not less than eight-hundred (800) square feet of living space. Custom built homes and permitted modular homes shall be required to have a permanent foundation. The minimum square footage of townhouses and/or patio homes shall be as regulated in Section 4.16 of this ordinance.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.03.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-18
E. Access Control. As regulated in Section 4.01.
3.04.2. R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
A. District Description. This residential district is intended to promote and encourage the establishment and maintenance of a suitable environment for urban residence in areas which by location and character are appropriate for occupancy by moderate density, single-family and selected multiple-family dwellings. One of the important purposes of this district is to create adequate standards of residential development in order to prevent overcrowded and unhealthy conditions in the older, established neighborhoods. The intensity of land use should not be so great as to cause congestion of buildings or traffic or overload existing sanitary facilities. Densities should be limited to provide adequate light, air, and usable open space for the residents and adequate space for all related facilities.
B. Uses Permitted. In the R-2 Medium Density Residential District, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted:
1. Any use permitted in the R-1 Low Density Residential District with the same restrictions applying
2. Duplexes
3. Residential townhouse and patio homes as regulated in Section 4.16.
4. Private schools, provided that:
a) There is a planted evergreen buffer strip at least thirty (30) feet wide along the property lines, except the lines bordering on streets, and
b) The building is located not less than fifteen (15) feet from the buffer zone or forty-five (45) feet from any property lines
C. Dimensional Regulations. All uses permitted in the R-2 Medium Density Residential District shall comply with the following requirements, except as provided in Chapter 5 "Exceptions and Modifications".
1. Front Yard. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
2. Rear Yard. The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be twenty (20) feet for the principal structure.
3. Side Yard. Each side yard shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet for one- and two-story structures, plus five (5) additional feet of side yard for each additional story over two.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-19
If the side yard abuts a local street, alley, or cul-de-sac the side yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
If the side yard abuts a major thoroughfare or collector road the side yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet.
4. Land Area. No lot or parcel of land shall be reduced in size to provide separate lots or building sites of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area except where sanitary sewer service is available, in which case the minimum lot area shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. However, where there is an existing lot of record of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, this lot may be utilized for the construction of one (1) single-family dwelling providing the lot in question has a public water supply and sanitary sewer service and providing that said lot of record is not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area.
On lots where duplexes are constructed, the following lot area requirements shall apply for each duplex:
a) Ten thousand (10,000) square feet with public water and sanitary sewers
b) Seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) square feet with public water, but without sanitary sewers.
5. Maximum Coverage. On any lot or parcel of land, the area occupied by all buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent of the total area of such lot or parcel.
6. Lot Width. No lot shall be less than seventy-five (75) feet wide at the building setback line. (Amended 8/20/2012 – Ord. #728)
7. Height Requirement. No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height except as provided in Section 5.03.
8. Required Street Frontage and Orientation of Principal Structures.
(Added 8/20/2012 – Ord. #728)
All principal structures shall be positioned on the lot so that the front façade and front door face a dedicated local street for which and E911 address can be given. On corner lots, one of the streets shall be designated as the front street, and the principal structure shall face this street or shall be angled toward the intersection of both streets. Under no condition shall the back of the principal structure face or angle toward a street or be
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-20
visible from the street providing access except as provided above for corner lots. In no case shall an accessory structure be located in the front yard or closer to any street than the principal structure. Accessory structures shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure and are subject to all building setbacks.
9. Minimum Square Footage Requirements for Residential Structures & Dwelling Units. (Added 9-26-2016 - Ord. #790)
Detached Single-family dwellings and duplexes in the R-2 Medium Density Residential Zoning District shall have a gross floor area of not less than six-hundred (600) square feet of living space per dwelling unit. Custom built homes and permitted modular homes shall be required to have a permanent foundation. The minimum square footage of townhouses and/or patio homes shall be as regulated in Section 4.16 of this ordinance.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.03.
E. Access Control. As regulated in Section 4.01.
3.04.3. R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
A. District Description. This residential district is intended to promote and encourage the establishment and maintenance of a suitable environment for urban residence in areas which by location and character are appropriate for occupancy by high density single- and multi-family dwellings. The intent of the provisions of this district is to create adequate standards of residential development to allow for high density development without undesirable conditions. The intensity of land use should not be so great as to cause congestion of buildings or traffic or to overload existing sanitary facilities.
B. Uses Permitted. In the R-3 High Density Residential District, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted:
1. Any use permitted in the R-1 Low Density Residential District and the R-2 Medium Density Residential District with the same restrictions applying
2. Multi-family dwellings where the sewage disposal system is approved by the Etowah Utility Board
3. Group quarters or dormitories where public sewage service is available
4. Recreational facilities associated with multi-family dwellings or apartment complexes
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-21
C. Dimensional Regulations. All uses permitted in the R-3 High Density Residential District shall comply with the following requirements, except as provided in Chapter 5 "Exceptions and Modifications".
1. Front Yard. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
2. Rear Yard. The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be twenty (20) feet.
3. Side Yard. The side yard shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet for one- and two-story structures, plus five (5) additional feet of side yard for each additional story over two.
If the side yard abuts a local street, alley, or cul-de-sac the side yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
If the side yard abuts a major thoroughfare or collector road the side yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet.
4. Land Area. No lot or parcel of land shall be reduced in size to provide separate lots or building sites of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area except where sanitary sewer service is available, in which case the minimum lot area shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for a single-family home. However, where there is an existing lot of record of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, this lot may be utilized for the construction of one (1) single-family dwelling providing the lot in question has a public water supply and sanitary sewer service and providing that said lot of record is not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area.
On lots or parcels of land where multi-family dwellings are constructed, the following area requirements shall apply:
WITH PUBLIC WITH PUBLIC WATER
NUMBER OF WATER AND BUT WITHOUT
DWELLING UNITS SANITARY SEWERS SANITARY SEWERS
2 Units 10,000 sq. ft. 17,500 sq. ft.
3 Units 15,000 sq. ft.
Over 3 units 15,000 sq. ft.+
2,500 sq. ft.
for each unit
over 3
5. Maximum Lot Coverage. On any lot or parcel of land the area occupied by all buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent of the total area of such lot or parcel.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-22
6. Lot Width. No lot shall be less than seventy-five (75) feet wide at the building setback line. (Amended 8/20/2012 – Ord. #728)
7. Height Requirement. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet, except as permitted in Section 5.03.
8. Required Street Frontage and Orientation of Principal Structures.
(Added 8/20/2012 – Ord. #728)
All principal structures shall be positioned on the lot so that the front façade and front door face a dedicated local street for which and E911 address can be given. On corner lots, one of the streets shall be designated as the front street, and the principal structure shall face this street or shall be angled toward the intersection of both streets. Under no condition shall the back of the principal structure face or angle toward a street or be visible from the street providing access except as provided above for corner lots. In no case shall an accessory structure be located in the front yard or closer to any street than the principal structure. Accessory structures shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure and are subject to all building setbacks.
9. Minimum Square Footage Requirements for Residential Structures & Dwelling Units. (Added 9-26-2016 - Ord. #790)
Detached Single-family dwellings, duplexes, and multi-family dwellings in the R-3 High Density Residential Zoning District shall have a gross floor area of not less than six-hundred (600) square feet of living space per dwelling unit. Custom built homes and permitted modular homes shall be required to have a permanent foundation. The minimum square footage of townhouses or patio homes shall be as regulated in Section 4.16 of this ordinance.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.03.
E. Access Control. As regulated in Section 4.01.
F. Site Plan Requirements. As required in Section 4.15.
3.04.4. MH MOBILE HOME DISTRICT.
A. District Description. This residential district is intended to provide for the development of single-family mobile home parks and for mobile home subdivisions. The purpose of this district is two-fold: 1) to provide for adequate mobile home parks where mobile home dwellers can rent a mobile home space, and 2) to provide for new platted mobile home subdivisions where mobile home owners can purchase a lot for their home. Mobile home subdivisions will be regulated by
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-23
the Etowah Subdivision Regulations as to required improvements and approval procedure and by these zoning regulations for dimensional requirements.
B. Uses Permitted.
1. Single-family mobile homes and customary accessory uses such as storage sheds and carports
2. "Public" parks, playgrounds, and community buildings in mobile home subdivisions
3. "Private" parks, playgrounds, community buildings, and coin laundries provided by the mobile home park
C. Uses Prohibited. All uses not allowed under Section 3.04.4.B. "Uses Permitted".
D. Regulations for Mobile Home Parks.
1. Permit Required. No mobile home park shall be established or maintained by any person unless such person holds a valid mobile home park permit from the City of Etowah. The permit shall not be issued until the Etowah Regional Planning Commission has approved the site plan, the McMinn County Health Department has approved the water and sewerage plans and other features required by the Tennessee Trailer Court Act, and the Etowah Building Inspector has certified that the mobile home park has been developed in accordance with the approved site plan.
2. Site Plan Required. The requirements of Section 4.15.F. "Requirements, Regulations, and Restrictions" shall be met for the site plan of a mobile home park. The scale of the site plan shall be one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or more detailed if the developer desires.
3. Site Requirements. Each mobile home park shall be located outside of flood hazard areas on a well-drained site and shall be situated so drainage will not endanger water supply. Each mobile home park shall be located on a single lot or on adjacent lots of the same ownership and planned so as to facilitate the efficient management and administration of such park.
Any area of land designated to be used as a mobile home park shall be at least three (3) acres in size and located in the MH Mobile Home District.
4. Size of Mobile Home Spaces. Each mobile home space shall be at least three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet, including parking area, with a minimum width and length of forty (40) feet by ninety (90) feet, respectively.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-24
Each mobile home located in a mobile home park shall be situated such that there is at least:
a) Ten (10) feet from a mobile home to any adjacent property line,
b) Twenty-five (25) feet from any public street right-of-way to a mobile home, and
c) Ten (10) feet of clear and open space between any attachments such as screened porches and adjacent mobile homes or other buildings.
5. Street Requirements. The minimum widths of various private streets within a mobile home park shall comply with the following:
One way with no on-street parking ...................... Ten (10) feet wide
Two-way with no on-street parking ........................ Sixteen (16) feet
Parallel parking on one side ......................................... Eight (8) feet
additional width
Parallel parking on two sides .................................. Sixteen (16) feet
additional width
The streets shall be constructed with four (4) inches of compacted gravel or higher standards.
6. Parking and Buffer Area. Each mobile home park shall provide two (2) parking spaces per mobile home space. Each parking space shall be at least nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet. They may be arranged side-by-side or end-to-end.
Each mobile home park shall have a green strip at least ten (10) feet wide along all exterior boundaries of the park.
7. Recreation Area. A centrally-located area in each mobile home park shall be provided for use by the occupants for recreation and entertainment. Such recreational area shall be at least four hundred (400) square feet per mobile home space. Such recreational area shall be maintained in an attractive manner and shall be well-drained.
8. Water Supply. Water shall be piped directly to each mobile home space or site. The developer of a mobile home park shall attach to any public water supply located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed park. If such a public water supply is available it shall be used exclusively.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-25
No independent water supply shall be constructed without written approval of plans and specifications by the Health Officer.
9. Sewage Disposal. Each mobile home park shall provide an adequate disposal system approved in writing by the Health Officer. Each mobile home space shall be equipped with at least a three (3) inch sewer connection trapped below the frost line and reaching at least four (4) inches above the surface of the ground. All trunk sewer lines shall be laid in trenches separated by at least ten (10) feet horizontally from any drinking water supply line.
The developer of a mobile home park shall first attempt to dispose of sewage through a public sewerage system. If this attempt is not feasible, then a septic tank and subsurface soil absorption system may be used provided the soil characteristics are suitable and an adequate disposal area is available.
10. Solid Waste Collection. The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse within a mobile home park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards. All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, and rodent-proof containers. Garbage and refuse shall be collected and disposed of no less than once a week.
E. Regulations for Mobile Home Subdivisions. Mobile home subdivisions shall be located on land which is zoned MH and shall be developed in accordance with the Etowah Subdivision Regulations regarding platting, design, improvements, et cetera, with the following exceptions:
1. Lot Width. Lot width shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.
2. Lot Depth. Lot depth shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet.
3. Lot Area. Lot area shall be a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet with public water and sewerage. (Lots without public water and/or sewerage shall have a lot area as prescribed by the McMinn County Health Department to accommodate wells and/or individuals septic tank systems.)
3.04.5. C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
A. District Description. This district is established to provide an area for the conduct of community and regional retail and service business of an indoor and intensive nature, especially for those sales and service uses which require a central location, which generate substantial pedestrian traffic, and which are mutually benefited by close proximity to other uses of similar nature and requirements, and for only those small-scale industrial uses commonly associated with retail, or business, or personal service activities. It is intended that such an area have properties suitable
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-26
for uses of different sizes so developed as to promote pedestrian circulation, avoid "dead" spaces between uses, and to contribute to mutual business advantage. It is further intended to exclude those commercial and industrial activities which are characterized by trucking, other than stocking and delivery of retail goods, and which cater to automobiles, or traffic, or to patrons who remain in their vehicles for service.
The provisions of this district are further intended to protect present retail businesses while encouraging the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to the functions of the Central Business District.
B. Uses Permitted. The following uses and their accessory uses shall be permitted in the C-1 Central Business District:
1. Retail sales or rentals including computer equipment, supplies and software; variety, discount and general merchandise; clothing and apparel, florists, copy and print shops, office furniture and supplies; home and office communication supplies and equipment, furniture and home furnishings, home appliances, books, magazines and newspapers; audio and video equipment, repair and supplies including televisions; music and musical instruments, hardware, garden and lawn supplies and equipment, auto parts and tires, jewelry, home appliances, hobby stores, sporting goods, antiques, gifts, souvenirs, card shops, pets and pet supplies, tobacco, and liquor (with necessary permits), and including those which are making products sold at retail on the premises, providing such manufacturing is incidental to the retail business or service, occupies less than forty (40) percent of the floor area and employs not more than five (5) operators. (Amended 07-23-01)
2. Clubs, lodges, and fraternal organizations
3. Personal service establishments including barber and beauty shops, laundromats, shoe repair, tailors and alterations, indoor recreation except for pool halls and video arcades, day care centers, art, dance, martial arts, music and photography studios; dry cleaners, funeral homes, eye glasses, hearing aids, home sick room supplies and equipment, ambulance services, locksmiths, real estate offices, and travel agencies, but excluding adult oriented entertainment and sales. (Amended 07-23-01)
4. Offices, studios, and financial institutions
5. Grocery stores, including specialty food stores such as bakery goods, delicatessens, and meat markets
6. Insurance agencies
7. Newspaper and other printing plants
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-27
8. Off-street parking lots
9. Professional offices for doctors, lawyers, dentists, architects, artists, engineers, and similar professional services
10. Public uses and structures
11. Utility structures and facilities, but excluding storage and parking facilities for equipment and supplies
12. Radio and television stations and transmission towers
13. Drug stores or pharmacies
14. Restaurants, grills, and similar eating establishments, excluding drive-ins
15. Schools, colleges, and churches
16. Signs as regulated in Section 4.12.
17. Theaters (indoor)
18. Public transportation terminals, including taxi stands
19. Gasoline service stations as regulated in Section 4.10.
20. Hotels and motels
21. Planned unit development (PUD's) as regulated in Section 4.09.
22. Automotive services (but not body repair) provided they are located in an existing building suited for such use.
23. Accessory apartment for the proprietor where said person and his/her immediate family resides on the premises of the office or retail store.
(Amended 01-29-97)
24. Wholesale and mail order uses not to exceed 33 percent of the floor area or storage area of the structure or yard. (Added 07-23-01)
25. Light Sewing Apparel Industries (Added 2/27/06 - Ord. #657)
C. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions (Added 3/24/2014 – Ord. #754). In the C-1, Central Business District, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted as special exceptions upon review and approval by the Planning Commission. In the exercise of its approval, the Commission may impose such
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-28
conditions upon the proposed use(s) of building and land, as it may deem advisable to further the general purpose of this ordinance.
1. Residential units (such as apartments or condos) are allowed on the upper floors and in the rear of any structure in the C-1 district as a use permitted on review. The following requirements shall apply to commercial/residential mixed use. When a conflict arises between these regulations and other regulations found in this ordinance or elsewhere, the strictest regulation shall apply:
a. The first floor of the structure which fronts the street shall be maintained for commercial use in accordance with the allowed uses of the C-1 zoning district. The first floor is not intended to include subterranean basements or storage space.
b. Residential units located in the rear of a commercial building shall be separate and not interfere with loading/unloading areas.
c. Residential units shall be at least 500 square feet each.
d. Each residential unit shall have at least one off-street parking space dedicated to the use of the residents. For units above 1,000 square feet of floor space, two off-street parking spaces shall be required. Residential parking spaces shall be required in addition to the parking requirements found in Section 4.03 of this ordinance, which will also apply to the commercial use of the building.
e. Residential units shall have separate access from commercial establishments.
f. The proposed design must comply with the International Building Code and other relevant city codes.
g. The Planning Commission shall review a sketch plan detailing the building layout and parking for the commercial/mixed use in order to ensure adherence to these requirements and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Reasons for denial of a request include, but are not limited to:
i. The intensity and nature of the primary commercial use or adjacent uses make the addition of residential units inappropriate.
ii. The addition of residential units would have a negative impact on the internal transportation system of the lot, adjacent properties or the external transportation system.
D. Dimensional Regulations. All uses permitted in the C-1 Central Business District shall comply with the following requirements, except as provided in Chapter 5 "Exceptions and Modifications".
1. Front Yard. No front yard shall be required in the C-1 Central Business District.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-29
2. Rear Yard. Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof of not less than thirty (30) feet in depth. The depth of a rear yard which abuts a residential district shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
In all other cases, no rear yard is required. When buildings have common sides and rear walls, as they often do in C-1 districts, special care shall be taken to meet the requirements of the City's fire code.
3. Side Yard. No side yard shall be required except that the width of a side yard which abuts a residential district shall be twenty-five (25) feet. If a side yard is provided adjacent to another C-1 property, the side yard shall be at least five (5) feet so that extremely narrow aisles are not created which will be difficult to police or keep free of litter.
4. Height Requirement. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet, except as provided in Section 5.03.
E. Requirement of Buffer Strip. Wherever a new use is established on property which abuts at any point upon property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or MH, the developer of said new use shall provide a buffer strip as defined in Chapter 2 "Definitions" along the entire abutment.
F. Off-Street Parking Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.03.
G. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.04.
H. Access Control. As regulated in Section 4.01.
I. Site Plan Requirements. As required in Section 4.15.
3.04.6. C-2 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT.
A. District Description. This district is established along selected portions of major thoroughfares to provide areas for those amusements, specialized sales, and travel accommodation activities which depend on visibility from or proximity to automobiles or traffic, serve regional travelers, cater to local residents in vehicles, or provide services essential to the movement of vehicles. It is intended that such areas have properties with lot sizes, yards, and performance and development standards sufficient to ensure that activities performed on any one lot will not unduly impede the flow of traffic, will not adversely affect activities of adjoining zones, and will not infringe on the efficiency of activities or customer attractiveness of adjacent lots. It is further intended to exclude those uses which are not necessary for service to traffic, which are not dependent on traffic, and which could reasonably be located elsewhere thus not contributing to congestion of the major thoroughfares.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-30
B. Uses Permitted. The following uses and their accessory uses shall be permitted in the C-2 Highway Business District:
1. Any use permitted in the C-1 Business District, except industry other than that which is incidental to a retail business or service
2. Hotels and motels, bed and breakfast, nursing homes and assisted living facilities (Amended 07-23-01)
3. Restaurants, grills, and fast food outlets including those allowing customer service in automobiles
4. Tourist services, including tourist information centers, souvenir/gift shops, and hunting/fishing/boating/camping supply shops
5. Medical clinics and laboratories, ambulance and rescue services (Amended 07-23-01)
6. Gasoline service stations and convenience stores, as regulated in Section 4.10 (Amended 07-23-01)
7. Automobile service, but not body repair
8. Establishments for the sale, service, or rental of passenger, travel, and recreation vehicles
9. Public or private golf courses
10. Libraries, art galleries, museums, and the like
11. Outdoor recreation facilities
12. Signs as regulated in Section 4.12.
13. Utility structures and facilities including storage and parking facilities for equipment and supplies
14. Commercial laundries and commercial plant nurseries and landscape companies
15. Animal hospitals, veterinarians, and animal kennels provided they are enclosed (Amended 07-23-01)
16. Truck stops
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-31
17. Amusement parks, amphitheaters, ballparks or stadiums, fairgrounds, and group picnic grounds
18. Public zoos
19. Airports and other transportation terminals
20. Planned unit developments (PUD's), such as shopping centers and professional office complexes
21. Auditoriums, exhibit halls, field houses, gymnasiums, theaters, and indoor recreation facilities
22. Cemeteries, subject to the provisions of Section 4.14.
23. Accessory apartment for the proprietor where said person and his/her immediate family resides on the premises of the office or retail store (Amended 01-27-97)
24. Pawn shops, building supply, heating, air-conditioning and ventilation sales and service; automobile and home glass, home repair contract services including carpenters, electricians, painters, plumbers, roofers and the like, bottled water sales and water treatment supplies for home and pool. (Added 07-23-01)
C. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions. In the C-2, Highway Commercial District, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted as special exceptions upon review and approval by the Planning Commission. In the exercise of its approval, the Commission may impose such conditions upon the proposed use(s) of building and land, as it may deem advisable to further the general purpose of this ordinance. (Added 04-24-00)
1. Flea markets, open air or under roof. (Ref. Sec. 4.18)
2. Automobile and light truck rentals, sales (new and used) and service. (Added 07-23-01)
3. Fireworks and other storage and sale of hazardous and inflammatory materials not otherwise provided for. (Added 07-23-01)
4. Tattoo and body piercing parlors, provided said parlor and the operators thereof are properly registered and licensed by the State of Tennessee under TCA § 68-38-201 et. seq. And 62-38-301 et. seq., as amended. Any permit for said use is subject to state registration and licensing. Suspension or loss of state registration or licensing for a period of one (1) year (365 calendar days from the date of suspension or loss) shall cause the zoning permit to be null and void. (Added 6/27/02)
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-32
D. Uses prohibited in the C-2 Highway Business District, all uses except those uses specifically permitted or permitted as special exceptions are prohibited. (Added 6/27/02)
E. Dimensional Regulations. The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in the C-2 Highway Business District:
1. Lot Area.
a) For those areas served by a sanitary sewer system, there shall be a minimum lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b) For those areas not served by a sanitary sewer system, the lot area requirements shall be determined by the McMinn County Health Department, but in no case shall be less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
2. Front Yard. The depth of the front yard shall be fifty (50) feet from the street or highway right-of-way.
3. Rear Yard. Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet; where a commercial building is served from the rear there shall be provided a rear yard of not less than thirty (30) feet; the depth of a rear yard which abuts a residential district shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet.
4. Side Yard. The width of any side yard which abuts a residential district shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet. In all other cases the side yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
5. Lot Width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than seventy-five (75) feet at the building setback line.
6. Height Requirement. No building or structure shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet, except as provided in Section 5.03.
F. Requirement of Buffer Strip. Wherever a new use is established on property which abuts at any point upon property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or MH, the developer of said new use shall provide along the abutment a buffer strip as defined in Chapter 2 "Definitions".
G. Off-Street Parking Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.03.
H. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.04.
I. Access Control. As regulated in Section 4.01.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-33
J. Site Plan Requirements. As required in Section 4.15.
3.04.7. I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
A. District Description. The I-1 Light Industrial District is established to provide a suitable area for firms engaged in light manufacturing and the storage and distribution of goods, to protect the surrounding land uses, to discourage uses incompatible to light manufacturing, and to protect the existing industries in the district.
B. Uses Permitted. In the I-1 Light Industrial District, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted provided that all building, health, and safety regulations are met:
1. Light industries, provided that any industry that may cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, or other objectionable conditions, shall be required to show that the proposed location, construction, and operation will not injure present or prospective industrial development in the district
2. Wholesaling, warehousing, and those businesses which are incidental thereto, including storage yards, but excluding storage of any material of any explosive nature
3. Contractors or construction equipment dealers' yards
4. Repair or service facilities, including, but not limited to, automobile repair, appliance repair, machine shops, cabinet shops, carpentry, plumbing, and welding
5. Sales and service of boats, boat trailers, and mobile homes
6. Agricultural equipment sales and service
7. Gasoline service stations
8. Veterinarian hospitals and kennels
9. Laundry and dry-cleaning establishments
10. Radio stations and transmission towers
11. Wholesale baking establishments
12. Bottling and distribution plants
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-34
13. Newspaper and printing plants
14. Truck terminals
15. Heavy equipment sales and service
16. Off-street parking lots
17. Public utility structures
18. On-site and off-site signs as regulated in Section 4.12.
C. Dimensional Regulations. All uses permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District shall comply with the following requirements, except as provided in Chapter 5 "Exceptions and Modifications".
1. Front Yard. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
2. Rear Yard. The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
3. Side Yard. The minimum depth of the side yard shall be twenty (20) feet, except that side yards for industrial lots adjacent to residential districts shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.
4. Land Area. It is hoped that all industries will be served by public water and sewerage systems. Where public water and sewer service is available, there shall be required a minimum land area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
5. Lot Width. No lot shall be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet wide at the building setback line.
6. Height Requirement. No building or structure shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height, except as provided in Section 5.03.
D. Requirement of Buffer Strip. Wherever a new use is established on property which abuts at any point upon property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or MH, the developer of said new use shall provide along the abutment a buffer strip as defined in Chapter 2 "Definitions".
E. Off-Street Parking Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.03.
F. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.04.
G. Access Control. As regulated in Section 4.01.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-35
H. Site Plan Requirements. As required in Section 4.15.
3.04.8. I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
A. District Description. The I-2 Heavy Industrial District is established to provide a suitable area for the location of heavy manufacturing plants, to protect the existing industries in the district, and to discourage uses incompatible with heavy industry.
B. Uses Permitted. In the I-2 Heavy Industrial District, the following uses are permitted provided that all building, health, and safety regulations are met:
1. Light and heavy industries provided that any industry that may cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, or other objectionable conditions, shall be required to show that the proposed location, construction, and operation will not injure present industrial development in the district
2. Stockyards, livestock sales, slaughter houses, and the processing of poultry and livestock
3. Bulk storage of petroleum or bottled gas
4. Auto junkyards, provided that the total area be screened from all adjacent development and any public rights-of-way by a planted evergreen buffer strip as defined in Chapter 2 "Definitions"
5. Newspaper and printing plants
6. Heavy equipment sales and service
7. Off-street parking lots
8. Public utility structures
9. On-site and off-site signs as regulated in Section 4.12.
C. Conditional Uses (Added 11-27-00)
a. Adult-oriented establishments, subject to the following special restrictions:
1. Restrictions. In no case shall an adult-oriented establishment be permitted to locate within five hundred feet (500') of any boundary to a R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential Zone or MH Mobile Home Zone, nor shall any proposed adult-oriented establishment be permitted to locate within five hundred feet (500') of a residential use with any zone, nor shall any proposed adult-oriented establishment be permitted to locate within five hundred feet (500')
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-36
from the nearest property line of a site with is used for the purpose of a recreation park, playground or swimming pool (not including ornamental only parks); place of worship, public or private school, day care center, or another adult-oriented establishment. Measurements shall be made from the nearest recorded property line of the adult-oriented establishment to the nearest property line or boundary of said uses.
2. Evaluation. For the purpose of enforcing this section, it shall be the responsibility of the building inspector to measure, evaluate, and advise the Planning Commission regarding compliance of a proposed adult-oriented establishment with the restrictions set forth herein. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to supply a site plan, as set forth in Section 4.15, and any other maps, surveys, or other such special information as might reasonably be required and requested by the planning commission or its designee for use in making a thorough evaluation of the application.
3. Adult-oriented Establishments-Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, manage, or operate an adult-oriented establishment in any zone other than I-2 or to own, manage or operate such an establishment without obtaining a conditional use permit as required herein and any other permit the City of Etowah may require. Obtaining any other required permits shall be a requirement of the conditional use permit.
4. Hours of Operation. Under the authority of TCA 7-51-1402(b) the hours of operation for an adult-oriented establishment shall be opening not earlier than one (1) o’clock p.m. and closing not later than eleven (11) o’clock p.m. Monday through Thursday, and not later than twelve (12) midnight on Fridays and Saturdays. No adult-oriented establishment shall be open for business on any Sunday or a legal holiday as designated in TCA 15-1-101.
5. Physical Design of Premises. As provided in TCA 7-51-1403 no person shall own, operate, manage, rent, lease or exercise control over any commercial building, structure, premises or portion or part thereof, which is an adult-oriented establishment and which contains:
a. Partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a building structure or premises having an aperture which is designed or constructed to facilitate sexual activity between persons on either side of the partition; or
b. Booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms, used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment, having doors, curtains, or portal partitions, unless such booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms so used shall have at least one (1) side open to adjacent public rooms so that the area inside is visible to persons in adjacent public
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-37
rooms. Such areas shall be lighted in a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but such lighting shall not be so such intensity as to prevent the viewing of motion pictures or other offered entertainment.
6. Revocation and Hearing: Expansion, relocation, substantial misrepresentation, violation of a) any of the terms of the ordinance, b) a change in the dominant sales items or services offered to the public, or c) failure to operate the establishment in conformity with any terms and specifications set forth in the conditions attached to the special permit shall constitute grounds for revocation of the special permit after notice and hearing. Notice of the hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals for revocation of the permit shall be given in writing setting forth the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the applicant’s or owners last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
7. Signs and Other Visible Messages. Signs and visible messages based on the allowable sign area of the zoning district as shown in Section 4.12 are permitted provided:
a) Sign messages shall be limited to a written description of material or services available on the premises;
b) Sign messages may not include any graphic or pictorial depiction of material or services available on the premises;
c) Messages which are visible or intended to be visible from outside the property (such as on or within doors or windows) shall not display materials, items, publications, pictures, films, or printed material available on the premises; or pictures, films, or live presentation of persons performing or services offered on the premises.
D. Dimensional Regulations. All uses permitted in the I-1 Heavy Industrial District shall comply with the following requirements, except as provided in Chapter 5 "Exceptions and Modifications".
1. Front Yard. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be fifty (50) feet.
2. Rear Yard. The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
3. Side Yard. The minimum depth of the side yard shall be thirty (30) feet, except that side yards for industrial lots adjacent to residential districts shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-38
4. Land Area. It is hoped that all industries will be served by public water and sewerage systems. Where public water and sewer service is available, there shall be required a minimum land area of two (2) acres. No heavy industrial land use shall be permitted in areas where a public water supply is not available. In areas where only public water is available, the size of the lot shall meet the McMinn County Health Department requirements based on soil types and septic system design requirements.
5. Lot Width. No lot shall be less than two hundred (200) feet wide at the building setback line.
6. Height Requirement. No building or structure shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height, except as provided in Section 5.03.
E. Requirement of Buffer Strip. Wherever a new use is established on property which abuts at any point upon property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or MH, the developer of said new use shall provide along the abutment a buffer strip as defined in Chapter 2 "Definitions".
F. Off-Street Parking Requirement. (Amended 02-27-95) As regulated in Section 4.03 of this title, excepting Section 4.03F, Construction Requirement for Parking Lots which may be waived by a majority vote of the Etowah Regional Planning Commission at the time of Site Plan Approval as specified in Section 4.15 of this title.
G. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.04.
H. Access Control. As regulated in Section 4.01.
I. Site Plan Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.15.
3.04.9. AG AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
A. District Description. This district is intended to preserve those areas within the corporate limits of Etowah for which agriculture is a desirable and profitable use from encroachment by more intense uses. The AG Agricultural District also provides for low density residential and outdoor recreation uses. It is further intended that the AG Agricultural District prevent undesirable urban sprawl and exclude land uses which demand a level of urban services which are impossible or uneconomical to provide. The agricultural use of land shall be limited by the requirement that no significant offensive odors or dust be created. Furthermore, after the adoption of this Ordinance, no new agricultural structures shall include space for commercial poultry and swine production, cattle feeder lots, or fur-bearing animal farms.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-39
B. Uses Permitted. In the AG Agricultural District, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted:
1. Detached single- and two-family dwellings
2. Parks, playgrounds, golf courses and driving ranges, country clubs, community centers, and other public recreational facilities
3. Public schools, colleges, libraries, fire stations, and utility structures with an approved site plan
4. Plant nurseries and greenhouses
5. Signs as regulated in Section 4.12.
6. General farm uses such as cultivation of soil for food products, or animal feed or timber, and the grazing of livestock including dairy cattle
7. Riding stables and kennels with an approved site plan
8. Sanitary landfill operations, subject to the approval of the McMinn County Health Department and the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment
9. One (1) roadside stand per farm for the sale of agricultural products produced on the premises provided that such stand does not exceed a total area of three hundred (300) square feet and provided it is located not nearer than thirty-five (35) feet from the roadway
10. Cemeteries, subject to the provisions of Section 4.14.
C. Dimensional Regulations. All uses permitted in the AG Agricultural District shall comply with the following requirements, except as provided in Chapter 5 "Exceptions and Modifications".
1. Front Yard. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
2. Rear Yard. The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet for the principal structure and five (5) feet for any permitted accessory structures.
3. Side Yard. The side yards shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet for a single-story structure, plus an additional five (5) feet for each additional story.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-40
If the side yard abuts a local street, alley, or cul-de-sac the side yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
If the side yard abuts a major thoroughfare or collector road the side yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet.
4. Land Area. No parcel of land shall be reduced in size to provide separate lots or building sites of less than one (1) acre. However, where there is an existing lot of record of less than one (1) acre at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, this lot may be used for construction of one (1) single-family dwelling provided the McMinn County Health Department approves the lot's proposed sewerage system.
5. Lot Width. No lot shall be less than one hundred (100) feet at the building setback line.
6. Height Requirement. No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, except as provided in Section 5.03. for silos, grain elevators, observation towers, and so forth.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.03.
E. Access Control. As regulated in Section 4.01.
F. Site Plan Requirements. As required in Section 4.15.
3.04.10. M-D MEDICAL DISTRICT.
A. District Description. It is intended that this district be used to provide for the unified development of medical facilities, nursing homes, and other facilities related to the health care of the citizens of the City of Etowah and the surrounding region.
B. Uses Permitted. In the M-1 Medical District, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted:
1. Public and private hospitals, clinics, and other facilities which provide for the overnight care of patients, and medical and dental offices not equipped for overnight care of patients
2. Public and private nursing homes
3. Drug stores, medical supply establishments, and the like
4. Utility facilities necessary for the provision of public services
5. Business signs as regulated in Section 4.12.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 3-41
6. Planned unit developments (PUD's)
7. Any other use which the Planning Commission feels is in conformance with the intent of this district shall be permitted on review
C. Uses Prohibited. All uses except those permitted or permitted upon approval by the Planning Commission are prohibited.
D. Dimensional Regulations. All uses permitted in the M-1 Medical District shall comply with the following requirements, except as provided in Chapter 5, "Exceptions and Modifications".
1. Front Yard. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty (30) feet.
2. Rear Yard. No building shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the rear lot line.
3. Side Yard. Where the side yard is adjacent to a residential district, no buildings shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to the side lot line.
4. Lot Width. None required except to meet other requirements herein.
5. Height Requirement. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height, except as provided in Section 5.03.
E. Off-Street Parking Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.03.
F. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.04.
G. Access Control. As regulated in Section 4.01.
H. Site Plan Requirements. As required in Section 4.15.
3.04.11. MUNICIPAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING ORDINANCE.
(Amended 5/24/10 Ord. #702)
See Appendix A for Municipal Floodplain Zoning Ordinance.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-1
CHAPTER 4
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS WHERE APPLICABLE
SECTION
4.01. ACCESS CONTROL
4.02. ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS
4.03. OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
4.04. OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS
4.05. TEMPORARY USE REGULATIONS
4.06. CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATIONS
4.07. GENERAL LOT RESTRICTIONS
4.08. VISION AT STREET INTERSECTIONS
4.09. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) REGULATIONS
4.10. GASOLINE SERVICE STATION RESTRICTIONS
4.11. SWIMMING POOL RESTRICTIONS
4.12. SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, AND OTHER ADVERTISING STRUCTURES
4.13. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR WRECKED AUTO YARDS AND
JUNKYARDS OR SALVAGE YARDS
4.14. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR CEMETERIES
4.15. SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
4.16. RESIDENTIAL TOWNHOUSE AND PATIO HOME REGULATIONS
4.17 LANDSCAPE PLAN
4.18 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLEA MARKETS
4.19 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURES
4.20 PARKING, STORAGE, AND USE OF VEHICLES, TRUCKS, HEAVY EQUIPMENT
IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
4.21 STANDARDS FOR FENCES AND RETAINING WALLS
4.22 SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES (MINI-WAREHOUSES)
4.01. ACCESS CONTROL.
In order to expedite the movement of traffic, to promote the safety of the motorist and pedestrian, and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict, it is necessary to reduce the points of vehicular contact. Therefore, to effectively control vehicular access onto the streets of Etowah, it is necessary to classify such streets as follows: major thoroughfares; collector streets; and local streets. The classification of each street shall be as shown in the Transportation Plan of Etowah, Tennessee, which is kept in City Hall.
A. Development Requiring Access Control Plan. Developers of commercial and industrial establishments and apartment complexes of three (3) or more dwelling units must file an access control plan which meets all requirements of this section and must have such plan approved by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission prior to obtaining a building permit. This access control plan is often part of a "site plan" as specified in Section 4.15. of this Ordinance. However, in the event that such a site plan is not required, an access control plan must still be submitted and approved. Although access control plans are not
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-2
required for single-family homes and duplexes, the provisions of Section 4.01.D., items 1, 2, and 3 shall, nevertheless, be adhered to for access to these land uses.
B. General Access Regulations Applying to All Classifications of Streets.
1. Maximum Width of All Access Points. The maximum width of all access points shall be thirty (30) feet measured at the property line; except when the development requiring access generates high overall or high peak traffic volumes, the Etowah Regional Planning Commission may approve a wider channelized access point to allow various turning movements for greater traffic control and safety.
2. Temporary Access Ways. Temporary access ways may be granted by the Planning Commission at locations other than those specified for permanent access where it is expedient for the purpose of staged development. Temporary access ways shall be closed by the owner when permanent access to the property is completed.
3. Off-Street Parking Lanes Entirely Independent of Public Streets. No off-street vehicular storage or parking shall be allowed where the arrangement requires that vehicles back directly into a public street right-of-way.
4. Access for Lots Fronting on More than One (1) Street. In all commercial developments where a lot abuts more than one (1) street, the Planning Commission may require that the access be from the street of lowest classification when necessary to lessen serious congestion on the major street. If access is allowed onto two (2) or more streets, the number of access points shall conform to those allowed for each street classification (see Section 4.01.D.).
5. Gasoline Service Stations. Gasoline service stations shall be allowed two (2) access points onto the same street to allow proper circulation past the gasoline pumps. This is regardless of lot width or street classification provided the required site plan is approved by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission
C. Construction of Frontage Roads and Interior Circulation Drives. In order to limit the number of individual access points to an arterial or collector street, the Etowah Regional Planning Commission shall encourage and may require the development of frontage roads and interconnecting interior circulation drives.
1. Frontage Roads. Frontage roads are those which parallel the existing street and extend across the entire frontage of a particular large property or group of properties. Frontage roads may be required to provide safe and efficient public access to individual properties, eliminating the traffic congestion which would be caused if each parcel had its own access onto the arterial or collector street.
Access points between the frontage road and the arterial street shall be no closer together than three hundred (300) feet along collector streets. All frontage roads
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-3
shall be built to the standards specified in the Etowah Subdivision Regulations and shall be dedicated as public streets and then maintained by the City of Etowah.
Access requirements for property served by a frontage road shall be the same as for property fronting a minor street; i.e., at least one hundred (100) feet apart, except that the Planning Commission may also allow a regrouping of access points onto the frontage road in accordance with an approved site plan which does not destroy the intent of these access control provisions.
2. Interior Circulation Drives. Interior circulation drives are needed in large developments which require large parking areas. These drives interconnect all parking lot access points with all buildings and areas of vehicular parking, loading, and servicing. They are constructed to provide safe and efficient vehicular movement between specified access points of a development or a series of developments. The Planning Commission shall encourage and may require that the interior circulation drives of adjacent developments be connected to eliminate the need to use the public streets to drive from one to another. All circulation drives shall be clearly defined and marked appropriately with arrows, et cetera, to assist public circulation into and out of the property and its parking areas.
An area of land not less than ten (10) feet deep shall be provided between the public street right-of-way line and the edge of all proposed frontage roads or interior circulation drives. This area will separate the roadways with a minimum turning radius. Such area shall be landscaped and grassed.
The width, placement, and design of frontage roads and interior circulation drives shall be reviewed by the City of Etowah and the Planning Commission staff and shall be approved by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission.
D. Access Control. In order to promote the safety of the motorist and pedestrian and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict by reducing the points of contact, the following regulations shall apply: (Amended 11-11-96)
1. Minimum distance from an adjoining interior lot line and a driveway opening at the street right-of-way line:
Residential use ..................................................................................... five (5) feet
Non-residential use and residential complexes
with more than 12 units.................................................................. fifteen (15) feet
2. Minimum distance from the intersection of a street right-of-way lines on a corner lot and a driveway opening at the right-of-way line:
Residential use ..................................................................................... ten (10) feet
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-4
Non-residential use and residential complexes
with more than 12 units.......................................................... twenty-five (25) feet
3. Minimum distance between two driveways serving the same property and which provide access to the same street, at the right-of-way line:
Residential use ....................................................................... twenty-five (25) feet
Non-residential use and residential complexes
with more than 12 units............................................................. forty-five (45) feet
(provided where there are topographic limitations, or the frontage is insufficient, the Planning Commission may reduce this distance up to a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.)
4. There shall be no more than two (2) points of access to any one public street for each four hundred (400) feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof, provided, however, that lots of less than one hundred (100) feet in width shall have no more than one point of access to any public street.
5. For the purposes of this section, dual one-way access drives shall be considered to be one (1) driveway.
4.02. ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS.
The uses of land, buildings, and other structures permitted in each of the Districts established by this Ordinance are designated by listing the principal uses. In addition to such principal uses, accessory uses which are customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses are also permitted in each district. Each accessory use shall:
1. Be customarily incidental to the principal use established on the same lot
2. Be subordinate to and serve such principal use
3. Be subordinate in area, intent, and purpose of such principal use
4. Contribute to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of users of such principal use
4.03. OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
A. Amount Required. Off-street automobile parking shall be provided on each lot upon which any of the following uses are hereafter established. One (1) passenger vehicle space shall be determined as two-hundred (200) square feet of parking area that is at least ten (10) feet
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-5
by twenty (20) feet for regular parking spaces and ten (10) feet by twenty-two (22) feet for parallel parking spaces. All parking areas shall have access to a street or alley. The number of parking spaces provided shall meet the minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth below. (Amended 9-28-2015 – Ord. #773)
1. Dwellings. Not less than two (2) spaces for each family dwelling unit.
2 Boarding Houses and Rooming Houses. Not less than one and one-half (1 1/2) spaces for each two (2) rooms occupied by boarders or roomers.
3. Tourist Accommodations, Hotels, or Motels. Not less than one (1) space for each room offered for tourist accommodation.
4. Any Auditorium, Church, Stadium, or Other Place of Public Assembly. Not less than one (1) space for every four (4) seats provided in such places of assembly. For places of public assembly where seating is not a measure of capacity, such as clubhouses, funeral parlors, et cetera, at least one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor space devoted to that particular use shall be provided.
5. Manufacturing or Other Industrial Use. Not less than one (1) space for every three (3) persons employed or intended to be employed on a single shift, with a minimum of six (6) spaces provided for any establishment.
6. Commercial Building or Use. One (1) space for each one hundred seventy-five (175) square feet of usable floor space in the C-2 zone. Usable floor space is to be determined by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission based on the nature of the business.
7. Medical or Dental Clinics and Hospitals. Four (4) spaces per doctor, plus one (1) additional space for each employee.
8. Service Stations. Five (5) spaces for each grease rack or similar facility, plus one (1) space for each gasoline pump.
9. Offices. One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of office space.
10. Restaurants. One (1) space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable floor area, plus one (1) space for every two (2) employees. For drive-in restaurants, one (1) space per fifty (50) square feet of usable floor area.
B. Certification of Minimum Parking Requirements. Each application for a building permit shall include information as to the location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading space and the means of ingress and egress to such space. This information shall be in sufficient detail to enable the Building Inspector to determine whether or not the requirements of this section are met.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-6
C. Combination of Required Parking Space. The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one (1) lot, but the required spaces assigned to one (1) use may not be assigned to another use except that the parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays.
D. Remote Parking Space. If the off-street parking space required by this Ordinance cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such space may be provided on any land within five hundred (500) feet of the main entrance to such principal use provided such land is in the same ownership as the principal use. Such land shall be used for no other purpose so long as no other adequate provision of parking space meeting the requirements of this Ordinance has been made for the principal use.
E. Requirements for Design of Parking Lots. (Amended 9-28-2015 – Ord. #773)
1. Except for parcels of land devoted to one- and two-family residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain egress.
2. Each parking space shall be no less than two-hundred (200) square feet in area and a parking space shall be at least ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet for regular parking spaces and ten (10) feet by twenty-two (22) feet for parallel parking spaces.
3. Isle ways to parking spaces shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet wide, and no parking lot shall be designed so as to force drivers to back into a public street.
3. Entrances and exits for all off-street parking lots shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.01.
4. The parking lot shall be contoured to drain surface water to an approved collection area; otherwise, storm water runoff shall be detained on site for evaporation or absorption into the ground.
5. Handicap spaces should meet the requirements of the ADA.
6. Parking lots shall be drained to eliminate storm water generated by impervious surfaces. For every ten thousand (10,000) square feet of parking area, a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet must utilize pervious paving materials with an appropriate drainage system.
7. Installation of median swales in the design of parking lots which allow for the infiltration of surface water is required between parallel parking blocks.
8. Surface water drainage shall be directed to natural drainage landscapes along the perimeter of the parking lot, to swales between parking rows, and/or to rain gardens at the end of parking bays.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-7
9. Similar green infrastructure designs to manage surface and storm water will also be considered.
10. All systems shall be engineered to provide an overflow system for excessive drainage beyond the parking lot’s infiltration capacity, up to the ability to sustain a 25 year storm event.
F. Construction Requirements for Parking Lots. (Amended 12-12-94) Except for parcels of land devoted to one and two family residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be constructed of Asphaltic Concrete (hot mix) or Ready Mix Concrete.
G. Reduction of Minimum Parking Requirements. (Added 9-28-2015 – Ord. #773)
For uses in industrial and commercial zones, the minimum amount of parking may be reduced up to twenty (20) percent if the applicant can provide information for one or more of the following circumstances. The Planning Commission shall consider such evidence and make a determination of the reduction in parking spaces. In all applications, the burden of proof is on the applicant to justify the proposed reduction.
1. A study from a transportation engineer or otherwise qualified professional research/study showing that a proposed lower minimum parking requirement would be sufficient for the use;
2. Information submitted by the applicant of the use in a similar market area and - population demographic to that of the City of Etowah in which fewer parking spaces have been adequate;
3. Provision of a dedicated overflow parking area which utilizes pervious or permeable pavers or other low impact landscaping;
4. Shared parking arrangement with an adjacent property in which the minimum parking standards can be met. A shared parking arrangement in a form approved by the Planning Commission must be completed between the relevant property owners and the City of Etowah.
H. Maximum Parking Requirements. (Added 9-28-2015 – Ord. #773)
For use in industrial and commercial zones, a maximum amount of parking may be imposed on new development which disturbs more than one (1) acre of land. In this case, when the developer submits the building permit application including a summary of the proposed use and number of parking spaces, the building inspector in conjunction with Planning Commission will analyze the following factors to determine if a maximum amount of parking will be placed on the development:
1. Development type and size: Specific characteristics of the project such as the development’s footprint and the type of land use.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-8
2. Population and development density: Looks at the density of the proposed development in terms of units, residents, customers, and employees.
3. Availability of transportation options: Modes of transportation of employees, visitors and residents. Proximity of public transportation, walkable neighborhoods, and bicycle amenities may reduce maximum parking amount.
4. Surrounding land use mix: The land uses around the proposed development including what shared parking may be available, surrounding uses hours of operation, and availability of on-street parking.
4.04. OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS.
Every building or structure hereafter constructed and used for industry, or business, or trade in any district shall provide space for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. This space shall not be considered as part of the space requirements for off-street automobile storage.
1. Behind every building or structure used for business or trade, there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth to provide space for loading and unloading vehicles, except as provided in Chapter 5 "Exceptions and Modifications".
2. The Board of Zoning Appeals may hereafter reduce this requirement where unusual or special conditions are due consideration.
4.05. TEMPORARY USE REGULATIONS.
The following regulations are necessary to govern the operation of certain necessary or seasonal uses non-permanent in nature. Application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be made to the Building Inspector. Said application shall contain a graphic description of the property to be utilized and a site plan, a description of the proposed use, and sufficient information to determine yard requirements, setbacks, sanitary facilities, and parking space for the proposed temporary use. The following uses are deemed to be temporary uses and shall be subject to the specific regulations and time limits which follow and to the regulations of any district in which such use is located.
1. Carnival or Circus. In the C-1 or C-2 districts a Temporary Use Permit may be obtained; however, such permit shall be issued for a period of not longer than fifteen (15) days.
2. Christmas Tree Sales. In any district a thirty (30) day Temporary Use Permit for the display of Christmas trees on open lots may be obtained.
3. Temporary Building. In any district a Temporary Use Permit may be issued for a contractor's temporary office and equipment sheds incidental to a construction project. Such permit shall not be valid for more than one (1) year, but may be renewed for six (6) month extensions; however, not more than three (3) extensions shall be granted to a particular use. Such use shall be removed upon completion of the construction project or upon expiration of the Temporary Use Permit, whichever occurs sooner.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-9
4. Real Estate Sales Office. In any district a Temporary Use Permit may be issued for a temporary real estate sales office in any new subdivision which has been approved by the Planning Commission under the Etowah Subdivision Regulations. Such office shall contain no living accommodations. The permit will be valid for one (1) year, but may be granted two (2) six (6) month extensions. Such office shall be removed upon completion of the development of the subdivision or upon expiration of the Temporary Use Permit, whichever occurs sooner.
5. Religious Tent Meetings. In the C-2 district a Temporary Use Permit may be issued for a tent or other temporary structure to house a religious meeting. Such permit shall be issued for not more than a thirty (30) day period.
6. Seasonal Sale of Farm Produce. In the AG, C-2, and I-1 districts a Temporary Use Permit may be issued for the sale of farm produce grown on the premises. Structures utilized for such sales shall be removed when not in use. The permit shall be issued for a five (5) month period. All structures must be off the right-of-way and set back from the edge of the pavement a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.
7. Miscellaneous Assemblies. In any district a Temporary Use Permit may be issued for any lawful assembly, such as an outdoor music concert, political rally, et cetera. Such permit shall be issued for not more than a seven (7) day period. Noise levels shall be considered when deciding whether to issue the Temporary Use Permit near residences.
4.06. CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATIONS.
A customary home occupation is a gainful occupation or profession conducted by members of a family residing on the premises and conducted entirely within the principal dwelling unit. In connection with a home occupation, no stock in trade shall be displayed outside the dwelling, and no alteration to any building shall indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than a residential unit, including permitted accessory buildings. When questions arise regarding the legality of specific home occupations, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine whether said home occupation is in compliance with the above restrictions and is compatible with the district in which said home occupation is located. However, activities such as dance instruction, band instrument instruction (except piano instruction), tea rooms, tourist homes, real estate offices, convalescent homes, mortuaries, animal clinics, retail sales business, or any other activity deemed by the Board to be incompatible with the district or a potential nuisance to the surrounding area shall not constitute an acceptable home occupation.
4.07. GENERAL LOT RESTRICTIONS.
The following general lot restrictions shall be complied with in all districts.
A. One (1) Principal Structure for Each Lot.
1. Only one (1) principal building and its customary accessory buildings may be erected on any lot. This provision does not prohibit PUD complexes as permitted in Section 4.09. of this Ordinance.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-10
2. No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut at least one (1) street for at least forty (40) feet, unless the lot is a flag lot in which case it must have at least twenty-five (25) feet of frontage at the end of an access strip which is twenty-five (25) feet wide throughout its length. Such building shall conform to the lot and yard requirements of the district in which it is located.
B. Reductions in Lot Area Prohibited. No lot, even though it may consist of one (1) or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per family, lot width, building area, or other requirements of this Ordinance are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose.
No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with these regulations shall be considered as providing a yard or other open space for any other building.
C. Rear Yard Abuts a Public Street. When the rear yard of a lot abuts a public street, all structures built in that rear yard shall observe the same setback from the street right-of-way line as required for adjacent properties which front on that street. In addition, any structure located within twenty-five (25) feet of that setback line shall be no closer to any side property line than the distance required for side yards on adjoining properties fronting on that street.
D. Front Entrance of Residences Shall Face a Public Street. The front yard of a residential structure shall abut a public street, and the front entrance to the structure shall abut the front yard. The Planning Commission may permit residences on corner lots to have the front entrance facing a side street (side yard) where this is compatible with the setbacks and other aspects of the neighborhood. Multifamily (3 dwelling units or more) structures may be allowed to have entrances facing a direction other than a public street; provided the facade facing the public street gives the aesthetic appearance of the front of a residence, and the general appearance and layout is consistent with adjoining properties. When a proposed building orientation is questionable, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall issue a ruling at the request of the property owner. (Amended 8/20/2012 - Ord. #728)
E. Minimum Setback from Drainage Ditch/Canal. The minimum setback from any drainage ditch or drainage canal for a principal or accessory structure shall be ten (10) feet. (Added 07-23-01)
4.08. VISION ON STREET INTERSECTIONS.
On a corner lot in any district, within the area formed by the center lines of the intersecting or intercepting streets and a line joining points on such center lines at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between the height of three and one-half (3 1/2) feet and a height of ten (10) feet above the average grade of each street at the center line thereof. The requirements of this section shall not be construed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-11
4.09. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) REGULATIONS.
In any zoning district where PUD's are allowed, the Etowah Regional Planning Commission may approve PUD complexes which include certain dimensional or density features that vary from the requirements outlined in Chapter 3. The intent is to encourage or provide for planned unit development that is compatible with the nature of the district, yet offers an environment which is not typical of these districts, such as condominiums and cluster housing in the residential zones and multi-use complexes in the business and industrial zones. The following restrictions shall apply to PUD complexes.
1. No use will be permitted which is not specifically permitted within the district in which the complex is to be located.
2. No parcel of land without an adequate public water supply shall be approved for a PUD.
3. No PUD will be approved unless an adequate sanitary sewer system, as defined in Chapter 2, is included in the plans and approved by the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment and the McMinn County Health Department.
4. All access roads within the PUD complex shall be constructed to the standards set forth in the Etowah Subdivision Regulations. (Road areas shall not be used as a part of the required area per dwelling unit in residential PUD's.)
5. Commercial and industrial PUD's shall have a buffer strip as defined in Chapter 2 along any abutment with property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or MH.
6. In the residential zones, the Planning Commission shall approve only usable areas to be considered as open spaces or recreational areas within the complex.
7. The following dimensional requirements shall be imposed on all planned unit development:
a) The exterior yards of the complex must meet the setback and yard requirements of the district in which the complex is located
b) Although the developer will be allowed to deviate from the density requirements for the individual lots or areas on which the structures are located, the complex itself must meet the minimum density requirements for the district in which it is located; this may be accomplished through the provision of open spaces, open-type recreational areas, and consolidated parking areas
c) A parking area of one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) space for every five (5) dwelling units in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH zones, in addition to those provided for in Section 4.03; in other zones, the requirements of Section 4.03. shall apply.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-12
8. The following plans and schedules shall be submitted to the Etowah Regional Planning Commission for preliminary approval (preliminary and final approval may be given at the same time if the plans and schedules meet the requirements for final approval):
a) Map showing location of the PUD in relation to the rest of Etowah
b) Preliminary site plan showing the location of the buildings, lot lines, setbacks, open space areas, utilities, parking spaces, and other use facilities
c) Location and dimensions of all points of entry and exit for motor vehicles and pedestrians and the interior circulation pattern
9. The following plans and schedules shall be submitted to the Etowah Regional Planning Commission for final approval:
a) The location of the PUD on the tax maps of Etowah
b) Names and addresses of the applicant and the developer or engineer
c) Topographic information at five (5) foot contours
d) A site plan of the complex including the location of all buildings, lot lines, setbacks, recreation and open space areas (residential), utilities, parking spaces, and certain common-use facilities
e) The location and dimensions of all points of entry and exit for motor vehicles and pedestrians and the complete interior circulation pattern
f) Such architectural, engineering, and geographic data as may be required to permit the Planning Commission and the Department of Public Health to determine if their regulations are being complied with and if the character of the district is being preserved
g) A time schedule for development shall be prepared and presented which shall demonstrate the applicant's readiness and ability to develop the proposed project
10. An application for a permit to develop and construct a PUD shall be filed in accordance with Section 6.03. of this Ordinance and shall be accompanied by all plans, schedules, and other information herein required.
4.10. GASOLINE SERVICE STATION RESTRICTIONS.
The following regulations shall apply to all gasoline service stations.
1. To allow for vehicular circulation there shall be a building setback from all street right-of-way lines of a distance of not less than forty (40) feet, except for canopies designed to cover the gasoline pump islands
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-13
2. Gasoline pumps shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any street right-of-way line
3. Sign requirements as established in Section 4.12. shall be met
4.11. SWIMMING POOL RESTRICTIONS. (Amended 04-24-00)
The following regulations shall apply to outdoor swimming pools:
1. A private swimming pool is a permitted accessory use in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and MH districts. Such pool shall be intended for and used solely for the enjoyment of the residents’ of the premises and their guests.
2. No swimming pool or part thereof, excluding aprons, patios, and walks, shall protrude
into any required front yard in the R-1, R-2 and MH districts.
3. The swimming pool area shall be walled or fenced with a self-closing and self-latching gate to prevent uncontrolled access by children and animals from the street or adjacent properties. The fence and gate shall be maintained in good condition.
4. All outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four (4) feet in height. Openings in the fence shall not permit the passage of a 4-inch diameter sphere; provided however, the maximum mesh size for a chain link fence shall be a 2 ¼-inch square.
5. Every swimming pool shall have a setback of not less than eight (8) feet from the property line and other structures with no less than a four (4) foot separation between pool and fence.
6. No swimming pool shall be located underneath an electric power line.
7. Public outdoor swimming pools and indoor pools are a permitted accessory use in the C-1 and C-2 districts for clubs, private schools, hotels and motels, golf courses and country clubs, outdoor recreation facilities and amusement parks, and health spas. A municipal, other governmental, or public school owned and operated swimming pool is permitted in a public park or at a public school in any district where the primary use is allowed. A site plan shall be required for any outdoor public swimming pool.
4.12. SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, AND OTHER ADVERTISING STRUCTURES.
These conditions are established as a reasonable and impartial method of regulating advertising structures in order to ensure light, air, and open space, to reduce traffic hazards at intersections, and to protect the property values of the entire community.
A. General Regulations Applying to All Districts. In any zoning district, the following general regulations shall apply as well as the regulations in Chapter 23, "Signs and Outdoor Displays", of the Southern Standard Building Code.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-14
1. No sign shall be erected or maintained where by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape, or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device.
2. No sign having flashing, intermittent, or animated illumination shall be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of property in any residential district unless such sign is not visible from such property; and in no case shall such a sign be less than fifty (50) feet from residential property.
3. No illuminated sign shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of property in any residential district unless the illumination of such sign is so designed that it does not shine or reflect onto such property
4. Reserved for Future Use. (Amended 11-27-00)
5. No new billboards and other similar outdoor advertising structures shall be erected within the City of Etowah.
6. No new off-site signs shall be allowed for business purposes. Off-site signs of a political nature shall be allowed with a city permit provided they are later removed.
7. Signs erected and overhanging any sidewalk must be placed at least nine (9) feet above the sidewalk and may extend over the sidewalk a distance equal to two-thirds (2/3) the width of the sidewalk, but in no case exceeding ten (10) feet.
8. Professional signs and signs for home occupations shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH districts.
9. No building walls or roofs shall be used for display of advertising in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH districts.
10. Temporary signs shall not be erected or otherwise fixed to any pole, tree, stone, fence, or any object within the right-of-way of any street, nor shall any temporary sign be suspended across the public streets or other public places without the approval of the Etowah City Commission.
11. On-site portable signs shall be permitted only with the approval of the Etowah City Commission after a check for obstructions and electrical hazards.
12. In any district the following signs shall be permitted:
a) For parking areas, entrance and exit signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and there can be only one (1) sign which shall not exceed sixteen
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-15
(16) square feet in area identifying or designating the conditions of the use of such parking area
b) "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area
c) One (1) sign not more than twelve (12) square feet in area giving the names of the contractors, engineers, or architect, during construction of a building
d) Signs established by, or by order of, any governmental agency
e) For special events of public interest, one (1) sign not over fifty (50) square feet in area located upon the site of the event
B. Specific Regulations Applying to Residential Districts. The following regulations shall apply in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH Districts:
1. Nameplates indicating name, address, house number, announcement of boarders or roomers, or customary home occupations are permitted
2. For apartment buildings, identification signs not exceeding nine (9) square feet in area are permitted
3. Church, school, or public building bulletin boards or identification signs not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area are permitted
4. Flashing or intermittent illumination is prohibited
5. Allowed signs shall be placed no closer to any property line than one-half the required building setback distance
6. On-premise ground or freestanding signs other than those specifically referred to above shall be limited to a height above the grade level of nine (9) feet to the top of the sign and sixty (60) square feet in area. (Added 11-27-00)
C. Specific Regulations Applying to Business Districts. In the C-1 Central Business District and the C-2 Highway Business District, the following regulations shall apply:
1. Bulletin boards or identification signs not exceeding sixty (60) square feet in area shall be permitted for public recreation uses, community facilities, and clinics
2. Business and professional signs shall be permitted subject only to the restrictions in Section 4.12.A. of this Ordinance; all ground signs shall be located no closer to any property line than one-half the required setbacks
3. No ground or freestanding sign shall be erected to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height or two hundred (200) square feet in area. The bottom coping of such sign
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-16
shall be at least three (3) feet above grade. A masonry base or light wood lattice under the coping is permitted. (Added 11-27-00)
D. Specific Regulations Applying to Industrial Districts. In the I-1 Light Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply:
1. Business signs shall be permitted which relate to the industry on the premises; such signs shall be located not closer than one-half the required setback from all property lines
2. Other on-site signs are permitted subject to the general restrictions set forth in Section 4.12.A of this Ordinance. No ground or freestanding sign shall be erected to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height or two hundred (200) square feet in area. The bottom coping of such sign shall be at least three (3) feet above grade. A masonry base or light wood lattice under the coping is permitted. (Amended 11-27-00)
E. Specific Regulations Applying to the Agricultural District. In the AG Agricultural District, the following regulations shall apply:
1. Allowed signs shall be placed no closer than one-half the required setback distance
2. Other on-site signs are permitted subject to the general restrictions set forth in Section 4.12.A. of this Ordinance and on-premise ground or freestanding signs shall be limited to a height above the grade level of nine (9) feet to the top of the sign and sixty (60) square feet in area. (Amended 11-27-00)
F. Specific Regulations Applying to the Medical District. In the M-1 Medical District, the following regulation shall apply:
1. Allowed signs shall be placed no closer than one-half the required setback distance
2. No ground or freestanding sign shall be erected to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height or two hundred (200) square feet in area. The bottom coping of such sign shall be at least three (3) feet above grade. A masonry base or light wood lattice under the coping is permitted. (Added 11-27-00)
4.13. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR WRECKED AUTO YARDS AND JUNKYARDS OR SALVAGE YARDS.
Because of the nature and character of their operations, wrecked auto yards, junkyards or salvage yards, and similar uses of land can have a decidedly detrimental effect upon surrounding properties. Salvage and wrecking yards tend to create problems of noise, dust, traffic, and health hazards, and may adversely affect property values by their general appearance. The following standards shall be used as a guide in evaluating whether land uses such as those outlined above have properly minimized their objectionable characteristics.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-17
A. General Standards for Evaluation.
1. All motor vehicles stored or kept in such yards shall be so kept that they will not catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may breed and so that they will not constitute a place or places in which rats, mice, or other vermin may be harbored, reared, or propagated.
2. Because of the tendency for salvage yards to promote the breeding of vermin, no such operation shall be permitted closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from any established residential zone.
3. All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed opaque fence, screen, or wall, excepting driveway areas, from eight (8) to twelve (12) feet in height. Storage between the road or street and such fence, screen, or wall is expressly prohibited. Any fence, screen, or wall for screening purposes shall be properly painted or otherwise maintained in good condition.
4. All such yards shall be so maintained as to be in a sanitary condition and so as not to be a menace to the public health or safety.
B. Off-Street Parking Requirements. As regulated in Section 4.03.
C. Ingress and Egress. The number and width of vehicular access driveways permitted in any single street frontage shall be limited to the requirements in Section 4.01.D.
D. Application for Wrecked Auto Yard, Junkyard, or Salvage Yard Permit. No persons shall own or maintain a new wrecked auto yard, junkyard, or salvage yard within the City of Etowah until he has secured approval from the Etowah Regional Planning Commission.
The written application, plans, and schedules and a statement of approval of the site percolation and drainage characteristics from the McMinn County Sanitarian shall be submitted to the Etowah Regional Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall duly review these materials and makes its recommendation in the form of a motion.
4.14. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR CEMETERIES.
A. Specific Requirements. The following standards shall be imposed upon the development and construction of cemeteries in the City of Etowah:
1. The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector and larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare via a safe, high-visibility intersection
2. Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than twenty (20) acres
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-18
3. A plan showing burial plots and pedestrian and vehicular access ways shall be prepared before lots are sold
4. All structures, including, but not limited to, mausoleums, permanent monuments, or maintenance buildings shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line
5. All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than twenty-five feet from any property line or street right-of-way line
6. All required yards shall be mowed and maintained as needed
B. Application for Cemetery Permit. No person shall develop, construct, or maintain a cemetery in the City of Etowah until he has secured approval from the Etowah Regional Planning Commission.
The written application, plans, schedules, and other information as required shall be submitted to the Etowah Regional Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall duly review these materials and makes its recommendation in the form of a motion.
4.15. SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
Except as hereinafter provided in this section and in Chapter 5 "Exceptions and Modifications", it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or erect any building or structure on any land within the City of Etowah until a site plan has been submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such plan shall delineate the overall scheme of development of a tract of land, including, but not limited to, grading; drainage; existing and proposed improvements; size, height, shape, and location of buildings; location and design of parking areas; pedestrian and vehicular circulation on site; and circulation for emergency apparatus.
A. Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
1. Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, accessory buildings thereto, or to the land on which they are situated or proposed
2. Farm structures such as barns, equipment sheds, and the like
3. Additions to buildings where the total gross floor area of the proposed addition does not exceed one-third (1/3) of the total gross floor area of the existing building or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is smaller
4. New buildings where the total gross floor area does not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet, provided there is no alteration of drainage flow of land or grading exceeding cut or fill of one (1) foot, the site is not in a floodplain, and the site is not in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-19
5. Improvements for off-street parking purposes when appurtenant only to existing buildings and where such improvement does not provide more than ten (10) additional parking spaces
6. Grading of open areas, either by excavation or fill, for the sole purpose of bringing the land to a grade compatible with the surrounding area provided such grading does not have an adverse effect on surrounding lands by causing ponding, flooding, or erosion
B. Development According to Site Plan. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, or alter any building or structure, or to develop, change, or improve land for which an approved site plan is required by this chapter except in accordance with the approved final site plan.
C. Permits Not to be Issued Without Approved Site Plans. No permit shall be issued to erect or alter any building or structure until a site plan has been submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Site Plan Submission. (amended 9/25/06) The owner or developer shall submit three (3) copies, or as many as may be required by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission, of his proposed site plan to the Etowah Planning Commission no later than ten (10) business days prior to the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider the site plan in light of the provisions of this chapter and approve or disapprove same as required; the plans then shall be returned to the owner or his agent with the date of such approval or disapproval noted thereon over the signature of the secretary of the Etowah Regional Planning Commission. One (1) copy of the approved plan shall be retained by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission.
E. Site Plan Content.
1. The site plan shall show the following:
a) Name of development and address
b) Name and address of owner of record and the applicant
c) Present zoning of the site and abutting property
d) Date, scale, and north point
e) Courses and distances of all property lines and of all street center lines
f) All property setback lines, easements, covenants, reservations, and rights-of-way
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-20
g) The total land area of site
h) Topography of existing ground and paved areas, and elevations of streets, alleys, utilities, sanitary and storm sewers, and buildings and structures; topography to be shown by dashed line illustrating two-foot or five-foot contours as required by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission and by spot elevation where necessary to indicate flat areas, as based on U.S.X. and G.S. datum
2. The site plan shall show the location of the following when existing:
a) Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements, and utilities
b) Buildings and structures, including signs
c) Public sewer systems with line sizes noted
d) Slopes, terraces, and retaining walls
e) Driveways, entrances, exits, parking areas, and sidewalks
f) Water mains with size noted and fire hydrants
g) Major tree and shrub areas
h) Recreational areas and swimming pools
i) Natural and artificial watercourses
j) Limits of floodplains
3. The site plan shall show the location, dimensions, size, and height of the following when proposed:
a) Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements, and utilities
b) Buildings and structures, including signs
c) Public sewer systems
d) Dumpster sites
e) Slopes, terraces, and retaining walls
f) Driveways, entrances, exits, parking areas, and sidewalks
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-21
g) Water mains with size noted and fire hydrants
h) Landscape plan (see Sec. 4.17) (Amended 05-11-98)
i) Recreational areas
j) Distance between buildings
k) Estimates of the following:
(1) Number of dwelling units
(2) Number of parking spaces
(3) Number of loading spaces
(4) Square feet of floor space
(5) Plans for collecting storm water and methods of treatment of natural and artificial watercourses
(6) Proposed grading, surface drainage, terraces, retaining wall heights, grades on paved areas, and ground floor elevations of proposed buildings and structures (proposed topography of site shall be shown by two-foot or five-foot contours as required by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission)
F. Requirements, Regulations, and Restrictions.
1. Any building or structure shall be reasonably accessible to fire, police, emergency, and service vehicles. When deemed necessary for access by the Building Inspector, emergency vehicle easements shall be provided. The access for fire, police, and emergency vehicles shall be unobstructed at all times.
2. The width, grade, location, alignment, and arrangement of streets, sidewalks, and alleys shall conform to the Etowah Transportation Plan and/or subdivision regulations as nearly as is reasonably practicable.
3. Adequate water mains and fire hydrants shall be provided in accessible places in accordance with sound firefighting and fire prevention acceptable to the Etowah Building Inspector.
4. Adequate provision shall be made for the collection and disposition of all on-site and off-site storm water and natural surface water. Natural drainage ways shall be
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-22
used when it is reasonably practicable to do so, and improvements shall be made to said ways in accordance with good engineering practices.
5. Adequate provision shall be made to control the slippage, shifting, erosion, accretion, and subsidence of soil.
6. Adequate provision shall be made for the collection and disposition of all on- and off-site sanitary sewage.
G. Appeals. If an applicant determines that his site plan has been unjustly disapproved or that the Etowah Regional Planning Commission has made requests for conformity to standards other than those set forth in this Ordinance, he may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission to the Etowah Board of Zoning Appeals.
4.16. RESIDENTIAL TOWNHOUSE AND PATIO HOME (RT-PH) REGULATIONS.
A. Purpose. In certain of Etowah's zoning districts, fee-simple townhouses and patio homes are allowed to increase the variety of available housing choices. Within these districts townhouse units and patio homes can be developed and sold as individually-owned lots in fee-simple to those who desire this type of low-maintenance home, provided the developer follows the specific regulations established in this section for "zero lot line" townhouse units or patio homes.
B. Definitions.
1. Patio Homes: A patio home for the purposes of the Etowah Zoning Ordinance shall be defined as a single-family residential dwelling of one (1) or more floors, which does not have any common walls shared with an adjacent unit or units, but which is located to one side of a less than standard width lot. That is, these homes have a "zero foot" setback on one side to maximize the amount of usable outdoor lot area on the other side for a patio, landscaped garden, or other outdoor living area.
2. Residential Townhouses: A single-family residential dwelling of one (1) or more floors on a lot by itself and having or appearing to have a common wall with an adjacent similar unit or units.
C. Regulations for TOWNHOUSES. All townhouse complexes shall incorporate the following features which have proved to provide the most attractive developments:
1. They shall contain between three (3) and seven (7) units in each building
2. Each townhouse shall have an architectural character that is individual yet compatible with its neighbors
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-23
3. The front facades shall be offset horizontally and the roof lines shall be offset vertically from one another to avoid the appearance of an apartment building
4. One-story units, when used, shall be placed on the end of a building
Since a townhouse complex involves common walls, unlike the patio home, some separate requirements are necessary to each type of development. (Note: The regulations in Section 4.16.E also apply to townhouses.)
5. Subdivision Plat Approval Procedure for TOWNHOUSE Construction. Since it is intended that the land in a townhouse development be used for owner-occupied townhouses, each townhouse shall occupy a separate subdivision lot. Since the townhouses are joined or appear to be joined, they shall be built as entire units.
Therefore, to prevent the sale of individual unbuilt lots, no individual lots can be recorded until the following subdivision and development process shall have been followed by the developer:
a) Prepare a site plan and a preliminary major subdivision plat for the proposed townhouse development (major lots are those which shall each contain a row of several townhouses)
b) Present the site plan and the preliminary subdivision plat to the Etowah Regional Planning Commission and obtain approval of both
c) Proceed to construct the required streets, et cetera, and the building units according to these approved plans after obtaining needed building permits (this may be done for the entire development or may be done in two or more phases)
d) Present final plat of the built-up phases to city Building Inspector for inspection and verification and then to the Etowah Regional Planning Commission for final subdivision approval (the final plat shall show the individual lot lines exactly where the side walls of the individual units were built)
e) If all the final subdivision requirements of the Etowah Regional Subdivision Regulations have been met or adequate bonds posted, the Planning Commission shall grant final subdivision approval for the phases that have been constructed with townhouses
f) The developer records this final plat and can then sell these townhouse units
6. Area and Dimensional Requirements for Townhouses. All townhouses within Etowah shall conform to the following measurements:
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-24
a) Minimum Floor Area (Amended 09-09-96)
One-Story Two-Story
1st Floor Min Total
780 sq. ft. 600 sq. ft. 960 sq. ft.
b) Minimum Lot Width and (Amended 09-09-96)
Public Street Frontage ....................... 26 ft.
c) Minimum Lot Area ...................... 2,340 ft.
(Amended 09-09-96)
d) Minimum Lot Depth ...................... 90 feet
(Provided front and back setbacks
and minimum lot areas are met.)
e) Minimum Building Line Setbacks
Front .................................................. 30 ft.
(from interior1 street right-of-way)
Front .................................................. 35 ft.
(from exterior2 street right-of-way)
Side .................................................. None
(except for end units which shall have a
15 foot side yard)
Rear ................................................... 25 ft.
f) Minimum Separation Between Buildings
Containing Groups of Townhouses.
End-to-end ........................................ 30 ft.
End-to-front....................................... 40 ft.
Back-to-end ....................................... 40 ft.
Back-to-back ..................................... 50 ft.
Front-to-front .................................... 60 ft.
Front-to-back..................................... 60 ft.
D. Regulations for PATIO HOMES. (Note: The regulations in Section 4.16.E. also apply to patio homes.)
1 An interior street is a new street entirely within the townhouse development.
2 An exterior street is an existing or new street which borders one side of the townhouse development
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-25
1. Subdivision Plat Approval Procedure for Patio Home Construction. To ensure that each building is built within the proper area of its lot, these regulations shall be followed:
a) Prepare a site plan and a preliminary subdivision plat for the proposed patio home development. The site plan, among other requirements, must indicate with a separate line the portion of each lot on which the patio houses must be built and which lot line will have a zero-foot setback.
b) After approval of the site plan, the normal subdivision review process for preliminary and final plats must be followed. The final plat will also show the buildable lot area for each lot, so that the Building Inspector will know if a future house plan for one of these lots complies with the intent of the approved site plan.
2. Area and Dimensional Requirements for Patio Homes. All patio homes within Etowah shall conform to the following measurements:
a) Minimum Lot Width at Building Line.
R-1 60 ft.
R-2 50 ft.
R-3 50 ft.
b) Minimum Lot Area.
R-1................................................ 6,000 ft.
R-2................................................ 5,000 ft.
R-3................................................ 5,000 ft.
c) Minimum Public Street Frontage ...... 40 ft.
d) Minimum Lot Depth ......................... 90 ft.
(Provided front and back setbacks and
lot area requirements are met)
e) Minimum Building Line Setbacks.
Front .................................................. 30 ft.
(from interior street right-of-way)
Front .................................................. 35 ft.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-26
(from exterior street right-of-way)
Side ............................... None on one side
& 20 feet on other side
(Except where a lot is on the edge of the Patio Home Development (e.g., abuts a conventional residential area, or a side street in which case either Section 4.16.E.1 or 4.16.E.2 below shall apply.)
Rear ................................................... 20 ft.
(from another patio home lot)
Rear ................................................... 30 ft.
(from all other types of residential development
and from non-residential districts)
f) Minimum Separation Between
Patio Homes ...................................... 20 ft.
(between any part of any two buildings, except for chimneys and overhangs which shall not exceed three (3) feet).
E. Regulations Applying to Both Townhouses and Patio Homes.
1. Minimum Building Setbacks. Minimum building setbacks for side yard adjacent to side street on corner lots shall be met as specified in Chapter 3 according to the district in which the development is located.
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback from Edge of RT-PH Development. No building shall be located less than twenty (20) feet from any boundary of the RT-PH development. (Larger front and rear setbacks have already been specified.)
3. Site Plan Approval Required. The site plan referred to in Section 4.16.C.5.a) and Section 4.16.D.1.a) for the RT-PH development shall be prepared in accordance with the site plan regulations of this Ordinance (Section 4.15.).
4. Required Utilities. The RT-PH development shall be provided with adequate public water and sewerage systems.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-27
5. Street Construction. All proposed streets shall be built in accordance with the requirements of the Etowah Regional Subdivision Regulations.
6. Required Off-Street Parking. Two (2) spaces, nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet in size, shall be provided for each dwelling unit. These spaces shall be located entirely upon the lot and shall be directly accessible from the public street right-of-way (a garage may count for one (1) space). To provide a guest parking, the provision in Section 4.09, item 7.c. shall be met.
Townhouses which are built facing existing public streets which are not cul-de-sacs shall have their parking provided in the rear of the fee-simple lots taking access from a new public alley to be designed and constructed by the developer. The alley or access way shall have an eighteen (18) foot minimum pavement width and a thirty (30) foot minimum right-of-way width.
7. Reconstruction. In the event that one (1) or more townhouse units are destroyed by fire or other cause, no structure or structures shall be placed on each vacant lot except another townhouse which must be built according to the original intent of these RT-PH regulations. If one (1) or more zero-lot line homes are destroyed, no structure shall be placed on each vacant lot except another zero-lot line house also built according to the original intent of these RT-PH regulations.
4.17. LANDSCAPE PLAN. (Amended 10/27/03)
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to preserve and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public; to facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community; to conserve properties and their values; and to preserve the character of an area by preventing the harmful effects of prejudicial land uses. More specifically, this section is intended to require the landscaping of large scale development and parking lots in order to reduce the harmful effects of wind and air turbulence, heat and noise, the glare of motor vehicle and other lights, the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and soil erosion, while providing shade and enhancing the appearance of large scale development and parking lots.
B. Applicability.
1. A Landscape Plan complying with the minimum standards set forth in this section shall be required for all new development projects requiring a site plan.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-28
2. A minimum of the lot area shall be landscaped to enhance site appearance. This is explicated in the Landscape Coverage chart below. Included in this coverage, there shall be maintained a landscaped strip not less than ten (10) feet wide along the street(s) right-of-way line, exclusive of business driveways and walkways.
Minimum Landscape Coverage by Land Use
Zoning District
Landscape Coverage
Heavy Industrial (I-2)
20%
Light Industrial (I-1)
15%
Highway Business (C-2)
10%
Medical (MD)
10%
Residential: High Density (R-3)
10%
(Section Amended 9-28-2015 - Ord. #774)
3. A Landscape Plan is required for site plan approval and issuance of a building permit; provided the planning commission may give provisional approval of a site plan pending approval of a separate Landscape Plan. The Landscape Plan must be approved and the landscaping must be installed completely prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the building inspector.
C. Landscape Plan.
1. The Landscape Plan may be included on the site plan or as a separate drawing, labeled “Landscape Plan.”.
2. All existing and proposed landscape materials shall be labeled as to size, quantity and name on the Landscape Plan.
3. Landscaping shall be integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include trees, shrubs, ground cover, and use of building and paving materials in a manner that respects the natural topographic features and natural resources of the site.
4. All existing trees 8 inches in diameter (caliper) and greater shall be denoted on the Site Plan or Landscaping Plan. Trees to be removed shall be clearly labeled. The developer shall make an effort to preserve significant trees of 8 inches diameter or greater. Conservation of trees shall be grounds for a request for a variance. Credit
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-29
shall be given for trees preserved during the development and construction process. Trees marked for preservation which are damaged or destroyed during construction, or that die within the 24 months from issuance of the certificate of occupancy, shall be replaced with an equivalent caliper of trees.
5. Trees shall not be planted within 5 feet of underground utilities. Canopy trees, i.e. trees which reach a height of 30 feet or more, shall not be planted within 10 feet of the alignment of overhead utility lines. Trees shall not be planted within 10 feet of fire hydrants, utility poles and street lights.
6. Recommended Tree List
Ash Hemlock Maple
Beech Holly Oak
Crape Myrtle Hornbeam Pine
Flowering Crabapple Leyland Cypress Redbud
Ginkgo (male only) Linden Spruce
Goldenrain Tree Locust (imp. varieties) Sweetgum
Magnolia Tulip Poplar
Undesirable Tree List: not to be allowed as new plantings but existing trees in good condition may be used in the Landscape Plan.
Black Locust Siberian Elm
Black Walnut Silver Maple
Cottonwood Weeping Willow
Osage Orange White Birch
Poplar (Lombardy)
D. Landscaping Regulations.
1. Minimum Requirement
a) Each acre of landscape surface area (rounded to the nearest whole number) in the residential, C-2 highway commercial and industrial zones, except as provided for section c) below not presently forested shall be landscaped with not less than 12 trees of 2-inch minimum diameter (caliper) and 25 shrubs not less than 18 inches high. Credit shall be given toward required trees for each tree 2- inch caliper or larger preserved during construction. Credit is based on the diameter of the tree(s) preserved against the minimum number of trees required, e.g. preservation of one 6- inch tree counts as 3 new 2-inch trees. (Added 10/27/03)
b) (added 10/27/03) The planning commission may waive the landscaping requirement in the C-1, Central Business District, for zero-lot line structures.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-30
c) (added 10/27/03) The minimum requirement for a landscape plan in a recognized industrial park in the I-1 or I-2 districts shall be a minimum of ten (10) percent of the area. Said area to be landscaped shall include only: the immediate vicinity of an administrative office(s), parking lot(s), 20 feet on either side of the entrance drive pavement, and areas of high visibility from a major public street. The minimum landscaping requirement for industrial districts is 6 trees and 12 shrubs per acre for the above listed areas. Provided however, this minimum is in addition to any buffer strip between said industry and an adjoining residential district, as provided in sections 3.04.7.D and 3.04.8.E. Credit for existing vegetation shall be given as provided in section above.
2. The landscape strip referred to in section B. 2. above shall be landscape with trees and shrubs. There shall be at least one tree for every 30 linear feet or portion thereof of street frontage however, this shall not be construed as requiring the planting of trees on thirty (30) foot centers. The preferred trees for landscape strips are canopy or shade trees and evergreen trees. However, where utilities are present 1½ inch caliper understory trees, with heights at maturity of 30 feet or less, may be used.
3. Parking lots shall be provided with landscape islands at the ends of all rows of
parking and intervals of about every 15 parking spaces. Parking islands shall contain trees or shrubs and be covered with 2 to 3 inches of shredded bark, mulch or turf. Rock or pavement shall not be acceptable. Parking islands shall have a minimum of 18 inches of top soil and have a minimum interior width of 5 feet. Provided, however, that parking lots for employees of an industry or manufacturing plant in the I-1 and I-2 districts, which are located more than 150 feet from a public road shall be exempt from this requirement. (Amended
05-22-00)
4. Minimum plant sizes shall be:
a) Deciduous canopy trees (grow to a height of 30 feet or more) shall be a minimum of 2 inches in diameter (caliper).
b) Understory trees (grow to a height of 30 feet or less) shall be a minimum of 1½ inches in diameter
c) Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of 5 feet in height.
d) Shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height.
5. All landscaping materials shall be installed in a sound, workman like manner and according to professionally accepted good planting procedures. Any landscape material which fails to meet the minimum requirements at the time of installation shall be removed and replaced with acceptable materials. The persons in charge of or in control of the property whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall be responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all landscaping materials, and shall keep them in proper, neat and orderly appearance, from refuse and debris, at all times. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-31
replaced within one (1) year, or by the next planting period, whichever comes first. Other defective landscape material shall be replaced or repaired within three (3) months.
E. Landscaped Parking (Added 9-28-2015 – Ord. #774)
1. Design Criteria
a) No parking space can be more than seventy-five (75) feet from a tree.
b) A landscaped island or peninsula shall border ends of interior parking bays that contain a minimum of ten (10) contiguous parking spaces.
c) A landscaped peninsula shall border ends of perimeter bays.
d) Side and front-facing truck delivery stalls and loading bays shall be screened from the public right-of-way.
2. Dimensions/Planting Criteria
a) Landscaped islands and peninsulas used to meet the landscaping requirements shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet and a minimum landscaped area of two hundred (200) square feet.
b) Landscaped islands and peninsulas used to meet the landscaping requirements shall be planted with at least one (1) tree.
c) Trees referred to in this shall have a minimum expected maturity height of thirty-five (35) feet and a minimum canopy spread of twenty (20) feet.
d) All landscaped islands and peninsulas shall be bordered by a curb or wheel stop.
F. Canal Buffer Requirements Added 9-28-2015 – Ord. #774)
1. For any new development abutting a canal, a buffer of 3 feet is required around the canal located within the municipality.
a) The buffer shall begin at the edge of the stream bed.
b) The buffer zone will be noted on all site plans.
c) All buffer zones must remain undeveloped. This includes, but is not limited to:
i. Clearing and grading; however, mowing and keeping the area clean is required
ii. Construction of buildings or other structures
4.18. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLEA MARKETS. (Added 04-24-00)
A. Purpose and Intent. Because of the nature and character of their operation, flea markets may have a detrimental effect upon surrounding properties and traffic safety. Flea markets may create problems of noise, dust, traffic, safety and health hazards. The appearance and activities may adversely affect neighboring property and cause safety problems for pedestrians, and impede automotive traffic. This section is intended to establish standards and regulate this activity to reduce the harmful effects of noise, safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists, interference with neighboring businesses, and maintain the traffic flow efficiency of the street.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-32
B. General.
1. Size:
a) Large Flea Market: Entirely open air or partly under roof, may include open pavilions; one acre or more in size.
b) Small Flea Market: Open air, less than one acre in size and with no pavilions.
c) Under Roof Flea Market: Any flea market operated in whole or in part in a walled structure.
2. Required Plans. Each applicant shall submit with their zoning application
a plan as shown below:
a) Large Flea Market: A site plan as required under Section 4.15 of this ordinance, including required buffer areas, the proposed layout of booth spaces and the location of proposed food service areas, rest rooms and/or portable toilets, and ground cover.
b) Small Flea Market: A sketch plan with developer’s name, and address, zoning, distances and area of the site, required buffer areas, existing buildings pavement, driveways, and drainage; and proposed booth spaces, restrooms, food service, if any, off-street parking, ground cover, and trash collection.
c) Under Roof Flea Market: As required for a building permit and a site plan if required under Section 4.15. If no site plan is required,
then a sketch plan showing the building, off-street parking, driveways and pedestrian ways.
3. The ground surface in every flea market shall be graded, covered, and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner, without water pockets or bogs.
C. Booths.
1. Flea market booths shall be located on individual stands.
2. Each booth shall contain not more than 450 square feet of area. (Amended 09-25-00)
3. At least five (5) feet or more of open space shall separate flea market booths from each other and from other buildings.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-33
D. Access and Parking.
1. Access to and parking at flea markets shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the driveways and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. Access control will comply with the requirements of Section 4.01.
2. Off-street parking shall be provided by the flea market. There shall be a minimum of five (5) parking spaces, as defined in Section 4.03, per one (1) thousand square feet of gross sales area.
E. Safety, Sanitation and Refuse.
1. Restrooms. Large flea markets and under roof flea markets shall have a minimum of one (1) central restroom facility located on the premises, with separate facilities for men and women. The Planning Commission may require more than one restroom and/or portable facilities. Small flea markets shall have a minimum of two (2) portable toilets on site while in operation.
2. An accessible, adequate, and safe supply of potable water shall be provided in large flea markets, under roof flea markets and any flea market where there is food service.
3. Any water service, sewer service, electrical service, food service heating and cooking installations, and structures shall be permitted and comply with appropriate city and state health and safety codes.
4. Flea markets shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris, which may provide rodent harborage, or breeding of flies, mosquitoes and other pests. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in flea markets shall not be allowed to create health hazards and rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. The flea market operator shall provide refuse containers for public use when in operation and shall provide a bulk waste container(s) suitable for the size and activity of the market. Refuse containers shall be emptied at the close of each business day; bulk waste containers shall be emptied and/or removed by the close of business the next day after the market closes, or sooner if necessary.
F. Operation.
1. The person to whom the zoning permit is issued shall operate a flea market in compliance with this section and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the market, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean, sanitary condition.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-34
2. The flea market management shall notify market tenants of all applicable provisions of this section, and inform them of their duties and responsibilities.
3. Flea market management shall supervise the placement of each booth and ensure its stability.
4. Hours of operation shall be limited to: (Amended 09-25-00)
Weekdays and Saturdays: 7:00 a.m. to one-half hour before sunset
Sundays: 11:00 a.m. to one-half hour before sunset
Markets shall not operate on: Thanksgiving and Christmas days.
5. Where an open-air flea market is not open for business for more than 24 hours, booths and tables shall be removed.
4.19 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURES. (Amended 5/28/02)
A. The purpose of these regulations is to (1) protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of telecommunications structures; (2) encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas; (3) minimize the total number of towers in the City by encouraging the joint use of telecommunications structures; (4) minimize visual pollution through careful design, siting, screening and camouflaging of towers; and (5) to minimize potential damage to adjacent properties
B. Use on Review. Construction and operation of a telecommunications structure in any zoning district shall be considered a “use on review” by the planning commission. The commission shall ensure compliance with the standards of this section prior to granting a special use permit allowing such a structure. Factors to be considered in granting the permit include, but are not limited to: (1) height of the proposed structure, (2) proximity to residential structures, (3) nature of land uses, topography, and foliage on adjacent and nearby properties, (4) design of the tower and especially design characteristics reducing visual obtrusiveness, (5) proposed ingress and egress, and (6) availability of shared use, co-location or alternative technologies not requiring use of towers.
C. Shared Use. The applicant shall submit documentation that the applicant has attempted to obtain shared use of an existing or planned telecommunications structure(s) in the City or McMinn County and that such shared use has been denied. Shared use is not precluded simply because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged or because of reasonable costs necessary to adapt the existing and proposed telecommunications structure(s) for shared use. The planning commission may consider expert opinion on the reasonableness of fees and modifications costs. Shared costs exceeding the cost of new tower development shall be presumed to be unreasonable. Shared use of existing telecommunications
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-35
structures may be technically impractical where supported by technical documentation from a licensed professional independent of the applicant. The applicant shall provide the planning commission a list of all contacted owner’s of telecommunications structures, the date of such contact, the form and content of said contact and the results of said contacts.
D. Buffering and Landscaping. Ground structures and buildings shall have special care to minimize the effects on adjacent areas. All ground structures shall be buffered with a minimum of an eight-(8) foot wide landscaped strip around the perimeter of the security fencing. The buffer strip shall consist of a combination of trees, shrubs, vines or other ground covers that blends and enhances the appearance of the ground structures within the buffered area. The buffer shall be installed for permanent year-round protection of adjacent property by visually shielding internal structures from adjoining property, to a height of eight (8) feet or the height of the proposed accessory structures, whichever is greater. Shrubs shall also be planted and maintained around any guy anchor for visual screening purposes. The landscaping provisions of this section may be varied or reduced by the planning commission if:
1. The proposed plan provides for unique and innovative landscaping treatment or physical features, that meet the intent and purpose of this section; or
2. The location is in a well-forested area or shielded by topography from adjoining properties and public streets; or
3. Where two or three sides of the site are forested or shielded as provided above, the planning commission may approve an opaque fence, not less than 8 feet high in lieu of landscaping, on the side or sides not so forested or shielded.
E. Co-location. The co-location of towers and antennas shall be permitted only on existing and proposed telecommunications structures or on power line structures and water towers over thirty-five (35) feet in height. Where antennas or telecommunications structures are to be co-located on an existing powerline structure or water tower, the maximum height shall not exceed the height of said structure plus twenty (20) feet.
F. Aesthetics. Towers shall have either a galvanized steel finish, be of stainless steel, or, subject to any Federal Aviation Administration regulations, be painted a neutral color so as reduce obtrusiveness. The tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will breakup the outline of the structure and blend the structure(s) into the setting, to make it as visually unobtrusive as possible
G. Fee. A non-refundable fee of six hundred dollars ($600) shall accompany any application for a new telecommunications structure.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-36
H. Security. Towers and associated ground structures shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than eight (8) feet in height, equipped with an appropriate anti- climbing device(s), provided however, the planning commission may modify this requirement as it deems appropriate. Climb-proof shields may be substituted for a security fence around guy anchors.
I. Separation Distance. A distance of not less than fifty (50) feet shall separate a telecommunications structure from another communications structure.
J. Setbacks. All towers and accessory structures shall be setback from the property lines a distance as required by the zoning resolution for that district or a distance equal to twenty (20) percent of the tower height, between the base of the telecommunications structure and the property line, whichever is greater. Provided however, that when a tower is constructed adjacent to any residence(s), a place of public assembly, or a public road, the minimum distance between the tower and said residence, structure or road shall be two hundred twenty-five (225) feet. Guy anchors shall meet the setback requirements of the district in which the tower is located.
K. Height. No tower shall exceed a height of three hundred (300) feet.
L. Site Plan. The applicant shall submit with an application for a special use permit, a site plan containing the information required in Section 4.15 above AND, except for a structure co-located on an existing tower, power line or water tower; the following additional data:
1. Be drawn by a surveyor or licensed professional engineer to a scale of 1-inch = 100 feet or larger.
2. A letter from a professional engineer certifying the height of the tower and the structure meets all the standards prescribed in latest edition of the Southern Standard Building Code, the Electronic Industries Association, and any applicable standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Federal Communication Commission; and describing the tower’s capacity including the number and type of antennas that can be accommodated.
3. A letter of intent from the owner, binding successive owners, allowing for the shared use of the tower.
4. Setbacks, distance to the nearest residence(s), and distance to the nearest telecommunications structure and the owner of said tower.
5. Landscaping and security plan.
6. Nature of uses on adjacent properties, topography and surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-37
7. Show type and height of the proposed tower with aesthetic design factors.
8. The location and design of driveways and/or access easements to the facility from a public street.
9. A signed and dated statement showing who has legal responsibility for dismantling and removing this tower when it is no longer in use as shown in Section N below. A copy of the approved site plan with this statement shall be recorded in the office of the Registrar of McMinn County.
10. Any other data required by this section.
11. Exceptions. The provisions of this part shall not apply to antennas or towers under 40-feet in height, or antennas or towers for use by state and local government and cooperative utility districts located by public buildings or co-located on public buildings or water towers. Pre-existing towers shall be allowed continue their use as they presently exist, however, new construction or expansion of a pre-existing tele-communications structure shall comply with this ordinance.
M. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on a telecommunications structure.
N. Removal of Obsolete Towers
1. A cellular tower and related equipment shall be removed when the facility has not been in service for a continuous period of twelve (12 ) months; or
2. If the owner decides to discontinue service, the owner shall provide the City of Etowah with a copy of the notice of intent to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to cease operations. They shall be given ninety (90) days from the date that operations cease to remove the obsolete tower and accessory structure(s). Provided that if another operator submits a request for a telecommunications structure during this time period, an extension for a reasonable period of time may be granted to negotiate the sale of said tower to a new operator.
O. Severability. The various parts, sections and clauses of this part are hereby declared to be severable. If a court of competent jurisdiction adjudges any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-38
4.20. PARKING, STORAGE, AND USE OF VEHICLES, TRUCKS, HEAVY EQUIPMENT IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. (Added 8/25/08 – Ord. #684)
The following provisions shall apply for the parking, storage, and use of vehicles, trucks, heavy equipment, and major recreational equipment in residential districts:
A. In any residential district, no inoperable vehicle and no vehicle without current license plates shall be parked or stored unless in a completely enclosed building or covered completely non-visible from a city street.
B. In any residential district, no major recreational equipment (including boats, campers, travel trailers, partial travel units, and the like, and equipment use for transporting such) shall be parked or stored in any front yard or city street for periods not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours during loading and unloading.
C. No recreational equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use.
D. In any residential district, no truck of a rated capacity of greater than one (1) ton, no parcel truck or other truck painted with any sign, and no heavy equipment, construction equipment or any other equipment not normally associated with residential uses shall be stored or parked on any lot or in the public right-of-way adjacent to any lot overnight nor stored or parked while loading or unloading for periods in excess of seven days except in an enclosed building.
4.21. STANDARDS FOR FENCES AND RETAINING WALLS.
(Amended 5/21/18 – Ord. #816)
For the purposes of this Ordinance, this section shall apply to all properties in all zoning districts of the City of Etowah, Tennessee. The purpose of these regulations is to allow for the construction of fences and retaining walls within 4 inches of property lines of private property while maintaining vision clearance of the rights of way lines of public streets.
1. For any fence or retaining wall that is to be constructed along property lines, crosses multiple parcels of property, and/or is located outside of the building setbacks, approval of the Etowah Building Official shall be required. A permit shall be obtained from the City, and the proposed design shall be in compliance with the standards herein.
2. A survey, prepared by a professional land surveyor, shall be submitted along with the Fence and Retaining Wall Permit Application. The surveyor will find or install iron pins so that exact location of the property lines as well as the proposed location of the fence and/or retaining wall can be identified. A survey may not be required if all property owners adjoining the property line where the fence and/or retaining wall is to be constructed agree to sign a mutual written agreement. If a survey is not required, then all affected property owners shall also be required to sign the permit application.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-39
3. Fences and retaining walls may be no less than 4 inches from the property lines unless the adjoining property owner agrees to allow the fence or retaining wall to be built up to the property line.
4. The “good side” or the “attractive side” of the fence and/or retaining wall shall face the neighboring properties.
5. Front yard fences, located between the front portion of an enclosed primary structure that is heated/cooled and the right-of-way, shall be four (4) feet or under and translucent, i.e. chain link, picket, etc., so as not to obstruct the vision clearance of the right-of-way lines of public streets.
4.22. SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES (MINI-WAREHOUSES)
(Added 8/25/08 – Ord. #684)
The following special standards shall apply to all self-service storage facilities:
A. Parking shall be provided in parking/driving lanes adjacent to the storage buildings. These lanes shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide when storage cubicles open onto one side of the lane only and at least twenty-four (24) feet wide when cubicles open onto both sides of the lane. Said lanes shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete.
B. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces plus one (1) additional space for every two-hundred (200) storage cubicles or a fraction thereof shall be located adjacent to the facility’s office.
C. No self-service storage facility shall exceed eighteen (18) feet in height.
D. Except for the sale or auction of items foreclosed upon by the owner of the facility, the sale or auction of any item is specifically prohibited.
E. The storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals is specifically prohibited and all rental contracts shall include clauses prohibiting such storage.
F. The servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawnmowers or any similar equipment is specifically prohibited.
G. Any proposed outdoor storage areas shall be shown on a site plan for the facility. Outside storage of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and lawnmowers shall be governed by the specific requirements of the zone in which the facility is located. In no case shall parking areas or driveways be used for storage.
H. All outdoor lights shall be shielded to direct light and glare only onto the self-service storage premises and may be of sufficient intensity to discourage vandalism and theft. Said lighting and glare shall be deflected, shaded, and focused away from all adjoining property.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 4-40
I. A minimum six (6) foot high opaque fence shall be provided around the perimeter of the facility and set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any side or rear property line.
4.22.1 MOBILE STORAGE STRUCTURES REQUIREMENTS
(Added 8/25/08 – Ord. #684)
A. In residential zoning districts, these structures should be either located in the driveway or at the rear of the residence.
B. In commercial zoning districts, these structures should be located in a designated loading/unloading area or in an area meeting setbacks for the zoning district.
C. In industrial zoning districts, these structures should be located in a designated loading/unloading area or in an area meeting setbacks for the zoning district.
D. Permit required at no charge.
E. Time of permit shall be 90 days and can be renewed for an additional 90 days upon review by the Building Inspector or his/her designee.
F. Mobile Storage Structures shall be removed within 90 days after construction activity ceases or a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Building Inspector.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 5-1
CHAPTER 5
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
SECTION
5.01. SCOPE
5.02. NON-CONFORMING USES
5.03. EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
5.04. LOTS OF RECORD
5.05. EXCEPTIONS TO FRONT SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
5.06. ABSOLUTE MINIMUM LOT SIZE
5.01. SCOPE.
Chapter 5 of this Ordinance is devoted to providing for the necessary exceptions and modifications to the specific zoning district provisions and the supplementary provisions for in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4.
5.02. NON-CONFORMING USES.
Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 13-7-208, Subsection (b), (c), (d), and (e) deal with non-conforming industrial, commercial, and business uses as follows:
In the event that a zoning change occurs in any land where such land area was not previously covered by any zoning restrictions of any governmental agency of this state or its political subdivisions, or where such land area is covered by zoning restrictions of a governmental agency of this state or its political subdivisions and such zoning restrictions differ from zoning restrictions imposed after the zoning change, then any industrial, commercial, or business establishment in operation, permitted to operate under zoning regulations or exceptions thereto prior to the zoning change shall be allowed to continue in operation and be permitted provided that no change in the use of the land is undertaken by such industry or business.
Industrial, commercial, or other business establishments in operation and permitted to operate under zoning regulations or exceptions thereto in effect immediately preceding a change in zoning shall be allowed to expand operations and construct additional facilities which involve an actual continuance and expansion of the activities of the industry or business which were permitted and being conducted prior to the change in zoning, provided that there is a reasonable amount of space for such expansion on the property owned by such industry or business situated within the area which is affected by the change in zoning, so as to avoid nuisances to adjoining landowners. No building permit or like permission for construction or landscaping shall be denied to an industry or business seeking to expand and continue activities conducted by that industry or business which were permitted prior to the change in zoning, provided that there is a reasonable amount of space for such expansion on the property owned by such industry or business situated within the area which is affected by the change in zoning, so as to avoid nuisances to adjoining landowners.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 5-2
Industrial, commercial, or other business establishments in operation and permitted to operate under zoning regulations or exceptions thereto immediately preceding a change in zoning shall be allowed to destroy present facilities and reconstruct new facilities necessary to the conduct of such industry or business subsequent to the zoning change, provided that no destruction and rebuilding shall occur which shall act to change the use classification of the land as classified under any zoning regulations or exceptions thereto in effect immediately prior to or subsequent to a change in the zoning of the land area on which such industry or business is located No building permit or like permission for demolition, construction or landscaping shall be denied to an industry or business seeking to destroy and reconstruct facilities necessary to the continued conduct of the activities of that industry or business where such conduct was permitted prior to a change in zoning, provided that there is a reasonable amount of space for such expansion on the property owned by such industry or business situated within the area which is affected by the change in zoning, so as to avoid nuisances to adjoining landowners.
The provisions of the preceding three (3) paragraphs shall apply only to land owned and in use by such affected business, and shall not operate to permit expansion of an existing industry or business through the acquisition of additional land.
Provided however, that where the operation of a non-conforming industrial, commercial, or other business establishment in a district other than that zoned for industrial or commercial use, is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months the building and land shall lose its status as a non-conforming use and shall not be entitled to any of the special exceptions shown above. Any new use must conform to the requirements for the district in which the lot is located. (Added 06-20-00)
An existing non-conforming use which is NOT an industrial, commercial, or business use shall meet these criteria:
1. An existing non-conforming use of a building may be changed to a conforming use or to another non-conforming use of the same or higher classification providing, however, that establishment of another non-conforming use of the same or higher classification shall be subject to the written approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals may require in order to protect the area
2. A non-conforming use of land shall be restricted to the area occupied by such use as of the effective date of this Ordinance; A non-conforming use of a building or buildings shall not be enlarged to either additional land or buildings after the effective date of this Ordinance
3. When a non-conforming use of any structure or land, excepting non-conforming mobile home or mobile home parks, has been discontinued for a period of six (6) months, it shall not be re-established or changed to any use not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance; immediately upon the removal of a non-conforming mobile home or mobile home park, the non-conformity of such structure or use of land shall lapse
4. Any non-conforming building or non-conforming use which is damaged by fire, flood, wind, or other act of God or man may be reconstructed and used as before if it be done
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 5-3
within six (6) months of such damage, unless damaged to extent of more than sixty (60) percent of its assessed value immediately prior to damage in which case any repair, reconstruction, or future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance
5. A non-conforming building or buildings housing a non-conforming use shall not be structurally altered except in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance; this provision shall not be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repairs or alterations required for structural safety
5.03. EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, silos, grain elevators, observation towers, transmission towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers, masts, and aerials.
The height limitations of this Ordinance may be exceeded for other structures provided the following conditions are met:
1. The developer must present, at the time he applies for a building permit, a copy of the building plans which have been approved by the Building Inspector. These plans must show all of the following:
a) A wet standpipe riser with one and a half (1 1/2) inch firehose connections
b) A wet automatic sprinkler protection system for the entire building
c) Enclosed exit stairways
d) Smoke and heat detection units
e) Any other fire protection and prevention requirements which the Building Inspector feels are necessary for the building
2. The design and installation of these fire protection measures must be in conformance with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards.
3. Before the building can be occupied, the developer must secure a statement from the Building Inspector that the fire protection systems have been installed according to the plans and that the systems are functioning properly.
5.04. LOTS OF RECORD.
The following provisions shall apply to all existing lots of record:
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 5-4
1. Where the owner of a lot consisting of one (1) or more adjacent lots of official record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the yard or other requirements of this Ordinance, an application may be submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance from the terms of this Ordinance. Such lot may be used as a building site provided, however, that the yard and other requirements of the district are complied with as closely as is possible in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
2. No lot which is now or hereafter built upon shall be so reduced in area that the yards and open space will be smaller than prescribed by this Ordinance, and no yard, court, or open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions hereof, shall again be considered as a yard, court, or other open space for another building.
3. Where two (2) or more lots of record with a continuous frontage are under the same ownership, or where a substandard lot of record has continuous frontage with a larger tract under the same ownership, such lots shall be combined to form one (1) or more building sites meeting the minimum requirements of the district in which they are located.
5.05. EXCEPTIONS TO FRONT SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
The front setback requirements of this Ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average depth of existing setbacks on the developed lots located within one hundred (100) feet on each side of such lot is less than the minimum required front yard depth.
5.06. ABSOLUTE MINIMUM LOT SIZE.
In no case shall the Board of Zoning Appeals permit a detached residence to be erected on a lot whose total lot area is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 6-1
CHAPTER 6
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
6.01. ADMINISTRATION OF THE ORDINANCE
6.02. THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
6.03. BUILDING PERMITS
6.04. TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
6.05. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
6.06. BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
6.07. VARIANCES
6.08. AMENDMENTS TO THE ORDINANCE
6.09. REMEDIES
6.10. INTERPRETATION
6.11. SEPARABILITY
6.12. EFFECTIVE DATE
6.01. ADMINISTRATION OF THE ORDINANCE.
Except as otherwise provided, no structure or land shall, after the effective date of this Ordinance, be used and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or moved unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the community. Where other ordinances, resolutions, or regulations heretofore adopted or which may be adopted hereafter impose greater restrictions than those specified herein, compliance with such other ordinances, resolutions, or regulations is mandatory.
6.02. THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered by the Etowah Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall administer and enforce this Ordinance and in addition he shall:
1. Issue all Building Permits
2. Issue all Certificates of Occupancy
3. Issue and renew, where applicable, all Temporary Use Permits
4. Conduct inspections as required in this Ordinance and such other inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with the various other general provisions of this Ordinance; the Building Inspector shall possess the right to enter upon any premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his authorized duties.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 6-2
The City Recorder shall keep and maintain all records, current zoning maps and amendments thereto, and collect all monies pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
6.03. BUILDING PERMITS.
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or other structure including accessory structures; to commence the moving, alteration, or repair of any structure including accessory structures; or to commence the filling of land or to cause any such work to be done with a value in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) within the corporate limits of Etowah until the Building Inspector has issued for such work a Building Permit containing a statement that the plans, specifications, and intended use of such structure in all respects conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. When the filling or excavation of land is in the Flood Hazard District, a permit shall be obtained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3, Section 3.04.11.D.
Application for a Building Permit shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector on forms provided for that purpose. It shall be unlawful for the Building Inspector to approve the plans or issue a Building Permit for any excavation or construction until such plans have been inspected and found to be in conformity with this Ordinance. To this end the application for a Building Permit for excavation, construction, moving, or alteration shall be accompanied by a plan or plat drawn to a scale and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the Building Inspector to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration is in conformance with this Ordinance:
1. The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot to be built upon
2. The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved and of buildings or other structures already on the lot
3. The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other structures
4. Location and design of off-street parking areas and off-street loading areas; and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed
If the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration as set forth in the application is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Building Inspector shall issue a Building Permit for such excavation or construction. If any application for a Building Permit is not approved, the Building Inspector shall state in writing on the application the cause for such disapproval. Issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provisions of this Ordinance and building permits shall be void after six (6) months from date of issue, unless substantial progress on the project has been made by that time.
6.04. TEMPORARY USE PERMITS.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 6-3
It shall be unlawful to commence construction or development of any use of a temporary nature until a permit has been secured from the Etowah Building Inspector as provided for in Section 4.05. of this Ordinance. Application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector on forms provided for that purpose.
6.05. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
No land or building or other structures or part thereof hereafter erected, moved, or altered in its use shall be used until the Building Inspector shall have issued a Certificate of Occupancy stating that such land, structure, or part thereof is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. Within seven (7) days after notification that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to make a final inspection thereof and to issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the building or premises or part thereof is found to conform with the provisions of this Ordinance; or, if such certificate is refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause for such refusal.
6.06. BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS (BZA).
A Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) is hereby established in accordance with Sections 13-7-205--13-7-207, Tennessee Code Annotated. The BZA shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
A. Procedure. Meetings of the BZA shall be held at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the BZA may determine. Such chairman or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the BZA shall be open to the public. The BZA shall adopt rules of procedure and shall keep records of applications and action taken thereon which shall be public records.
B. Appeals to the BZA. An appeal to the BZA may be taken by any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved, or by any governmental office, department, board, or bureau affected by any decision of the Building Inspector based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this Ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the BZA a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Building Inspector shall transmit to the BZA all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. The BZA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any person or party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney.
C. Powers of the BZA. The BZA shall have the following powers:
1. Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is avowed by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by the Building Inspector or other administrative official in the carrying out or enforcement of any provision of this Ordinance.
2. Special Exceptions. To hear and decide applications for special exceptions as specified in this Ordinance, hear requests for interpretation of the zoning map, and for decision on any special questions upon which the BZA is authorized to pass.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 6-4
3. Variances. To hear and decide applications for variances from the terms of this Ordinance.
6.07. VARIANCES.
The purpose of the variance is to modify the strict application of the specific requirements of this Ordinance in the case of exceptionally irregular, narrow, shallow, or steep lots, or other exceptional physical conditions, whereby such strict application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship which would deprive an owner of the reasonable use of his land. The variance shall be used only where necessary to overcome some obstacle which is preventing an owner from using his property under this Ordinance.
A. Application. After written denial of a permit, a property owner may make application for a variance using the standard form made available by the BZA.
B. Hearings. Upon receipt of an application and a ten dollar ($10.00) fee, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a hearing to decide whether a variance to the Ordinance provisions is, in fact, necessary to relieve unnecessary hardships which act to deprive the property owner of the reasonable use of his land. The BZA shall consider and decide all applications for variances within thirty (30) days of such hearing and in accordance with the standards set forth below.
C. Standards for Variances. In granting a variance, the BZA shall ascertain that the following criteria are met:
1. Variances shall be granted only where special circumstances or conditions, fully described in the findings of the Board, do not apply generally in the district
2. Variances shall not be granted to allow a use otherwise excluded from the particular district in which the request is made
3. For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the BZA the aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of any reasonable use of his land; mere loss in value shall not justify a variance; there must be a deprivation of beneficial use of land
4. The granting of any variance shall be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this Ordinance and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood, detrimental to the public welfare, or in conflict with the comprehensive plan for development
5. In reviewing an application for a variance, the burden of showing that the variance should be granted shall be upon the person applying therefor
6.08. AMENDMENTS TO THE ORDINANCE.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 6-5
A. General. The Etowah City Commission may, from time to time, amend this Ordinance by changing the boundaries of district or by rewriting provisions wherever it is alleged that there was an error in the original zoning ordinance or whenever the public necessity, convenience, and general welfare require such amendment.
B. Initiation of Amendment. Amendments may be initiated by the Etowah City Commission, the Planning Commission, or by citizens desiring an amendment.
C. Application for Amendment from Citizens. A request for an amendment shall be in writing and shall also be accompanied by maps, drawings, a petition signed by the owners affected by the proposed amendment, and data necessary to demonstrate that the proposed amendment is in general conformance with the general plan of the City of Etowah and that public necessity, convenience, and general welfare require the adoption of the proposed amendment. (An accurate legal description shall be prepared in time for notice of any public hearing.)
D. Review and Recommendation by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review and make recommendations to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on all proposed amendments to the Zoning Ordinance.
E. Grounds for an Amendment. The Planning Commission in its review and recommendation and the City Commission in its deliberations shall make their findings with regard to the following grounds for an amendment:
1. The amendment is in agreement with the general plan for the area
2. The amendment does not violate the legal grounds for zoning provisions
3. It has been determined that there will be no adverse effects upon adjoining property owners unless such adverse effect can be justified by the overwhelming public good or welfare
4. It has been determined that no one property owner or small group of property owners will benefit materially from the change to the detriment of the general public
5. It has been determined that conditions affecting the area have changed to a sufficient extent to warrant an amendment to the area's general plan and, consequently, the zoning map
F. Public Hearing and Notice of Hearing. A public hearing shall be held on all proposed amendments to this Ordinance. Notice of such hearing shall be in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Etowah at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. This notice shall specify the location, date and time of the hearing, the current and proposed zoning classification, and in the case of a proposed boundary change a legal description of the change.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 6-6
G. Enactment. If the amendment was disapproved by the Planning Commission, it must receive the favorable vote of a majority of the entire membership of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen in order to be enacted.
If the amendment was approved by the Planning Commission, it must only receive the favorable vote of a simple majority of the membership of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
H. Amendments Affecting the Zoning Map. Upon enactment of an amendment to the Zoning Map which is part of this Ordinance, the City Commission shall have such amendment placed upon the zoning map, noting thereon the ordinance number and effective date of such amendatory ordinance.
I. Effect of Denial of Application. Whenever an application for an amendment to the text of this Ordinance or for a change in the zoning classification of any property is denied, the application for such amendment shall not be eligible for reconsideration for one (1) year following such denial in the following cases:
1. Upon initiation by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen or Planning Commission
2. When the new application, although involving all or a portion of the same property, is for a different zoning district than that for which the original application was made, or
3. When the previous application was denied for the reason that the proposed zoning would not conform with the general plan and the general plan has subsequently been amended in a manner which will allow the proposed zoning
6.09. REMEDIES.
In case any building or other structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this Ordinance, the Building Inspector or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may seek remedy in the courts by instituting injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use; or to correct or abate such violation; or to prevent occupancy of such building, structure, or land.
6.10. INTERPRETATION.
In case of conflict between this Ordinance or any part thereof and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of the City of Etowah, the most restrictive shall, in all cases, apply.
6.11. SEPARABILITY.
Etowah Zoning Ordinance 6-7
Should any section or provisions of this Ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.
6.12. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take effect from and after the effective date of its passage and publication as required by law, the public welfare requiring it.
DATE PASSED ON FINAL READING __________________________
__________________________
Mayor, City of Etowah
Appendix
Ordinance No. 702
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE ZONING ORDINANCE
OF THE CITY OF ETOWAH, TENNESSEE
SECTION 3.01.11 FL FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT
WHEREAS, the authority granted in Tennessee Code Annotated (TCA), Section 13-7-201, allows for the zoning of territory within a municipality; and
WHEREAS, the Etowah City Commission has implemented zoning districts as provided for in TCA, Section 13-7-202; and
WHEREAS, TCA Section 13-7-204, authorizes amendments to the zoning ordinance; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with TCA, 13-7-203, subsection (A), an advertised public hearing was held prior to the adoption of this zoning ordinance amendment; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with TCA, Section 13-7-203, subsection (B), the Etowah Municipal Regional Planning Commission approved and recommended the zoning amendment herein described to the Etowah Board of Mayor and Commissioners;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Commission of the City of Etowah, Tennessee that the Etowah Zoning Ordinance be and hereby is amended as shown below:
Section 1: Deleting Ordinance 670 Municipal Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and replacing with the following as noted in Section 2.
Section 2: Amending Section 3.04.11. FL FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT by deleting the existing language in its entirety and replacing with the following language:
3.04.11 Municipal Floodplain Zoning Ordinance:
See Appendix A for Municipal Floodplain Zoning Ordinance
Section 3: Appendix A: The Municipal Floodplain Zoning Ordinance (Attached to this Ordinance)
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED THAT this ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days from and after its date of final passage by the Etowah Board of Mayor and Commissioners in the City of Etowah, Tennessee, the public welfare requiring it.
PASSED ON FIRST READING: _ ___4-26-10___
PASSED ON SECOND READING: ____4-24-10___ __
PUBLIC HEARING: ____5-24-10___ _______
____________________________
_____/s/___Joel S. Blair________
Joel S. Blair, Mayor
____________________________
_ /s/__Melissa Henderson___________
Melissa Henderson, City Recorder
Approved as to form: _________________________________
____ /s/ . Guinn___________________
Charles Guinn, City Attorney
APPENDIX A
MUNICIPAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTED FOR THE PURPOSE OF AMENDING THE CITY OF ETOWAH, TENNESSEE MUNICIPAL ZONING ORDINANCE REGULATING DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF ETOWAH, TENNESSEE, TO MINIMIZE DANGER TO LIFE AND PROPERTY DUE TO FLOODING, AND TO MAINTAIN ELIGIBILITY FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM.
ARTICLE I. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
Section A. Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the State of Tennessee has in Sections 13-7-201 through 13-7-210, Tennessee Code Annotated delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Etowah, Tennessee, Mayor and Commissioners, do ordain as follows:
Section B. Findings of Fact
1. The City of Etowah Tennessee, Mayor and its Legislative Body wishes to maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and in order to do so must meet the NFIP regulations found in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Ch. 1, Section 60.3.
2. Areas of the City of Etowah, Tennessee are subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
3. Flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities; by uses in flood hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods; or construction which is inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
Section C. Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. This Ordinance is designed to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to flooding or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights, or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community facilities, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Section D. Objectives
The objectives of this Ordinance are:
1. To protect human life, health, safety and property;
2. To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodprone areas;
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas to minimize blight in flood areas;
7. To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a floodprone area;
8. To maintain eligibility for participation in the NFIP.
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application given its stated purpose and objectives.
"Accessory Structure" means a subordinate structure to the principal structure on the same lot and, for the purpose of this Ordinance, shall conform to the following:
1. Accessory structures shall only be used for parking of vehicles and storage.
2. Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
3. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
4. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, which otherwise may result in damage to other structures.
5. Utilities and service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or otherwise protected from intrusion of floodwaters.
"Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building.
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the local enforcement officer’s interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance or a request for a variance.
"Area of Shallow Flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
"Area of Special Flood-related Erosion Hazard" is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further refined.
"Area of Special Flood Hazard" see “Special Flood Hazard Area”.
"Base Flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. This term is also referred to as the 100-year flood or the one (1)-percent annual chance flood.
"Basement" means any portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
"Building" see “Structure”.
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
"Elevated Building" means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwater, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.
"Emergency Flood Insurance Program" or "Emergency Program" means the program as implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with Section 1336 of the Act. It is intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
"Erosion" means the process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. This peril is not “per se” covered under the Program.
"Exception” means a waiver from the provisions of this Ordinance which relieves the applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order or other determination made or issued pursuant to this Ordinance.
"Existing Construction" means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the initial floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community’s participation in the NFIP.
"Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community’s participation in the NFIP.
"Existing Structures" see "Existing Construction".
"Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
"Flood" or "Flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
"Flood Elevation Determination" means a determination by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.
"Flood Elevation Study” means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion hazards.
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A.
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard or the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
"Flood Insurance Study" is the official report provided by FEMA, evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevation of the base flood.
"Floodplain" or "Floodprone Area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
"Floodplain Management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
"Flood Protection System” means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities and structures and their contents.
"Flood-related Erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
"Flood-related Erosion Area" or "Flood-related Erosion Prone Area" means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.
"Flood-related Erosion Area Management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and floodplain management regulations.
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
"Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
"Functionally Dependent Use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
"Highest Adjacent Grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
"Historic Structure" means any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
3. Individually listed on the Tennessee inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
4. Individually listed on the City of Etowah, Tennessee inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
a. By the approved Tennessee program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior.
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
"Levee System" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
"Lowest Floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Ordinance.
"Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "Manufactured Home" does not include a "Recreational Vehicle".
"Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
"Map" means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by FEMA.
"Mean Sea Level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term is synonymous with the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
"National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" means, as corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
"New Construction" means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management Ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure.
"New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of this ordinance or the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure.
"North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)" means, as corrected in 1988, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
"100-year Flood" see "Base Flood".
"Person" includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including State and local governments and agencies.
“Reasonably Safe from Flooding” means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the Special Flood Hazard Area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed structures.
"Recreational Vehicle" means a vehicle which is:
1. Built on a single chassis;
2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
"Regulatory Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
“Special Flood Hazard Area” is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99.
"Special Hazard Area" means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.
"Start of Construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; and includes the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
"State Coordinating Agency" the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development’s, Local Planning Assistance Office, as designated by the Governor of the State of Tennessee at the request of FEMA to assist in the implementation of the NFIP for the State.
"Structure" for purposes of this Ordinance, means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
"Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
"Substantial Improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration or other improvement of a structure in which the cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the initial improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial improvement, or (2) in the case of substantial damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been pre-identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project or; (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".
"Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Parks or Subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
"Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this Ordinance.
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this Ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
"Water Surface Elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
ARTICLE III. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section A. Application
This Ordinance shall apply to all areas within the incorporated area of the City of Etowah, Tennessee.
Section B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
The Areas of Special Flood Hazard identified on the City of Etowah, Tennessee, as identified by FEMA, and in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Community Panel Numbers 47107C0306D, 47107C0307D, 47107C0308D, and 47107C0309D, dated September 28, 2007, along with all supporting technical data, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
Section C. Requirement for Development Permit
A development permit shall be required in conformity with this Ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities.
Section D. Compliance
No land, structure or use shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations.
Section E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Ordinance conflicts or overlaps with another regulatory instrument, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Section F. Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under Tennessee statutes.
Section G. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Etowah, Tennessee or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
Section H. Penalties for Violation
Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon adjudication therefore, be fined as prescribed by Tennessee statutes, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Etowah, Tennessee from taking such other lawful actions to prevent or remedy any violation.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION
Section A. Designation of Ordinance Administrator
The Building Inspector is hereby appointed as the Administrator to implement the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section B. Permit Procedures
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities. The development permit may include, but is not limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Application stage
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings where Base Flood Elevations are available, or to certain height above the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this Ordinance.
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential building will be floodproofed where Base Flood Elevations are available, or to certain height above the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this Ordinance.
c. A FEMA Floodproofing Certificate from a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect that the proposed non-residential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in Article V, Sections A and B.
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
2. Construction Stage
Within AE Zones, where Base Flood Elevation data is available, any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of, a Tennessee registered land surveyor and certified by same. The
Administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
Within approximate A Zones, where Base Flood Elevation data is not available, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the measurement of the lowest floor of the building relative to the highest adjacent grade. The Administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Administrator an as-built certification of the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level upon the completion of the lowest floor or floodproofing.
Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
Section C. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator
Duties of the Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied, and that proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
2. Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
3. Notify adjacent communities and the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development, Local Planning Assistance Office, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA.
4. For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community FIRM’s through the Letter of Map Revision process.
5. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
6. Record the elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved buildings, in accordance with Article IV, Section B.
7. Record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable to which the new and substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with Article IV, Section B.
8. When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with Article IV, Section B.
9. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this Ordinance.
10. When Base Flood Elevation data and floodway data have not been provided by FEMA, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A on the City of Etowah, Tennessee FIRM meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
11. Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this Ordinance in the office of the Administrator and shall be open for public inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited retrieval within combined files.
ARTICLE V. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Section A. General Standards
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required:
1. New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure;
2. Manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. They must be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State of Tennessee and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
3. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
4. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
5. All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
6. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
7. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
8. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
9. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this Ordinance;
10. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provision of this Ordinance, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further extended or replaced;
11. All new construction and substantial improvement proposals shall provide copies of all necessary Federal and State permits, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334;
12. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development proposals shall meet the standards of Article V, Section B;
13. When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are partially located in an area of special flood hazard, the entire structure shall meet the standards for new construction;
14. When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are located in multiple flood hazard risk zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple Base Flood Elevations, the entire structure shall meet the standards for the most hazardous flood hazard risk zone and the highest Base Flood Elevation.
Section B. Specific Standards
In all Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the following provisions, in addition to those set forth in Article V, Section A, are required:
1. Residential Structures
In AE Zones where Base Flood Elevation data is available, new construction and substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: “Enclosures.”
Within approximate A Zones where Base Flood Elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, the administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated to a level of at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in Article II). Should solid
foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: “Enclosures.”
2. Non-Residential Structures
In AE Zones, where Base Flood Elevation data is available, new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed to no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the Base Flood Elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: “Enclosures.”
In approximate A Zones, where Base Flood Elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed to no lower than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in Article II). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: “Enclosures.”
Non-Residential buildings located in all A Zones may be floodproofed, in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and are built with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Administrator as set forth in Article IV, Section B.
3. Enclosures
All new construction and substantial improvements that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
a. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a Tennessee professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria.
1) Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the finished grade;
3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
b. The enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles, storage or building access.
c. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms in such a way as to impede the movement of floodwaters and all such partitions shall comply with the provisions of Article V, Section B.
4. Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles
a. All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (3) in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements of new construction.
b. All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that either:
1) In AE Zones, with Base Flood Elevations, the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on a permanent foundation to no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the Base Flood Elevation or
2) In approximate A Zones, without Base Flood Elevations, the manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength) that are at least three (3) feet in height above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in Article II).
c. Any manufactured home, which has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, must meet the standards of Article V, Sections A and B.
d. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
e. All recreational vehicles placed in an identified Special Flood Hazard Area must either:
1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or
3) The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction.
5. Standards for Subdivisions and Other Proposed New Development Proposals
Subdivisions and other proposed new developments, including manufactured home parks, shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding.
a. All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
b. All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
c. All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
d. In all approximate A Zones require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals Base Flood Elevation data (See Article V, Section E).
Section C. Standards for Special Flood Hazard Areas with Established Base Flood Elevations and With Floodways Designated
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Article III, Section B, are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights and velocities. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
1. Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill material, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted; however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed encroachments or new development shall not result in any increase in the water surface elevation of the Base Flood Elevation, velocities, or floodway widths during the occurrence of a base flood discharge at any point within the community. A Tennessee registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data, using the same methodologies as in the effective Flood Insurance Study for the City of Etowah, Tennessee and certification, thereof.
2. New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V, Sections A and B.
Section D. Standards for Areas of Special Flood Hazard Zones AE with Established Base Flood Elevations but Without Floodways Designated
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Article III, Section B, where streams exist with base flood data provided but where no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply:
1. No encroachments, including fill material, new construction and substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a Tennessee registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
2. New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V, Sections A and B.
Section E. Standards for Streams without Established Base Flood Elevations and Floodways (A Zones)
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Article III, Section B, where streams exist, but no base flood data has been provided and where a Floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions shall apply:
1. The Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation and floodway data available from any Federal, State, or other sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations (see 2 below), as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in approximate A Zones meet the requirements of Article V, Sections A and B.
2. Require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals Base Flood Elevation data.
3. Within approximate A Zones, where Base Flood Elevations have not been established and where such data is not available from other sources, require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or floodproofed to a level of at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in Article II). All applicable data including elevations or floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in Article IV, Section B. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of Article V, Section B.
4. Within approximate A Zones, where Base Flood Elevations have not been established and where such data is not available from other sources, no encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty feet (20), whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a Tennessee registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the City of Etowah, Tennessee. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
5. New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V, Sections A and B. Within approximate A Zones, require that those subsections of Article V Section B dealing with the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, assuring watercourse carrying capacities are maintained and manufactured homes provisions are complied with as required.
Section F. Standards For Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO and AH Zones)
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Article III, Section B, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions, in addition to those set forth in Article V, Sections A and B, apply:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one (1) foot above as many feet as the depth number specified on the FIRM’s, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified on the FIRM, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated to at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Article V, Section B.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be floodproofed and designed watertight to be completely floodproofed to at least one (1) foot above the flood depth number specified on the FIRM, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If no depth number is specified on the FIRM, the structure shall be floodproofed to at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. A Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this Ordinance and shall provide such certification to the Administrator as set forth above and as required in accordance with Article IV, Section B.
3. Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
Section G. Standards For Areas Protected by Flood Protection System (A-99 Zones)
Located within the Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Article III, Section B, are areas of the 100-year floodplain protected by a flood protection system but where Base Flood Elevations
have not been determined. Within these areas (A-99 Zones) all provisions of Article IV and Article V shall apply.
Section H. Standards for Unmapped Streams
Located within the City of Etowah, Tennessee, are unmapped streams where areas of special flood hazard are neither indicated nor identified. Adjacent to such streams, the following provisions shall apply:
1. No encroachments including fill material or other development including structures shall be located within an area of at least equal to twice the width of the stream, measured from the top of each stream bank, unless certification by a Tennessee registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the locality.
2. When a new flood hazard risk zone, and Base Flood Elevation and floodway data is available, new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the standards established in accordance with Articles IV and V.
ARTICLE VI. VARIANCE PROCEDURES
Section A. Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals
1. Authority
The City of Etowah, Tennessee Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Ordinance.
2. Procedure
Meetings of the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at such times, as the Board shall determine. All meetings of the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall be open to the public. The Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure and shall keep records of applications and actions thereof, which shall be a public record. Compensation of the members of the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall be set by the Legislative Body.
3. Appeals: How Taken
An appeal to the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental officer, department, or bureau affected by any decision of the Administrator based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this Ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. In all cases where an appeal is made by a property owner or other interested party, a fee of (Current City Fee Schedule) dollars for the cost of publishing a notice
of such hearings shall be paid by the appellant. The Administrator shall transmit to the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal action was taken. The Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time which shall not be more than ten business days from the date of the hearing. At the hearing, any person or party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or by attorney.
4. Powers
The Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers:
a. Administrative Review
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by the Administrator or other administrative official in carrying out or enforcement of any provisions of this Ordinance.
b. Variance Procedures
In the case of a request for a variance the following shall apply:
1) The City of Etowah, Tennessee Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Ordinance.
2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures as defined, herein, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary deviation from the requirements of this Ordinance to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
3) In passing upon such applications, the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this Ordinance, and:
a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other property to the injury of others;
b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion;
c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage;
d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e) The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent use;
f) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
g) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
h) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
i) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
j) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, and streets and bridges.
4) Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this Ordinance, the Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this Ordinance.
5) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
Section B. Conditions for Variances
1. Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard and the factors listed in Article VI, Section A.
2. Variances shall only be issued upon: a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; or a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or Ordinances.
3. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the Base Flood Elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance (as high as $25 for $100) coverage, and that such construction below the Base Flood Elevation increases risks to life and property.
4. The Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request.
ARTICLE VII. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Section A. Conflict with Other Ordinances
In case of conflict between this Ordinance or any part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future Ordinance of the City of Etowah, Tennessee, the most restrictive shall in all cases apply.
Section B. Severability
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, provision, or portion of this Ordinance which is not of itself invalid or unconstitutional.
CITY OF
ETOWAH, TENNESSEE
ZONING ORDINANCE
JANUARY 1987
(As amended through May 21, 2018)
Prepared by the
ETOWAH REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ 1-1
1.01 Authority from State Enabling Legislation ............................................................. 1-1
1.02 Title ......................................................................................................................... 1-1
1.03 Purpose .................................................................................................................... 1-1
1.04 Enactment ............................................................................................................... 1-2
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................. 2-1
2.01 Scope ....................................................................................................................... 2-1
2.02 Definitions............................................................................................................... 2-1
CHAPTER 3 - ZONING DISTRICTS ..................................................................................... 3-1
3.01 Classification of Districts ........................................................................................ 3-1
3.02 Zoning District Map ................................................................................................ 3-1
3.03 Zoning District Boundaries ..................................................................................... 3-1
3.04 Specific District Regulations .................................................................................. 3-2
3.04.1 R-1 - Low Density Residential District ................................................... 3-2
3.04.2 R-2 - Medium Density Residential District ............................................. 3-4
3.04.3 R-3 - High Density Residential District ................................................... 3-6
3.04.4 MH - Mobile Home District .................................................................... 3-8
3.04.5 C-1 - Central Business District .............................................................. 3-11
3.04.6 C-2 - Highway Business District ........................................................... 3-14
3.04.7 I-1 - Light Industrial District.................................................................. 3-18
3.04.8 I-2 - Heavy Industrial District ................................................................ 3-20
3.04.9 AG - Agricultural District ...................................................................... 3-24
3.04.10 M-D - Medical District ........................................................................ 3-26
CHAPTER 4 - SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS
WHERE APPLICABLE ................................................................................. 4-1
4.01 Access Control ........................................................................................................ 4-1
4.02 Accessory Use Regulations..................................................................................... 4-4
4.03 Off-Street Parking Requirements ............................................................................ 4-4
4.04 Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements .................................................. 4-6
4.05 Temporary Use Regulations ................................................................................... 4-7
4.06 Customary Home Occupations ............................................................................... 4-8
4.07 General Lot Restrictions ......................................................................................... 4-8
4.08 Vision at Street Intersections .................................................................................. 4-9
4.09 Planned Unit Development (PUD) Regulations ..................................................... 4-9
4.10 Gasoline Service Station Restrictions ................................................................... 4-11
ii
4.11 Swimming Pool Restrictions ................................................................................ 4-11
4.12 Signs, Billboards, and Other Advertising Structures ............................................ 4-12
4.13 Development Standards for Wrecked Auto Yards & Junk Yards or
Salvage Yards ....................................................................................................... 4-15
4.14 Development Standards for Cemeteries................................................................ 4-16
4.15 Site Plan Requirements ......................................................................................... 4-17
4.16 Residential Townhouse and Patio Home Regulations .......................................... 4-21
4.17 Landscape Plan ..................................................................................................... 4-26
4.18 Development Standards for Flea Markets............................................................. 4-29
4.19 Development Standards For Telecommunications Structures…………………...4-32
4.20 Parking, Storage, and Use of Vehicles, Trucks, Heavy Equipment in ................ 4-38
Residential Districts
4.21 Fences, Walls, and Hedges ................................................................................... 4-38
4.22 Self-Service Storage Facilities (Mini-Warehouses).............................................. 4-39
CHAPTER 5 - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS ..................................................... 5-1
5.01 Scope ....................................................................................................................... 5-1
5.02 Non-Conforming Uses ............................................................................................ 5-1
5.03 Exceptions to Height Limitations ........................................................................... 5-3
5.04 Lots of Record......................................................................................................... 5-4
5.05 Exceptions to Front Setback Requirements ............................................................ 5-4
5.06 Absolute Minimum Lot Size ................................................................................... 5-4
CHAPTER 6 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ............................................. 6-1
6.01 Administration of the Ordinance ............................................................................ 6-1
6.02 The Enforcement Officer ........................................................................................ 6-1
6.03 Building Permits ..................................................................................................... 6-2
6.04 Temporary Use Permits .......................................................................................... 6-2
6.05 Certificate of Occupancy ........................................................................................ 6-3
6.06 Board of Zoning Appeals ........................................................................................ 6-3
6.07 Variances................................................................................................................. 6-4
6.08 Amendments to the Ordinance ................................................................................ 6-5
6.09 Remedies ................................................................................................................. 6-6
6.10 Interpretation ........................................................................................................... 6-6
6.11 Separability ............................................................................................................. 6-7
6.12 Effective Date ......................................................................................................... 6-7
APPENDIX A – MUNICIPAL FLOOD ZONING ORDINANCE ...................................... A-1
ZONING ORDINANCE
ETOWAH, TENNESSEE
January 1987
(As Amended Through May 21, 2018)

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
FOR
Etowah, Tennessee
TITLE
REGULATIONS CONTROLLING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND IN ETOWAH, TENNESSEE, AND ITS PLANNING REGION: REQUIRING AND REGULATING THE PREPARATION AND PRESENTATION OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL DESIGN STANDARDS; REQUIRING MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS TO BE MADE OR GUARANTEED TO BE MADE BY THE SUBDIVIDER; SETTING FORTH THE PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION IN APPLYING THESE RULES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS; AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS.
PURPOSE
Land subdivision is the first step in the process of community development. Once land has been cut up into streets, lots and blocks and publicly recorded, the correction of defects is costly and difficult. Subdivision of land sooner or later becomes a public responsibility, in that roads and streets must be maintained and various public services customary to urban areas must be provided. The welfare of the entire community is thereby affected in many important respects. It is therefore in the interest of the public, the developer and the future owner that subdivisions be conceived, designed and developed in accordance with sound rules and proper minimum standards.
Article 1 & II – Page I-1
ARTICLE I
PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE
In pursuance of authority set forth in Sections 13-3-401 through 13-3-411 and 13-4-301 through 13-4-309, Tennessee Code Annotated, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the city; to encourage economically sound and stable land development; to assure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to land developments; to assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land development; to assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and to assure that land is developed in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan of Etowah, the Regional Planning Commission of Etowah, Tennessee, does ordain and enact the following articles and sections.
ARTICLE II
SHORT TITLE
This document shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations of Etowah, Tennessee."
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – III - 1
ARTICLE III
DEFINITION OF CERTAIN TERMS USED HEREIN
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in these regulations have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. For the purpose of these regulations, certain words or terms are defined as follows.
The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future.
Access. The right to cross between public and private property, permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave a lot.
Bond. Any form of security (including, but not limited to, a cash bond, surety bond, undated letter-of-credit, cashiers check, or certified check) in an amount and form satisfactory to the planning commission for the amount of the estimated construction cost guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and specifications within the time prescribed by the developers agreement with the planning commission.
Dedication. The transfer of a property interest(s) from private ownership to the city (or county) for a public purpose, whether in fee-simple or as an easement.
Developer. Any individual, subdivider, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity commencing proceedings under these regulations to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another.
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, building, or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
Easement. The right of a person to make lawful and beneficial but limited use of a designated part of the land of another person, created by an express agreement or by prescription.
Access Easement. The right granted by the owner of land to another party, by deed or prescription, to allow vehicular access across one parcel of land to another.
Drainage Easement. A perpetual, unobstructed easement across property reserved to carry surface water drainage along specified routes to natural water courses. Drainage easements shall not be filled or built upon in any way that will impede the flow of surface water.
Utility Easement. An easement for the installation, operation, inspection, maintenance, repair, or replacement of public utility lines, cables, poles, ditches, pipes, manholes, etc., and the appurtenances belonging thereto.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – III - 2
Flag Lot. An interior lot located to the rear of another lot but with a narrow portion of the lot extending to the road (“the flag stem”). The narrow portion of the lot extending to the road shall be suitable for ingress, egress and utilities. It shall not be included in the calculation of minimum lot area and yard setbacks.
Flood. A general overflow of a stream which results in inundation of lands not normally covered by water.
Floodway. The channel of the stream and that portion of the adjoining floodplain designated to reasonably provide for passage of flood waters. Along Cane Creek the floodway is the area outlined on the chart "Proposed Floodway, Cane Creek, Vicinity of Etowah, Tennessee" (Etowah Regional Planning Commission and Tennessee State Planning Commission, April 1972, see Appendix 1), which chart is made a part of this ordinance. On other streams the floodway shall be that area extending to each side of the stream a distance equal to five (5) times the width of the stream at top of banks, unless the subdivider demonstrates that a smaller area is reasonable.
Health Department. The director of the county or district health department having jurisdiction over the county health and sanitation, or his duly authorized representative, usually a county sanitarian employed by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation.
Land Subject to Flood. Along Conasauga and Cane Creeks land below the elevation of the Regional Flood shall be considered subject to flood. The Regional Flood is shown on the chart "High Water Profiles, Conasauga and Cane Creeks, Vicinity of Etowah, Tennessee" (Tennessee Valley Authority, September 1962, see Appendix 2), which chart is made a part of these regulations. Along other streams land less than six (6) feet above normal streamflow, unless a lower elevation is determined by a registered engineer to be a reasonable level. Land outside the floodway raised to above the level of the Regional Flood shall no longer be considered subject to flood.
Lot. A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of these regulations, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way.
Lot of Record. A designated tract of land (lot) as shown on a plat or other document recorded in the county register’s office or the county assessor of property’s office.
Monument. A permanent concrete or iron marker used to establish definitively all lines on the plat of a subdivision, including all lot corners, boundary lines, corners, and points of change in road alignment. Monuments shall meet or exceed the standards of section 0820-3-.07(1)(h), Tennessee Land Surveyors Laws and Regulations, 1992 (as amended). Pins shall be of metal, not less than ½ inch in diameter and 18 inches in length, with the surveyor’s registration number stamped on a non-corrosive cap.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – III - 3
100 Yr. Flood Plain Schematic
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – III - 4
Offer of Dedication. The act of granting land , roads, or other improvements to an entity such as the City of Etowah, the Etowah Utilities Board, or the McMinn County Government. The offer of dedication shall not constitute the acceptance of such land or roads by the local government or board.
Owner. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided under these regulations.
Planning Commission. The Etowah Regional Planning Commission.
Planning Region. The land within an area identified by and approved by the Local Government Planning Advisory Commission (or its successor) as under the jurisdiction of the Etowah Regional Planning Commission for planning purposes. For the purposes of these regulations, the incorporated area of the City of Etowah and the planning region may be considered separately.
Plat, Plan, Plot, or Replat. An accurate graphical representation of a finite piece of surveyed land property, including pertinent and important data and information pertaining thereto and any changes proposed from earlier plats.
Private Development or Improvement. Any proposed development, wherein ownership of roads, utilities or any combination thereof will be retained by the developer or his designee, e.g. a homeowners association. Responsibility for maintenance of the roads or utilities must be clearly delineated, shown on or attached to the final plat, and recorded with the approved final plat in the county register’s office.
Private Road. An access to a lot or lots by a permanent easement which is not part of the city/county maintained street or road system. Private roads are not allowed within the corporate limits of Etowah, provided that internal circulation within an apartment complex or a shopping mall shall not be considered as a private road. Private roads within the planning region shall be governed by state law and such standards as are adopted by the McMinn County Commission.
Road. (Added 4/19/10) A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, arterial, collector, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way, and for the purpose of these regulations "roads" are divided into the following categories:
1. Rural Principal Arterials - the rural principal arterial system consists of a connected rural network of continuous routes having the following characteristics:
a. Serve corridor movements having trip length and travel density characteristics indicative of substantial statewide or interstate travel.
b. Serve all, or virtually all, urban areas of 50,000 and over population and a large majority of those with population of 25,000 and over.
Road Types
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – III - 5
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – III - 6
c. Provide an integrated network without stub connections except where unusual geographic or traffic flow conditions dictate otherwise (e.g., international boundary connections and connections to coastal cities).
In the more densely populated States, this system of highway may not include all heavily traveled routes which are multi-lane facilities. It is likely, however, that in the majority of States the principal arterial system will include all existing rural freeways.
2. Rural Minor Arterials - the rural minor arterial road system should, in conjunction with the principal arterial system, form a rural network having the following characteristics:
a. Link cities and larger towns (and other traffic generators, such as major resort areas, that are capable of attracting travel over similarly long distances) and form an integrated network providing interstate and inter-county service.
b. Be spaced at such intervals, consistent with population density, so that all developed areas of the State are within a reasonable distance of an arterial highway.
c. Provide an integrated network without stub connections except where unusual geographic or traffic flow conditions dictate otherwise (e.g., international boundary connections and connections to coastal cities).
3. Collectors - the rural collector routes generally serve travel of primarily intra-county rather than statewide importance and constitute those routes on which (regardless of traffic volume) predominant travel distances are shorter than on arterial routes. Consequently, more moderate speeds may be typical, on the average.
In order to define more clearly the characteristics of rural collectors, this system should be sub-classified according to the following criteria:
a. Rural Major Collector
These routes should: (1) Provide service to any county seat not on an arterial route, to the larger towns not directly served by the higher systems, and to other traffic generators of equivalent intra-county importance, such as consolidated schools, shipping points, county parks, important mining and agricultural areas, etc. ; (2) link these places with nearby larger towns or cities, or with routes of higher classification; and (3) serve the more important intra-county travel corridors.
b. Rural Minor Collectors
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – III - 7
These routes should: (1) Be spaced at intervals, consistent with population density, to collect traffic from local roads and bring all developed areas within a reasonable distance of a collector road; (2) provide service to the remaining smaller communities; and (3) link the locally important traffic generators with their rural hinterland.
4. Local Streets (Neighborhood) – the purpose of a local street is to provide access to property abutting the public right-of-way. This includes vehicular and pedestrian access. Local streets are included in the rural local road system
The rural local road system should have the following characteristics: (1) Serve primarily to provide access to adjacent land; and (2) provide service to travel over relatively short distances as compared to collectors or other higher systems. Local roads will, of course, constitute the rural mileage not classified as part of the principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector systems.
5. Marginal Access Street – marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
6. Alley – a minor street used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
7. Cul-de-sac – a local street with only one outlet, called a “dead-end” street.
Setback Line. A line established by zoning ordinance or subdivision regulations, generally parallel with and measured from the lot lines, delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided.
Subdivider. See Developer.
Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided.
The following types of “divisions” of land are not “subdivisions” within the meaning of these regulations: 1) The testamentary division of property and partnership division of property between two (2) or more owners of an undivided interest either among themselves or by court order is excluded. 2) Divisions where the resulting tracts are all over five (5) acres, all have frontage on an existing publicly-maintained road, and where no extension of public water or sewer lines is required.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – III - 8
What is a S/D?
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – IV - 1
ARTICLE IV
PLATTING JURISDICTION, ENFORCEMENT AND
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
The enforcement of these regulations and penalties for the unapproved recordation or transfer of land are provided by state law in the authority granted by public acts of the State of Tennessee.
4.01. PLATTING AUTHORITY. From and after the passage of these regulations, the planning commission shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of a land subdivision shall be entitled to record in the office of the McMinn County Register of Deeds unless it shall have the approval of the planning commission inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the planning commission, as required by these regulations, is declared to be a misdemeanor, punishable by law.
4.02. USE OF PLAT. The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a subdivision plat that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the McMinn County Register of Deeds is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties.
4.03. ENFORCEMENT. No plat or plan of a subdivision located within the city limits or the area of planning jurisdiction shall be filed or recorded by the McMinn County Register of Deeds until said plat or plan has received final approval in writing by the planning commission as provided in Sections 13-3-402 and 13-4-302, Tennessee Code Annotated. (See also Sec. 9.12)
4.04. OPENING AND IMPROVING PUBLIC STREETS (Roads). No public officer, authority or county governing body shall accept, layout, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street, lay or authorize the laying of water mains or authorize the laying of water mains or sewers, or the construction of other facilities or utilities in any street located within the area of planning jurisdiction unless such street shall have been accepted, opened or otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of these regulations, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines to a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission, or on a street plan made and adopted by the commission as provided in Sections 13-3-406 and 13-4-307, Tennessee Code Annotated.
4.05. ERECTION OF BUILDINGS. No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in a subdivision within the area of jurisdiction of the planning commission unless the street giving access thereto has been accepted as a public street in accordance with these regulations, or unless such street has been accepted as a public street prior to the effective date of these regulations. Provided that in the planning region, such building permit may be issued if the building is to be on a private road as defined.
Any building or structure erected or to be erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful building or structure, and the building inspector or the city attorney or other official designated by the Etowah City Board may bring action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – IV - 2
4.06. PENALTIES. No county register shall receive, file or record a plat of a subdivision within the planning region without the approval of the planning commission as required in Sections 13-3-402 and 13-4-302, Tennessee Code Annotated, and any county recorder so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law.
Sections 13-3-410 and 13-4-306, Tennessee Code Annotated, provides that whoever being the owner or agent of the owner of land, transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land without having submitted a plat of such subdivision to the planning commission and obtained its approval as required before such plat be recorded in the office of the appropriate county register, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city, through its attorney or other official, designated by its chief legislative body, may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action or injunction.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – V - 1
ARTICLE V
PRELIMINARY PLATTING REQUIREMENTS
5.01. PREAPPLICATION REVIEW. Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the Etowah Planning Region is proposed, the subdivider is encouraged to consult early and informally with the city and the Local Planning Office. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review and no formal application shall be required.
NOTE: (1) The purpose of the preapplication review is to afford the subdivider an opportunity to avail him/herself of the advice and assistance of the planning commission in order to facilitate the subsequent preparation and approval of plans.
At this stage, the subdivider should also consult with any lending institution that will be participating in the financing of his proposed development and with the Federal Housing Administration of the Department of Housing and Urban Development that may be insuring mortgages on houses that may be built in this land subdivision.
(2) The various plat reviews required by these regulations may properly be made by the city building inspector or staff planner from the Local Planning Assistance Office. It is a waste of effort for the entire planning commission membership to review a proposed land subdivision, except in cases of conflict or unusual and difficult problems. Approval or disapproval in every case must be by action of the commission. This note applies only to pre-application reviews.
5.02. PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL. The regulations shown below must be complied with in order to secure preliminary plat approval:
5.03. Exemptions. A subdivider may omit the submission of a preliminary plat, if all the following conditions are met:
a. the proposed subdivision contains less than six (6) lots, sites, or divisions;
b. all public improvements as set forth in these regulations are already installed, or because of the nature of the development are not deemed necessary by the planning commission, or the developer posts a bond to ensure public improvements are installed;
c. the subdivider has consulted informally with the planning commission or its staff for advice and assistance before preparation of the final plat and its formal application for approval.
d. the plat of subdivision divides the tract into no more than two (2) lots, then approval may be endorsed in writing on the plat by the secretary of the commission without the approval of the planning commission, upon certification by planning staff of the planning commission the subdivision complies with the Etowah Subdivision Regulations and that no request for a variance from such regulations has been requested or is needed. (Added 05-20-02)
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – V - 2
5.04. Application for Preliminary Plat Approval. (amended 10/16/06)
Following the pre-application review of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the chairman of the planning commission, at least ten (10) business days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission, five (5) copies of the preliminary plat and other documents.
NOTE: Five (5) copies of the preliminary plat and other documents are required for review and record. The copies are for the following government entities: (A) planning commission; (B) subdivider; (C) public utility department or company (for record); (D) county health officer; and (E) city building inspector. A sixth copy may be required for the county road superintendent, where applicable.”
5.05. Review of Preliminary Plat. The planning commission shall check the plat for conformance to these regulations and shall afford a hearing on the preliminary plat.
Thereafter, the planning commission shall give tentative approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat. A notation of the action shall be made in the minutes of the meeting. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, two (2) copies of a list containing the reasons for disapproval, shall be issued. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent and one (1) copy added to the records of the planning commission.
Tentative approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Tentative approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one (1) year unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning commission.
If action on a preliminary plat is not taken by the planning commission within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time.
5.06. Certificate of Tentative Approval. Two (2) Certificates of Tentative Approval of the Preliminary Plat by the planning commission shall be issued: one (1) copy for the subdivider or his agent and one (1) for the planning commission records. The certificate shall contain the following:
Pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Etowah, Tennessee, all the requirements of tentative approval have been fulfilled.
Therefore, the Preliminary Plat of ____________________ Subdivision has been approved by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission on __________, 19 ____, subject to the following modifications. This approval does not constitute approval of a final plat. This Certificate of Tentative Approval shall expire and be null and void on __________, 19 ____. (one year later).
_______________________________
Secretary, Etowah Regional
Planning Commission
5.07. PRELIMINARY PLAT SPECIFICATIONS. When required, all preliminary plats shall be prepared to meet the following specifications:
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – V - 3
5.07.01. Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch.
5.07.02. Sheet Size. Sheet size shall be twenty (20) by twenty (20) inches, or shall be the sheet size required by the County Register for recording purposes. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one (1) sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one (1) sheet with an index map on separate sheet of the same size.
5.07.03. Information to be Provided on Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information:
a. name of subdivision;
b. name and address of owner of record, subdivider, and surveyor;
c. north point, graphic scale and date;
d. vicinity map showing location and acreage of subdivision;
e. exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and distances; city limits and other political subdivision lines, where applicable.
f. names of adjoining property owners and/or subdivisions;
g. existing streets and other rights-of-way, buildings, water courses, railroads, culverts, utilities and easements on and adjacent to the tract;
h. proposed design including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings;
i. block numbers and lot numbers.
j. plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, water, gas and underground electric) showing the anticipated connection(s) to the existing or any proposed utility systems and drainage. When connections to certain public utilities are not practical, any proposed individual water supply and/or sewage disposal system must be approved by the county health department on the final plat;
k. rock outcroppings, marshes, springs, sinkholes, natural storm drains and other outstanding topographical features; and
l. minimum building front yard setback lines; see section ___.
m. the present zoning classification, if any, on the land to be subdivided and on adjoining land;
n. spot elevations and contour lines at least for every five (5) foot change in elevation, unless specifically waived by the planning commission;
o. street cross-section and centerline profile; and
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – V - 4
p. if any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flood, as defined in these regulations, the floodplain and floodway shall be shown and the FIRM identified.
q. location of all water courses; location and size of needed drainage structures.
r. tax map and parcel number.
s. the city or district, county, and the state where the property is located.
t. surveyor’s seal and signature.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – V - 5
SAMPLE PRELIMINARY PLAT
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – V - 6
CHECKLIST FOR
PRELIMINARY PLAT CONSIDERATION
Name of Subdivision_____________________________________________________________
Location _______________________ Civil District ____________Zoning District ___________
Owner of Record _________________________ Address _____________Tel. ______________
Subdivider ______________________________ Address _____________Tel. ______________
Surveyor _______________________________ Address _____________Tel. ______________
Date submitted for preliminary approval _____________________________________________
* * * * * * * * * * *
[ ]5 copies submitted 15 days prior to meeting.
[ ]Name of subdivision.
[ ]Drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 ft.
[ ]Name and address of owner of record, subdivider and surveyor.
[ ]North point, graphic scale and date.
[ ]Vicinity map showing location and acreage of subdivision.
[ ]Boundary lines by bearing and distances.
[ ]Names of adjoining property owners and/or subdivisions.
[ ]Location of all existing physical features on land and nearby properties.
[ ]Location of watercourses, drainage easements, location & size of drainage structures
[ ]Names, locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and reservations, lot lines, etc.
[ ]Block numbers and lot numbers.
[ ]Plans of proposed utility layouts showing connections to existing or proposed utility systems.
[ ]Minimum building front yard setback line.
[ ]Present zoning classification, if any, on land in subdivision and adjacent land.
[ ]Tax map and parcel number(s)
[ ]Cross-section and centerline street profiles at suitable scales as may be required by street superintendent and/or planning commission.
[ ]Conforms to general requirements and minimum standards of design.
[ ]Floodplain and FIRM No. ________________.
Disapproved ______________, 19 ____, because of incomplete items above or other reasons as stated: _______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Signed: ________________________________
Planner
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VI - 1
ARTICLE VI
FINAL PLATTING REQUIREMENTS
6.01. FINAL PLAT APPROVAL. (amended 10/16/06)
After the plat of a proposed subdivision has been given preliminary plat approval by the planning commission, the subdivider may, within one (1) year from preliminary plat approval, submit a final plat on the development, or a phase of the development to the planning commission. Six (6) copies of the final plat and other documents as shown in this article shall be submitted at least ten (10) business days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission. The copies shall be made from the original which shall be drawn in permanent reproducible material, no larger than sixteen and one-half (16 1/2) inches by twenty-two (22) inches. The certificates shall be placed on the original reproducible plat to avoid hand lettering each copy, however, only the six (6) copies shall have signatures.
NOTE: The original plat is to be kept by the developer for his use. The six (6) prints will be distributed as follows: one (1) copy for the County Register to be recorded; two (2) copies to the planning commission; one (1) copy for Local Planning Assistance Office; one (1) copy for the city building inspector; and one (1) copy to the McMinn County E-911 Office.
6.02. REVIEW OF FINAL PLAT. Except for staff approved, two lot subdivisions as shown in Sec. 5.03.d., the planning commission shall check the final plat for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat, and with the rules and regulations in this document. Thereafter, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. A notation of the action of the planning commission shall be made on the six (6) copies of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons for disapproval if the plat is disapproved. If action on a final plat is not taken by the planning commission within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. (Amended 05-20-02)
NOTE: All certifications with appropriate signatures shall be placed on all six (6) copies of the plat and any other that may be deemed necessary. Certifications could possibly be placed on the plats by means of rubber stamps, leaving a blank for the appropriate signature. No certification or signatures should be placed on the reproducible copy.
6.03. A CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAT BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION. If the subdivision is approved, the secretary of the planning commission shall include a certificate of approval of the final plat directly on the copies of the plat as follows:
"All the requirements of approval having been fulfilled pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Etowah, Tennessee, this final plat was given approval by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission effective ___________, 19____."
________________________ ___________________________
Date Secretary, Etowah Regional
Planning Commission
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VI - 2
6.04. RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT. Upon approval of a final plat and the Secretary's signature certifying the plat has been approved, the subdivider shall record said plat in the Office of the McMinn County Register. The act of recordation legally creates the lots within the subdivision.
6.05. FINAL PLAT SPECIFICATIONS. The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat (Article V) with the following additions:
a. bearings and distances to the nearest existing street lines or bench marks or other permanent monuments (not less than three (3) shall be accurately described on the plat);
b. municipal, county and land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision;
c. exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a Category II field survey, giving distances to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with a linear error of closure not to exceed one (1) foot per 7,500 feet of perimeter (1:7,500). (Amended 05-20-02)
d. name of subdivision, exact location, widths and names of all streets and alleys within the immediately adjoining tract;
e. street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii and lengths of tangents;
f. lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth (1/10) of a foot and bearings;
g. lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically;
h. location, dimensions and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use, statement of dedication;
i. accurate location, material and description of existing and proposed monuments and markers;
j. a statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, or any private covenants;
k. if any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flood, as defined in these regulations; the limit of such flood shall be shown and the FIRM identified;
l. modification, limitations and approval by health authority;
NOTE: "As built" plan and profile of all streets and sewers and storm drains shall be furnished the city upon completion of the project.
m. contours shall not be required on final plats unless deemed necessary by the planning commission.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VI - 3
n. A note stating the McMinn County Tax Map and Parcel Number, county deed book and page number(s) for the tract subdivided.
6.06. SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATION. A licensed land surveyor's certification shall be placed directly on the final plat as follows: (Amended 05-20-02)
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; and that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "Future," and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all requirements of the Etowah Subdivision Regulations have been fully complied with. Further, I certify this is a Category ____ land survey as defined in Standards of Practice issued by the Tennessee State Board of Examiners for Land Surveyors and the ratio of precision of the unadjusted survey is
1: ________ as shown hereon.
Surveyor:_____________________________________
Tenn. Reg. No. ______________
6.07. OWNER’S CERTIFICATION. An owner's certification shall be placed on the final plat, as follows:
OWNER'S CERTIFICATION:
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through as duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey and that all state, county and city taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid."
Date _____________________________ Agent/Owner _____________________
Address: _________________________ City: __________________________
Tel: _____________________________
6.08. STREET CERTIFICATION. The appropriate certificates shall be placed on the final plat as follows:
a. Approval of Streets and Drainage System
I hereby certify that the streets, surface drainage systems and related improvements shown on the plat have been completed to proper specifications and according to required design standards or that a performance bond in the amount of $______________ has been posted. A maintenance bond in the amount of $ ___________ (40% of the value of all road and drainage improvements installed) is submitted to cover any necessary repairs to these improvements for eighteen months after acceptance for maintenance by the city/county.
Date ___________________________ __________________________
City Inspector/County Road Supt.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VI - 4
b. Certification on Drainage and Road Maintenance Bond.
I hereby certify that a maintenance bond has been issued to the City of Etowah/McMinn County for 40 percent of the value of the drainage and road improvements shown on this plat. Said bond will remain in the possession of this office eighteen months, unless called upon by The City of Etowah/McMinn County for any repairs or improvements to the drainage system and/or street(s) shown on this plat.”
_________________ _____________________________________
Date Director of Finance
c. Private Road Status (McMinn County only)
This certifies the road (s) labeled on this plat is (are) private and not dedicated to the McMinn County Government. The McMinn County Government has no responsibility for maintenance of this road(s). The road shall be maintained by ____________________________________.
6.09. CERTIFICATION OF THE ETOWAH UTILITIES BOARD OR COUNTY HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Etowah Utilities Board, or other their designee, shall certify that the water or sewage disposal system and other utility improvements indicated on the preliminary plat have been completed to proper specifications and design standards. Where the required improvements have not been completed, the Etowah Utility Board shall certify that approved bond, or security, has been posted to insure their completion.
"UTILITY CERTIFICATE"
I hereby certify that the water and sewage systems indicated on the plat have been installed according to the required specifications and design standards of the subdivision regulations.
Date ___________________________ __________________________
Etowah Utilities Board
Where septic tanks are to be used in lieu of public sewerage, the local health authority shall certify that lot areas shown on the plat are adequate to accommodate individual septic tank systems as restricted.
A certificate signed by the county health authority shall be placed on the final plat as follows:
I hereby certify that each lot shown on this subdivision plat is adequate to accommodate individual septic tank systems according to the restrictions stated on the plat.
Date ___________________________ __________________________
County Health Officer
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VI - 5
6.10. GAS CERTIFICATE. A certificate signed by the manager of the utility gas system shall be placed on the final plat as follows:
GAS CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that adequate easements have been allowed where needed for gas lines in this subdivision.
Date ___________________________ __________________________
Manager, Gas System
6.11. CERTIFICATE OF DEDICATION. A certification by the owner setting forth the description of the areas and improvements he dedicates to the public and the extent of the title which he is dedicating shall be placed on the final plat.
I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plat of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish the minimum subdivision requirements, and dedicate all roads, alleys, walks, parks, other open spaces and other improvement to public or private use as noted.
______ ___________________________________________________________
Date Owner
6.12. E-911 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL. A certificate shall be placed on the final plat as follows:
Certification of E-911 Approval
I hereby certify that I have reviewed this plat and find that it conforms to the county's E-911 Requirements.
______ ___________________________________________________________
Date McMinn County E-911 Representative
6.13. CERTIFICATE FOR STAFF APPROVED PLAT. (Added 05-20-02) A certificate showing that staff has reviewed a two-lot subdivision and recommends the secretary sign his/her approval of the plat.
I hereby certify the subdivision plat shown hereon includes only two-lots, does not require any variances from the subdivision regulations, that no improvements are required, and complies with the Etowah Regional Planning Commission Subdivision Regulations.
______ ___________________________________________________________
Date Planning Staff
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VI - 6
6.14 CERTIFICATE FOR EXISTING SEPTIC SYSTEMS (Added 2/17/03) Where a plat includes an existing structure on a septic system for wastewater disposal, the following certificate shall be added:
Existing Septic System Certificate
The existing septic system is located as shown on this plat (lot(s) _____). The location includes the septic tank and all field lines. To the best of my knowledge the septic system is in proper working order as of this date and the septic system(s) is/are contained within the boundary of the individual lot.
_________________ _____________________________
Date Owner
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VI - 7
Sample Final Plat
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VI - 8
CHECKLIST FOR
FINAL PLAT CONSIDERATION
Name of Subdivision_____________________________________________________________
Location ________________________ Civil District ____________ Zoning District __________
Owner of Record __________________________ Address ____________Tel. ______________
Preliminary approval granted:____________________________ (date)
Submitted for FINAL APPROVAL: ______________________ (date).
* * * * * * * * * * *
[ ]Submitted within one year from date of preliminary approval.
[ ]5 copies submitted 15 days prior to meeting.
[ ]Name of subdivision.
[ ]Drawn to a scale of ______ equals ______ on sheets not larger than 16 1/2" by 22".
[ ]Name and address of owner of record, subdivider and surveyor.
[ ]North point, graphic scale and date.
[ ]Usable vicinity map
[ ]Tax map and parcel; deed book and page no.
[ ]Bearings of property lines and sufficient engineering data to locate all lines including radii, angles & tangent distances.
[ ]Reservations, easements or other non-residential areas.
[ ]Dimensions to the nearest 10th of a foot and angles to the nearest minute.
[ ]Lot lines, alleys, building setback lines.
[ ]100 year flood boundary and location of all water courses and drainage easements.
[ ]Location and description of monuments.
[ ]Names, locations of adjacent properties.
[ ]Lines, names and widths of all streets and roads.
[ ]Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks letters alphabetically.
[ ]Location sketch map with flooded areas outlined.
[ ]Certificate of ownership and dedication.
[ ]Certificates of approval of water and sewerage systems and streets.
[ ]Existing Septic System Certificate (If required) (Added 2/17/03)
[ ]Certificate of engineer or surveyor.
[ ]Proposed deed restrictions if not a zoned area.
[ ]Conforms to general requirements and minimum standards of design.
[ ]Required physical improvements have been made or bond posted in the amount of $_______________. Maintenance bond posted in amount of $ ___________.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VII - 1
ARTICLE VII
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
7.01. NAME OF SUBDIVISION. The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision.
7.02. ACCESS. Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public street. (?)
7.03. PUBLIC USE AREAS. When features of other plans adopted by the planning commission (such as schools or other public building sites, parks or other land for public use) are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, land for such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within one (1) year by the appropriate public agency.
Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public uses that the planning commission finds not required or not suitable for such use, the planning commission shall refuse to approve the plat, and shall notify the governing body of the reasons for such action.
NOTE: One of the primary purposes and advantages of planning for the dedication and reservation of property for public use is to indicate areas which may be presently acquired at today's acreage prices rather than at greatly increased prices in the future. Also, future improvements and acquisition would increase the expense to the city's taxpayers as well as inconveniencing the individual property owners and the neighborhood in general.
Where public use is to be made of the property and where the residents of the subdivision will receive primary benefit, the dedication of the property should be encouraged. Where the public use is for the public as a whole, the community should pay proportionately for the acquisition of reserved areas within a reasonable time. A reasonable time is to be determined according to the circumstances, because the subdivider should not be required to hold his land idle for a lengthy and indefinite period.
7.04. SUITABILITY OF THE LAND. The planning commission shall not approve the subdivision of land if, from adequate investigations conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public the site is not suitable for platting and development purposes of the kind proposed. This includes land which is:
a. Physically unsuitable because of flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, unsuitable soil, and other features which may endanger health, life or property, aggravate erosion, increase the flood hazard, or necessitate expenditure of public funds for supply and maintenance of services and/or which other public agencies have investigated and found to be not in the best interest of the public.
b. Unsuitably located by reason of being scattered or premature subdivision of land which would involve danger or injury to the health, safety, property or economic utilization because of lack of or adverse effect on water supply, schools, proper drainage, good transportation, or other public services or facilities that would
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VII - 2
necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for supply or maintenance of such services or elimination of danger.
c. Subject to flooding as defined in Article III. If a subdivision is proposed within one hundred (100) feet of a stream for which detailed flood data has not been published, the planning commission shall require detailed flood information for the particular area before deciding whether or not such subdivision development can occur.
7.05. INDIVIDUAL MOBILE HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS. The requirements and regulations of the "Etowah Zoning Ordinance" or the “McMinn County Mobile Home Resolution” as applicable, shall be satisfied and the approval of the local health authority must be secured prior to approval by the planning commission of any mobile home or travel trailer park.
A mobile home subdivision shall meet the general requirements of these regulations prior to the approval of any plat and before the sale or lease of any individual mobile home lot.
7.06. LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENT. The requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of large-scale community or neighborhood units, such as a housing project, apartment complex or shopping center which is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks and streets. Plans for all such developments shall be presented to the planning commission for review and approval prior to the commencement of construction.
Where deemed necessary by the planning commission, large-scale development which fronts on major or secondary thoroughfares shall be required to provide a frontage access road, of no less than twenty-seven (27) feet in width, with permanent or temporary access to the public thoroughfare to be provided at a location deemed desirable by the planning commission.
Large scale developments in the planning region shall comply with the following standards:
a. Size. Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate in size to provide service areas and off-road parking suitable for the type of use and development contemplated. Platting of individual lots should be avoided in favor of an overall design of the land.
b. Design. Land shall not be platted for commercial or industrial purposes unless the subdivider can demonstrate to the planning commission that each lot provides the following:
1. A site that does not unduly interfere with through traffic. (Each industrial subdivision or area shall utilize a single collector for all heavy traffic between the area and the general road system. Minor industrial roads and individual industrial parcels shall be oriented at right angles with the collector road and any adjacent railroad.)
2. An integrated parking area
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VII - 3
3. Adequate buffering for any adverse effect on any present or future adjacent residential development.
7.07. BLOCK LENGTHS AND WIDTHS. Block lengths and widths shall be as follows:
a. blocks shall be no greater than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet nor less than three hundred (300) feet in length, except in unusual circumstances; and
b. blocks shall be wide enough to provide two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where abutting upon major streets or where other situations make this requirement impractical.
7.08. FLOOD PLAIN BUILDING SITE. Any area within a flood plain as indicated on the appropriate FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall be shown on the preliminary and final plats.
In areas subject to flood where no fill is proposed, no building line shall be located any closer to a watercourse, drainageway, stream or channel than the edge of the area subject to flood. In areas where fill is used to raise the elevation of the building site, the fill shall extend streamward fifteen (15) feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon, but no fill shall be placed in the floodway.
7.09. LOT SIZES. Residential lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning ordinance. In the absence of a zoning ordinance, residential lots shall not be less than seventy-five (75) feet wide at the setback (building) line.
a. Residential lots shall have a depth of not less than one hundred (100) feet and not greater than three (3) times the width of the lot at the building line, unless unusual circumstances make these limitations impractical.
b. Lots not served by public water and sanitary sewer systems shall be at least twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet in area or of a size specified by the city/county health authority to adequately accommodate both a fresh-water well and septic tank on the same lot. The minimum distance between the septic tank fields and fresh-water well shall be one hundred (100) feet. Where individual septic tanks are used on lots served by a public water system, minimum lot size shall be eleven thousand five hundred (11,500) square feet. The health officer shall also prescribe minimum lot sizes to conform to health standards, which may be greater than the standards contained herein.
c. Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements for both abutting streets.
7.10. LOT LINES. All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless impractical because of topographic or other features.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VII - 4
7.11. BUILDING SETBACK LINES. A building line (setback line) meeting the front yard setback requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be established on all lots. In the absence of a zoning ordinance, the front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from the street right-of-way lines. Other minimum setback lines shall be as established for the zoning district where the property lies; where there is no zoning the minimum setback lines shall be as follows:
a. from the side property line ............................................. 10 feet
b. from rear property line .................................................. 15 feet
c. from side property line which abuts.............................. 35 feet
a minor street (corner lot)
7.12. LOT ABUTTING PUBLIC STREETS. Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street at least 40 feet, except as provided in section 7.14 below and section 8.08 (private streets in the planning region).
7.13. DOUBLE AND REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS. Double frontage lots should be avoided, except where essential to provide separate residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. Reverse frontage lots shall have a depth of not less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet. A planted evergreen screen easement at least ten (10) feet wide, across which there shall be no right-of-access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting a traffic artery or other incompatible land use.
7.14. FLAG LOTS. Flag lots will not be normally be approved within the City of Etowah. Flag lots in the planning region/urban growth area shall comply with this section. A “Flag Lot” is a lot which, except for a narrow private access lane, does not front on or abut a publicly-maintained street or road. These lots are to provide a building site in the interior or a tract of land behind lots which have full frontage on a publicly maintained street or road.
a. Within the portion of the flag lot which excludes the access strip, the building setbacks for front, side and rear yards shall still apply and be measured from the boundaries of the parcel excluding the access strip.
b. No more than two access strips shall be located side-by-side.
c. Flag stems shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet.
d. Width:
1. For flag lots of two (2) acres or less, the access strip shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width.
2. For flag lots of more than two (2) acres, but not more than five (5) acres, the access strip shall be not less then forty (40) feet in width.
3. For flag lots of over five (5) acres, the access strip shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet in width.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VII - 5
7.15. TOWNHOUSE & PATIO HOME SUBDIVISIONS (Added 3/12/2014)
In the Etowah Planning Region (Urban Growth Boundary), fee-simple townhouses and patio homes are allowed to increase the variety of available housing choices. Within the Planning Region townhouse units and patio homes can be developed and sold as individually-owned lots in fee-simple to those who desire this type of low-maintenance home; provided the developer follows the specific regulations established in this section for "zero lot line" townhouse units or patio homes.
A. REASONS FOR SPECIAL REGULATIONS
1. The narrow lots needed for townhouses and patio homes are not provided elsewhere in the "Etowah, Tennessee Subdivision Regulations." The sizes of these lots are typically well below the minimum square footage that is needed to provide adequate subsurface sewage disposal.
2. The narrow lots to be allowed are not suitable for any other housing type. The townhouses and patio homes must be "in place" before Final Subdivision Plat Approval is granted. Obviously, if such lots were sold to different owners while still "unbuilt," the owners would have great difficulty arranging a coordinated townhouse construction program since many share a lot line and oftentimes a common wall.
3. Etowah wishes to offer residents a variety of hosing choices that are affordable, safe, protect the property values of surrounding properties, and that will provide a higher quality of living to those moving into the area.
B. DEFINITIONS (particular to this section):
Developed Area. The combined areas of the Major Lots, Road Rights of Way and Utility Easements
Major Lot. The group of minor lots covered by one complete building
Minor Lot. The land, including front, rear, and side setbacks (where applicable) upon which one individual dwelling unit is placed.
Townhouse. Townhouses in the Etowah Planning Region are defined as all of the following, and townhouse subdivisions shall be approved only for housing units that meet this complete townhouse definition:
a) a single-family residential dwelling of one, two, or three floors, having at least one bedroom, and having or appearing to have a common wall with an adjacent similar unit or units.
b) each unit is built within an individually owned parcel of land that is owned by the owner of the townhouse unit, and the sale of the unit includes the sale of the land as well.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VII - 6
c) single-family units which are built in sets of between three (3) and seven (7) units per building.
d) units having fire walls constructed in accordance with the provisions of the current edition of the International Building Code regarding building separation and fire-rated separating walls.
e) units having individual architectural characteristics to the extent feasible, such as different front wall setbacks, different roof heights, and different, but harmonious building materials and/or colors.
Patio Homes. Single-family residential dwelling of one (1) or more floors, which does not have any common walls shared with adjacent dwelling units, but which is located to one side of a less than standard width lot. Often these homes are built on a side property line with a usable area between structures that may contain a yard, landscaped garden, or other outdoor living area.
C. REQUIREMENTS FOR TOWNHOUSE & PATIO HOME LOTS:
1. Minimum Minor Lot Area: 2,600 square feet
2. Minimum Minor lot Width: 26 feet
3. Minimum lot Depth: 100 feet, provided front and rear setbacks are met
4. Minimum Building Setback lines.
a) Front: 25 feet from road right-of-way unless the design provides a suitable arrangement of rear parking, in which case lesser front yard setbacks of no less than 10 feet may be allowed if approved by the Planning Commission. All units shall front on interior local roads that will only serve the proposed development (units may not front on existing public roads).
b) Rear: 25 feet.
c) Side: for townhomes there shall be no side yard setback except for the end units, which shall have a 10 foot setback from the side lot lines adjoining other townhouses or patio homes (20 feet total separation) or a 15 foot setback from the side lot line adjoining a non-townhouse or patio home lot. Side yards abutting a public or private road shall have a side yard setback of 35 feet from the road right-of-way.
Side: for patio homes there shall be no side yard setback on one side of the home, but at least a 10 foot setback from the side lot lines adjoining other townhouses or patio homes (10 feet total separation between patio homes and
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VII - 7
20 feet total separation between patio homes and townhouse units) or a 15 foot setback from the side lot line adjoining a non-townhouse or patio home lot. Side yards abutting a public or private road shall have a side yard setback of 35 feet from the road right-of-way.
5. Maximum Developed Area: 70% of total site, the remainder being open space, privately maintained by the Homeowners Association and not by McMinn County or the City of Etowah.
6. Water and Sewerage Systems: Public water, fire protection, and sewerage systems shall be required for all townhouse and/or patio home subdivisions. If the existing lines are not available, the developer shall run lines to the development, which connects on to a public water and sewerage system. The specifications for line size for water and sewer shall be approved by the utility having jurisdiction. The small narrow lots preclude the use of individual wells and traditional septic systems.
7. Underground Utilities: All utilities such as but not limited to water, sewer, gas, electrical, cable, fiber optic cable, etc. shall be located underground with no overhead lines or utility poles other than street lights being visible.
8. Road Construction and Drainage: All proposed roads, curbs, and drainage facilities shall be built in accordance with the construction standards for public subdivision roads contained in the Etowah Municipal-Regional Subdivision Regulations with the following exceptions
a) Road right-of-ways shall be a minimum of 50 feet wide for streets that connect existing public roads, and a minimum of 40 feet wide for cul-de-sacs and internal horseshoe type loops.
b) Pavement widths shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide for travel lanes with curbed shoulders, and an additional 8 feet shall be added on sides where on-street parking will be made available.
c) Off-Street Parking: Three (3) spaces shall be provided for each townhouse unit. The spaces shall be a minimum size of 9 feet by 18 feet. At least two spaces shall be located entirely on the townhouse lot within a garage, driveway, etc. rather than on the street. The third space may be located on the townhouse lots, in a public use area, or in the street if where on-street parking is made available.
9. Flood Protection: The building sites within the townhouse and/or patio home subdivision shall be located in flood-free areas or shall otherwise be shown to be above the level of the 100-Year Flood in accordance with the Federal Emergency Management Flood Insurance Rate Maps and local flood ordinances.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VII - 8
10. Reconstruction: In the event that one or more townhouse units are destroyed by fire or other cause, no structures shall be placed on any vacant townhouse lots except another townhouse unit which must be built according to the intent of these regulations.
E. SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
To prevent the sale of individual "unbuilt" lots, no individual lots can be recorded with the McMinn County Register of Deeds until the following steps in the subdivision and development process shall have been followed by the developer:
Step 1: Prepare a Preliminary Subdivision Plat for the proposed townhouse/ patio home development.
The Preliminary Plat (drawn to scale) shall provide the following information and show the following elements as they will be arranged on the site of the townhouse/patio home subdivision:
a) name of subdivision,
b) name, address, and phone number of owner of record and the applicant,
c) date of drawing,
d) scale of drawing (not smaller than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet),
e) north point,
f) total land area in acres in each phase of the planned subdivision,
g) locations and dimensions of all property lines including the major lots which will each contain a group of three (3) to seven (7) townhouse units and the minor lots on which they sit, or the lots for the patio homes,
h) contour lines of five (5) feet vertical intervals shall be required when changes in elevation are less than one-hundred (100) feet. On sites with elevation changes greater than one-hundred (100) feet, vertical contours of twenty (20) feet are permitted,
i) proposed location of each townhouse group showing number of units in each building, the property lines dividing any common walls, and the location of the proposed structures (conceptual drawings, perspectives, etc., are not required but will assist the Planning Commission in understanding the proposal),
j) building setback lines,
k) proposed parking space locations,
l) existing and proposed sewer and water lines and fire hydrants
m) existing and proposed public road rights-of-way and pavement widths,
n) existing and proposed utility easements or other needed easements,
o) retaining walls, sidewalks, and other similar proposed features,
p) landscaped areas or other special proposed areas, such as recreation facilities,
q) natural or proposed water courses or water bodies and drainage
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VII - 9
structures, and
r) limits of 100-year flood area (as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Flood Insurance Rate Maps), if any.
The preliminary subdivision plat shall also meet the requirements for a preliminary subdivision plats as required for typical development under the Etowah Municipal-Regional Subdivision Regulations. In cases of conflict, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
Step 2: At least ten (10) business days prior to a scheduled Etowah Municipal-Regional Planning Commission meeting, the developer shall submit a copy of the proposed preliminary plat to the planning commission staff. Staff will review the plat and place it on the agenda for the next planning commission meeting.
Step 3: Meet with the Etowah Municipal-Regional Planning Commission and obtain their approval of the preliminary plat. Approval will be based on the requirements mentioned herein.
Step 4: Proceed to construct the required improvements (roads, drainage facilities, and utilities, as well as the townhouse units or patio homes for the whole development or for one or more phases according to the approved preliminary plat.
The standards for subdivision roads, drainage, water supply, and sewerage extensions contained in the Etowah Municipal-Regional Subdivision Regulations shall apply, and only curbed roads with proper drainage will be accepted (no graveled shoulders).
Step 5: Prepare a Final Subdivision Plat of the built phases showing how the major lots on the approved preliminary plat have been divided into minor lots for individual townhouses or patio homes.
NOTE: The Final Subdivision Plat shall show the individual lot lines exactly where the side walls of the townhouse units or patio homes were actually built after any site adjustments were made. Also, the Final Plat shall show the following certificates/certifications:
a) Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
b) Certificate of Survey Accuracy
c) Certification of the Approval of Roads
d) Certification of E-911 Approval
e) Certification of Approval for Water System
f) Certification for Approval for Sewer System
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – VII - 10
g) Certificate of Approval for Recording
h) Certificate of Approval by the Planning Commission
Step 6: Ten (10) business days prior to a scheduled Planning Commission meeting, present the Final Subdivision Plat of the built-up phases to the planning commission staff for careful plat review, as well as a careful field check of the development; and place the requested Final Subdivision Plat review on the official Planning Commission agenda.
Step 7: Be at the scheduled Planning Commission meeting, with four (4) copies of the signed final plat (at least three (3) copies must have original signatures - the others may be copies). If all of the appropriate requirements for the Final Subdivision Plat have been met or adequate bonds, approved by City have been posted to cover incomplete roads or infrastructure, then the Planning Commission shall grant final subdivision approval for the phases which have "finished" townhouse units or patio homes on each lot. The term "Finished" shall mean complete as far as walls, flooring, roofing, windows, and utility systems, lacking only final painting, wallpapering, or other minor work.
Step 8: A guarantee in lieu of completion for the roads or infrastructure in the form of a surety bond or certified check may be held by the City of Etowah (or a homeowners association in the case of private roads) for one-year to assure satisfactory completion. The amount of the surety bond or check shall be sufficient to cover the cost of completing the incomplete infrastructure.
Step 9: Record the final plat and proceed to sell the individual townhouse units or patio homes.
Etowah Subdivision R egulations – VIII - 1
ARTICLE VIII
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND
OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY
8.01. CONFORMANCE TO ADOPTED TRANSPORTATION PLAN. All streets and other features of the Transportation Plan of Etowah, Tennessee or the Major Thoroughfare Plan of McMinn County as appropriate, shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimensions indicated on the adopted Transportation Plan/Thoroughfare Plan.
8.02. CONTINUATION OF EXISTING STREETS. Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width.
8.03. STREET CONNECTIONS. Where proposed streets are to adjoin existing streets, the developer must make the connection at his expense and meet all street design requirements set forth in these regulations.
8.04. STREET ELEVATIONS. The planning commission may require, where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets in areas subject to flood as defined in these regulations. No street shall be approved which is more than two (2) feet below flood elevation. Fill may be used for streets in areas subject to flood provided such fill does not unduly increase flood heights. The minimum road elevation shall be no lower than elevation level for a flood of 50-year frequency of occurrence, as determined by TVA.
Drainage openings and facilities shall be designed for a ten-(10) year storm event and so as to not restrict the flow of water and unduly increase flood heights.
8.05. STREET NAMES. The street names shall require the approval of the planning commission and the McMinn County E-911 Board. County Road numbers for streets in the planning area shall be obtained from the E-911 director or McMinn County Road Superintendent. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name/number of the existing street.
8.06. RESTRICTION OF ACCESS. When a tract fronts on an arterial or collector street, the planning commission may require such lots to be provided with frontage on a marginal access street or may require reverse frontage lots.
8.07. ALLEYS. Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multi-family, commercial or industrial developments but shall not be provided in one-and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys.
8.08. PRIVATE STREETS AND RESERVE STRIPS. There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision within the city limits of Etowah. Private roads or easements in the
Etowah Subdivision R egulations – VIII - 2
planning region are permitted, provided they comply with such rules and regulations as may be adopted from time to time by the McMinn County Commission.
There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the city, or in the planning region with McMinn County, under conditions approved by the planning commission.
8.09. EASEMENTS. Easements having a minimum width of ten (10) feet shall be provided where deemed necessary along each side and rear lot line for utility lines and underground mains and cables. Easements of the same or necessary greater width shall be required along the lines of or across lots, where necessary, for the extension of existing or planned utilities.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water or drainage right-of-way (easement) of adequate width (parallel streets may be required by the planning commission in connection therewith). The drainage easement shall be the same as the area designated as the floodway (as defined in Article III).
8.10 STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS. (Amended 4/19/10) The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a street from property line to property line. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows:
a. Rural Principal Arterials................................................... 140 feet
or as may be
required
b. Rural Minor Arterials......................................................... 80 feet
c. Rural Major Collectors....................................................... 60 feet
d. Rural Minor Collectors....................................................... 60 feet
e. Local Streets (Neighborhood)............................................. 50 feet
f. Marginal Access Streets...................................................... 50 feet
g. Alleys..................................................................................... 15 to 20 feet
h. Cul-de-sacs............................................................................ 50 feet
Cul-de-sacs are permanent dead-end streets or courts designed so that they cannot be extended in the future.
Except where topographic or other conditions make a great length unavoidable, cul-de-sacs, or dead-end streets, shall not be greater in length than seven (700) feet. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least fifty (50) feet with an outside pavement radius of at least forty (40) feet.
Etowah Subdivision R egulations – VIII - 3
i. Temporary Cul-de-sacs....................................................... 50 feet
Where in the opinion of the planning commission, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property. Such dead-end streets having a length greater than two hundred (200) feet shall be provided with a temporary turnaround of either a circular or back-and-turn design.
Where deemed necessary by the planning commission, adequate rights-of-way shall be dedicated to connect with any temporary dead-end streets adjoining the subdivision.
8.11. ADDITIONAL WIDTH ON EXISTING STREETS. Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum street width requirements.
a. The entire right-of-way shall be dedicated where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street; and
b. Where the subdivision is located on only one (1) side of an existing street, the amount of right-of-way to be dedicated is as follows:
1. If the land across the roadway from the proposed subdivision has not been subdivided or developed, the subdivider is only required to dedicate one-half (1/2) of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway.
2. If the land across the roadway has been subdivided or developed, the subdivider is required to provide enough additional right-of-way on his side of the roadway to bring the total right-of-way to the required width (in no case less than fifty (50) feet).
c. In cases where rights-of-way in excess of fifty (50) feet are required, additional widths shall be reserved and when used, just compensation therefore shall be paid by the condemning authority.
8.12. STREET PAVEMENT WIDTHS. (Amended 4/19/10) Street pavement widths shall be as follows:
a. Rural Principal Arterials.................................. 48 feet, or greater
as may be required
b. Rural Minor Arterials....................................... 32 feet, or greater
as may be required
c. Rural Major Collectors..................................... 30 feet, or greater
as may be required
Etowah Subdivision R egulations – VIII - 4
d. Rural Minor Collectors..................................... 30 feet, or greater
as may be required
e. Minor Streets...................................................... 28 feet (with one parallel parking lane)
f. Local Streets (Neighborhood)........................... 24 feet
In Planning Region............................................ 20 feet with 3 foot
gravel shoulders
g. Alleys................................................................... 11 to 16 feet
h. Cul-de-sacs..........................................................24 feet with forty
(40) foot radius
for turn-around
In Planning Region………………………….... 20 feet plus 3 foot
gravel shoulders
i. Through proposed neighborhood or local business areas, the street widths shall be increased twelve (12) feet on each side to provide for turning movements of vehicles into and out of necessary off-street parking areas without interference to traffic.
Note: The pavement widths are measured from the face of the curb to the face of the curb. These widths are considered the minimum necessary to accommodate modern traffic. Street parking must, of course, be considered in the pavement widths. Where no street parking is permitted or none is anticipated, allowances may be made. A parallel parking lane normally requires eight (8) feet. On minor streets, a moving traffic lane should have a minimum of ten (10) feet. Neighborhood street where the abutting property had adequate off-street parking and traffic moves slower, provisions for one (1) lane of parking and two (2) nine (9) foot traffic lanes may be adequate. (Pavement widths for major streets are normally a responsibility of the governing body.) (Amended 05-20-02)
8.13. STREET GRADES. Maximum and minimum street grades shall be fourteen (14) percent and five-tenths of one percent (0.5) respectively.
NOTE: These street grade limits are considered to be the optimum requirements to provide adequate safety. Different topographical situations may necessitate adjustment. The minimum grade requirement is necessary for drainage purposes. In this regard, it should be considered that in addition to accommodating traffic, streets are the heart of the surface drainage system.
Etowah Subdivision R egulations – VIII - 5
Horizontal Curve/Street Profile
Etowah Subdivision R egulations – VIII - 6
Street Jogs/Intersection
Etowah Subdivision R egulations – VIII - 7
8.14. HORIZONTAL CURVES. (Amended 4/19/10) Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, the street shall have a centerline radius of not less than the following:
a. Rural Principal Arterial………………………………….. 300 feet
b. Rural Minor Arterial……………………………………... 300 feet
c. Rural Major Collector……………………………………. 200 feet
d. Rural Minor Collector……………………………………. 200 feet
e. Local Streets………………………………………………. 100 feet
8.15. VERTICAL CURVES. Every change in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve constructed so as to afford a minimum sight distance of two hundred (200) feet, said sight distance being measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be four and one-half (4 1/2) feet above the pavement, to an object four (4) inches high on pavement. Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, topography warrant it, profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet horizontally and one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet vertically shall be required.
8.16. INTERSECTIONS. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees.
Curb radii at street intersections shall not be less than twenty (20) feet, and where the angle of a street intersection is less than seventy-five (75) degrees, the planning commission may require a greater curb radius. Whenever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction.
8.17. TANGENTS. Between reverse curves there shall be a tangent having a length of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
8.18. STREET JOGS. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be allowed.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – IX - 1
ARTICLE IX
IMPROVEMENTS PREREQUISITE TO FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
Prior to the approval of a final plat, an agreement shall be reached between the subdivider or his agent and the city or county government with regard to the installation of any street improvements or utility construction called for in the subdivision plat. The subdivider shall be required to have installed at his expense the following improvements:
NOTE: The subdivider at his expense, may contract with the city or a private firm to install the necessary improvements.
9.01. MONUMENTS.
a. All corners shall be established with a metal or concrete objects. Metal corners (monuments) shall be no less than ½ inch in diameter, concrete corners shall be no less than 4 inches in diameter, both shall be no less than 18 inches in length. Monuments shall be placed so the top is flush with the finish grade.
b. Concrete markers shall have a permanent mark for the survey point and shall have the surveyor’s name or company name attached or stamped. All new monuments shall have a cap or tag of non-corrosive material with surveyor’s registration number or company name stamped.
(Ref. Sec. 0820-3-.07 (1) (h) Rules of Tenn. State Board of Examiners for Land Surveyors)
9.02. GRADING. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded by the subdivider to the required cross section. Due to special topographic conditions, deviation from the above will be allowed only with special approval of the planning commission. Where roads are constructed under or adjacent to existing electric transmission lines, the nearest edge of the roadway surface shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any transmission line structure and all grading for the road shall be done in a manner which will not disturb the structure or result in erosion endangering the structure. In the case of electric transmission lines, the clearance from the road to the nearest conductor shall meet the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code.
a. Preparation. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials and all trees not intended for preservation.
b. Cuts. All tree stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to a depth of two (2) feet below the subgrade. Rock, when encountered, shall be scarified to a depth of twelve (12) inches below the subgrade. This provision applies to the roadway and not necessarily to the entire right-of-way width.
c. Fill. All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the development site. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed twelve (12) inches loose and compacted by a sheep's foot roller. The
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – IX - 2
filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to a roller shall be mechanically tamped.
9.03. INSTALLATION OF UTILITIES. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the required underground work, water mains, sewer lines, gas mains, etc., and all service connections, shall be installed completely and approved throughout the subdivision.
9.04. REQUIRED INSPECTIONS DURING ROAD CONSTRUCTION. Before road construction begins the developer shall contact the Public Works Director or McMinn County Road Superintendent as notification and to discuss pre-construction specifics. While road construction is taking place, inspections shall be made by the director/superintendent before, during and after each step or process, and prior to the next course or procedure. The director/superintendent shall check the width, depth and crown of the road and such other aspects of the work as he deems necessary. Weight tickets showing the type, class, and weight of gravel and surfacing material shall be furnished to the director/superintendent after the completion of each step.
9.05. STREET OR ROAD BASE. The base shall consist of crushed stone, Grade D, Class B., compacted to six (6) inches, and constructed as specified in Tennessee Department of Transportation (TDOT) Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1981, as revised. If mineral aggregate 303-02 is used, it may be compacted to a minimum of four (4) inches as a base for two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete. When the base is laid, the developer must notify the director/superintendent to inspect the base before proceeding to the installation of the surface course.
9.06. ASPHALTIC CONCRETE SURFACE COURSE (HOT-MIX). The road surface (paved surface) shall consist of two (2) inches of approved asphalt course. The surface course shall have not less than an average weight of two hundred twenty (220) pounds per square yard. Bituminous plant-mix base (hot mix) shall conform to the Tennessee Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (and any revisions) dated March 1, 1981. Materials will conform to Section 307 (Grading C). When the surface course is completed, the developer shall notify the director/superintendent to inspect as the third and probably, final inspection needed for approval. At the time of notification, the developer shall provide the director/superintendent with the job-mix formula, to ensure that proper materials and standards have been used.
NOTE: Each new street or road proposed under these regulations shall be inspected by the Director of Public Works, City of Etowah or the McMinn County Road Superintendent, or their duly authorized representative, at three stages during the construction process. The first inspection is when grading has been completed, the second after laying the street base, and the third after putting down the asphaltic concrete surface course.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – IX - 3
Tangent Section Type 1
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – IX - 4
Tangent Section Type 2.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – IX - 5
9.07. CURBS AND GUTTERS. Within the Etowah Planning Region, the subdivider shall provide one (1) of the illustrated types of concrete curbs and gutters, where public sewer is available. Backfill shall slope towards the curb and be higher than the curb to ensure drainage of surface water into the drainage system. Where public sewer is not available the developer has the option of installing curb or a three foot gravel shoulder (a minimum of 4-inches compacted) on both sides of the pavement.
9.08. STORM DRAINAGE. An adequate drainage system including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersecting drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water.
NOTE: Cross drains should be provided to accommodate all natural water flow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full width roadway and the required slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by a licensed engineer, architect, or surveyor, using Talbot's formula for a ten-year storm event, but in no case shall the pipe be less than fifteen (15) inches. Cross drains shall be built on straight line and grade, and shall be laid on a firm base but not on rock. Pipes shall be laid with the spigot end pointing in the direction of the flow and with the ends fitted and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth uniform invert. They shall be placed at sufficient depth below the roadbed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact, and in no case shall the top of the pipe be less than one (1) foot below the roadbed.
9.09. WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. Water mains and appurtenances properly connected with the community water supply and approved by the State of Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, shall be constructed in each subdivision to adequately serve all lots for domestic use and fire protection. All construction of water lines and appurtenances may be made by the Etowah Utilities District, either with their own forces, or by contract, upon the subdivider making proper bond or financial arrangements with Etowah Utilities. The subdivider may construct said water lines and appurtenances but said construction shall be subject at all times to the inspection and approval of Etowah Utilities District or local health authority. All inspections will be at the cost of the subdivider.
All water mains, except services, shall not be less than six (6) inches in diameter and of a material approved by the Division of Water Supply, Dept. of Environment & Conservation. Fire hydrants shall be installed in any subdivision within the Etowah city limits. The fire hydrants shall be located at the end of each line and no lot shall be more than five hundred (500) feet from a fire hydrant. No two (2) inch water mains shall be installed under any circumstances and no fire hydrants shall be located on four (4) inch mains.
The specifications of all material, including but not limited to fire hydrants, and the manner in which all lines and appurtenances are laid shall meet inspection and approval of the local health authority.
All water construction plans for subdivisions shall include a service from the main water line to the property line of each proposed lot in order that each proposed lot, at the time of construction, may be served by water without the installing of additional lines. The end of each service shall be properly marked.
The entire cost and expense of installing the required water supply system, including the connection to the existing water supply and including but not limited to the cost of pipe, valves,
Types of curbs
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – IX - 6
fittings, fire hydrants, trenching, backfilling, and services shall be borne by the subdivider including the stipulated payment for tapping and metering the system to serve each lot.
The provision of this section shall apply to all major subdivisions within 1,000 feet of an existing water supply system, and may apply to minor subdivisions if deemed appropriate by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission.
9.10. SEWAGE DISPOSAL. When any portion of a proposed subdivision is located within five hundred (500) feet of an existing public sanitary sewer line, sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve all the lots within the subdivision. Should the subdivision have elevations which are below those of the nearest public sanitary sewer, a lift station shall be installed by the subdivider provided the public sanitary sewer is within a reasonable distance of any portion of the subdivision. All sanitary sewer construction shall be built in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. All construction of sanitary sewers and appurtenances shall be by The Etowah Utilities District, either with their own forces or by contract, upon the subdivider making proper bond or financial arrangements with said district. The subdivider may construct such sanitary sewers and appurtenances but said construction shall be subject at all times to the inspection and approval of the Etowah Utilities District. All inspections will be at the cost of the subdivider.
All sewer lines except a house service shall be no less than eight (8) inches of material approved by the Department of Environment and Conservation. Manholes shall be constructed to standard city specifications and located not more than four hundred (400) feet apart and at each change in direction and/or grade. Force mains shall be no less than four (4) inch pipe. Lift stations shall be prefabricated steel ejector type or duplex pump type. All construction in general shall conform to the requirements of and shall meet the approval of the Etowah Utilities District and the Department of Environment and Conservation.
All sewer construction plans for subdivisions shall include a house service from the main sewer line to the property line of each proposed lot in order that each proposed lot at the time of construction may be served by sewer without the installing of additional lines. The end of each house service shall be properly marked.
The entire cost and expense of installing the connection to the existing public sanitary sewer line and including but not limited to the cost of pipe, manholes, lift stations, force mains, trenching, excavation, backfill and services shall be borne by the subdivider including the stipulated payment for tapping the system to serve each lot.
Where a subdivision is located beyond the service limits as determined by the planning commission, the subdivider may elect to have the lots served by individual sewage disposal systems. Should individual sewage disposal systems be proposed, satisfactory evidence of acceptability in the form of certified approved percolation tests shall be required. Subdivisions shall also have lot sizes which are adequate for the installation of the proposed individual system and all such subdivisions shall be approved by the Department of Environment and Conservation representative for McMinn County in writing.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all major subdivisions and may apply to minor subdivisions if deemed appropriate by the Etowah Regional Planning Commission.
NOTE: Upon receipt of a preliminary plat, the Dept. of Environment & Conservation reviews the data and a field investigation of each lot is made. If percolation rates are acceptable, other
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – IX - 7
topographic features including lot sizes are considered. In addition to unsatisfactory percolation test results, lots may be deemed unacceptable because of rock outcroppings, gullies, natural storm drains, excessive slope and the like. In view of topographic features and percolation test results, the maximum amount of available unusable area for subsurface disposal is determined for each lot. Calculations are made to determine the maximum number of bedrooms for a home and/or the maximum daily flow of sewage from establishments or institutions allowable for each lot. These data limitations and restrictions will be entered on the final plat by the Department of Environment and Conservation. This does not preclude the developer from enlarging lot sizes, combining unsuitable lots with acceptable ones, or designating certain lots for uses not requiring sewage disposal facilities as long as other requirements of the planning commission and other agencies are satisfied and provided that the above named alternatives are reviewed and approved prior to the preparation of the final plat. For lots with existing septic sewage disposal systems, the location of the entire septic system should be shown on the plat, regardless of lot size. The plat containing said lot shall also show the Existing Septic System Certificate as shown in Section 6.14 (Amended 2/17/2003)
9.11. SIDEWALKS. Within the city of Etowah, for the safety of pedestrians and of children at play and on approaches to shopping and community facilities (schools, parks, etc.), installation of sidewalks on both sides of streets shall be required of the developer, unless specifically waivered by the planning commission. In the planning region, sidewalks may be required by the planning commission where public sewer is provided to a subdivision, and for commercial developments.
When sidewalks are required, the following specifications shall be met: sidewalks shall be located not less than one (1) foot from the property line to prevent interference or encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other planting or structures placed on the property line at a later date. In single-family residential areas, concrete sidewalks shall be four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick. In multi-family or group housing development, sidewalks shall be five (5) feet wide and four (4) inches thick. In commercial areas, sidewalks shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide or larger to conform to adjoining sidewalks, and four (4) inches thick.
9.12. GUARANTEE IN LIEU OF COMPLETED IMPROVEMENTS. No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for record by the county register of deeds, until one of the following conditions has been met:
a. All required improvements have been constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the planning commission; or
b. The planning commission has accepted a surety bond or certified check in an amount equal to the estimated cost of installation of the required improvements, whereby improvements may be made and utilities installed without cost to the city, county, or other responsible utility system in the event of default by the subdivider.
NOTE: The planning commission shall set the amount of the bond based upon the cost of improvements estimated by the city or other responsible utility district or official designated by the planning commission.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – IX - 8
9.13. ACCEPTANCE OF STREET/UTILITY BY CITY/COUNTY COMMISSION.
a. The procedure for acceptance of streets by the City of Etowah/McMinn County and water/sewer mains by the Etowah Utilities District, for operation and maintenance is as shown below:
1. Construction is complete.
NOTE: For water and sewer Mains two (2) sets of “as built” plans shall be provided to the Etowah Utilities District.
2. The director of public works/road superintendent conducts a final inspection and determines the street is satisfactory. Water and sewer mains shall be inspected by the manager of the Etowah Utilities District or his designated representative.
3. A maintenance bond is furnished for the street as described in section “b” below.
4. The director/superintendent or manager recommends the street/utilities be accepted into the city/county system for maintenance.
5. The city/county commission approves a resolution accepting the street; the Board of Directors of the Etowah Utilities District accepts the utility mains into the system.
b. Any street constructed by the developer shall have a maintenance bond to cover the cost of any repairs during the first eighteen (18) months of use after being accepted by the city/county.
1. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be forty (40) percent of the value of the road and drainage improvements accepted by the city/county.
2. The city/county shall attempt to notify the developer prior to making any repairs, except for repairs deemed to be an emergency, so the developer shall have an opportunity to make the repairs without calling the bond. Emergency repairs will be billed to the developer.
3. Release of the bond will be made upon expiration of the 18 month period, a final inspection by the director of public works/road superintendent, a favorable recommendation by the Etowah city manger/McMinn county attorney, and approval of the city/county commission.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – X - 1
ARTICLE X
VARIANCES AND AMENDMENTS
10.01. VARIANCES. Variances may be granted where the planning commission decides that there are topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, and a departure from these regulations will not destroy their intent. Any variance thus authorized shall be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission, with the reasoning on which the departure is justified set forth.
10.02. AMENDMENTS. These regulations may be amended from time to time by the planning commission. However, before enacting an amendment, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least thirty (30) days notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
Etowah S ubdivision Regulations – XI - 1
ARTICLE XI
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
11.01. SEPARABILITY. Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole or part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.
11.02. CONFLICT WITH OTHER REGULATIONS. No final plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning ordinance shall be approved unless it conforms to such ordinance.
Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in zoning ordinances, building codes, or other official regulations, the highest, or more restrictive standard shall apply.
11.03. ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE. These regulations shall take effect and be in force from and after the first day of its adoption, the public welfare demanding it.
Adopted by the planning commission on the ___ day of _______________, 19 ____.
____________________________________________
CHAIRMAN
ETOWAH REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
A P P E N D I X
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
TITLE 1
PURPOSE 1
I PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE I-1
II SHORT TITLE I-1
III DEFINITION OF CERTAIN TERMS USED HEREIN III-1
IV PLATTING JURISDICTION, ENFORCEMENT AND
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION IV-1
V PRELIMINARY PLATTING REQUIREMENTS V-1
VI FINAL PLATTING REQUIREMENTS VI-1
VII DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS VII-1
VIII DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND
OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY VIII-1
IX IMPROVEMENTS PREREQUISITE TO FINAL PLAT
APPROVAL IX-1
X VARIANCES AND AMENDMENTS X-1
XI LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS XI-1
APPENDIX
Proposed Floodway, Cane Creek, Vicinity
of Etowah, Tennessee
High Water Profiles Conasauga and Cane
Creeks. Vicinity of Etowah, Tennessee
____________________________________________________________________________________________
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
FOR
ETOWAH, TENNESSEE
____________________________________________________________________________________________
AS PREPARED BY THE
ETOWAH REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
Jim Alsip, Chairman
Chris Watts, Vice-Chairman
Leroy Hershey Evan Ray
Burke Garwood Gene Keller Don Rogers
MARCH 15, 1999
(As amended through March 12, 2014)
(Originally Adopted October 23, 1972)
ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS OFTEN ASKED
ABOUT
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
1. Are subdivision regulations fair to everyone?
Yes, the written regulations provide the local planning commissions with uniform procedures and standards of design and construction by which to appraise equally and fairly all plats for land subdivision.
2. Who is affected by the regulations?
Every owner of land within the planning region who divides land into smaller parcels, or changes the size or shape of existing lots.
3. Am I affected if I resubdivide my tract into two parcels?
Yes, in most cases. "Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites or divisions for immediate or future sale or building development, and includes resubdivision. (See definition in Article 2.)
4. What's to prevent me from recording a subdivision plat without approval?
The county register of deeds is prevented by law from recording land subdivisions lying within planning regions without final planning commission approval in writing.
5. Can I sell by an unapproved plat and then record my lots by metes and bounds?
No. State law makes it a misdemeanor, punishable by law, to use an unapproved subdivision plat even if metes and bounds description is used in the instrument of transfer or sale.
6. What happens if I sell unapproved and unrecorded lots from my subdivision?
a. A state law has been broken (TCA 13-3-410).
b. Most lending agencies will not approve or guarantee loans.
c. State law requires that public bodies shall not extend sewers, water mains, lighting or other utilities in unauthorized roads.
d. Where building permits or zoning are in effect, a building permit to construct any building will be withheld.
e. Any building or structure erected in violation may be forced to be vacated or removed.
f. The legislative body of a county or municipality may stop sales by injunction or other legal action.
7. What improvements will I need to install in my subdivision?
Most subdivision regulations require the developer to grade and improve roads, install curbs, monuments, sewers, and water mains in accordance with adopted specifications.
8. Why doesn't the lot buyer instead of the developer pay for improvements?
The lot buyer does - at the time he purchases his property. If lots are sold without regulations, often the community bears the expense of providing needed improvements that should have been originally planned for and installed by the developer.
9. Won't subdivision regulations cause expensive development and cost me a lot of money?
Quite the contrary! Properly planned subdivisions make the most of land with a minimum of construction and operating cost. Good design takes advantage of all capabilities of the site and results in a minimum amount of roads and utilities with a maximum number of well-arranged and easier-sold lots. Good land subdivision affects the value of the land and the immediate return to the investor, while saving the developer money.
l0. How do I go about having a subdivision approved?
Your local planning commission's printed set of regulations include the procedure for having a plat approved. The planning commission meets at regular intervals and your preliminary plat is submitted in advance of the meeting at which it is to be considered. It is suggested that you consult your planning commission early so as to become familiar with the official plans that might affect your area.
ll. What if I wish to lay out a commercial or industrial subdivision?
The provisions of subdivision regulations apply to all subdivision of land, including that for use of business and industry. Since space, parking and service requirements will vary greatly, it is impossible to establish standards for all types of uses. For that reason, specific requirements for lot sizes and area are set forth in detail only for residential areas.
l2. Where can I get technical site planning assistance?
Your planning commission will help by recommending several competent subdivision designers who can contribute much to the financial success of your subdivision. Although they will not prepare final plans for you, advice on layout and design is available from the planning staff of the Local Planning Office of the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development.
SUGGESTED STEPS FOR A DEVELOPER
OF A SUBDIVISION
* Confer with the planning commission and its staff representatives to become thoroughly familiar with the subdivision requirements, the major street plan and other public improvements which might affect the area to be subdivided.
* Have preliminary sketch plat prepared by a reputable engineer or surveyor.
* Discuss preliminary plat with staff representative. The preapplication review by a trained land planner may save the subdivider time and costly revisions as well as possible savings through better design.
* Submit required copies of the sketch plat to the planning commission for preliminary approval in advance of its regular monthly meeting.
WHEN PRELIMINARY APPROVAL HAS BEEN GRANTED:
* See city engineer or designated approving agent(s) for street and utility specifications; contact city or county health officials for septic tank specifications if public sewers are not available.
* Develop subdivision according to preliminary plat and required modifications, if any. Install improvements.
* Obtain certificates from street and health officials certifying that improvements have been made or that a performance bond has been posted.
* Prepare final plat.
* Submit final plat to the planning commission for approval. When approved, the planning commission secretary will sign the certificate of approval for recording.
* The subdivider now records the plat with the county register's office. He is now ready to sell his lots.
PUBLIC NOTICE
The Etowah Regional Planning Commission will hold a public hearing on proposed changes to the Etowah Subdivision Regulations, which will be applicable to the City and to The Etowah Planning Region. These changes include new definitions, revisions to the certifications required, establishing procedures for taking over streets and utilities, and adding illustrations.
The hearing will be held at 6 p.m. in the Etowah City Hall, 723 Ohio Ave. on Monday, March 15, 1999.
Copies of the proposed regulations are available for review at the Etowah City Hall during normal business hours. All interested persons are urged to attend the hearing.
John Solsbee
City Manager
SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
Etowah, Tennessee
Amended Through 3/12/2014
(Originally Adopted 10/23/72)