TOWN OF ERWIN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
This is an uncertified electronic version of the Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances. The text is presumed to be accurate and complete; however, due to changes and amendments the Table of Contents, some page numbering, and the Index to the Code of Ordinances may not be accurate displayed.
Many significant changes to Part 9 - Chapter 4 Zoning, prompted this
ordinance to be adopted as a new Zoning Ordinance on 7 September 2000 thus replacing the previous version. Several grammatical corrections and a few text amendments were made to the Zoning Ordinance and adopted on 3 May 2001. You may notice that Part 8 - Chapter 2 Animals and Part 9 Planning and Regulations of Development appear in a format different than other Parts of the Code and that Chapters 9 and 11 in Part 9 were incorporated into Chapter 4 Zoning.
With the Adobe Reader you should be able to use the Search and Print features. The Adobe Reader (free from adobe.com) included on this CD may not be the most current version. Check their web site for any updates .
TOWN OFFICIALS
MAYOR
Patsy M. Carson
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Randy L. Baker, Mayor Pro Tem Alvester McKoy Ricky W. Blackmon
Thurman Whitman Frankie Ballard William R. Turnage
TOWN MANAGER
Richard Douglas
TOWN CLERK TOWN ATTORNEY
Cynthia B. Patterson C. Mac Hunter
FOREWORD
This Code of Ordinances for the Town of Erwin is provided by the North Carolina League of Municipalities as part of its services program. Technical staff assistance has been provided by Public Research and Management, Inc., of Atlanta, Georgia, which was responsible for the organization, codification, indexing and printing of the Code.
The Code consists of:
The Charter and all local acts which are not a part of the Charter document;
State laws which govern the organization and procedure of the municipal governing body. These laws control in situations to which they apply unless the Charter provided otherwise; and
The Code of Ordinances, which includes citations referring to official source and date of original ordinances; those without citations which represent new ordinances.
This Code is designed to serve as a complete compilation of ordinances and as a reliable reference guide. The parts, chapters and articles of the Code follow in logical order. The table of contents, the sectional analysis at the beginning of each chapter, and the indices provide sufficient points of reference for all elements of the Code.
The League offers a full range of services to supplement this Code and to keep it current. It is published in loose-leaf form so that all new ordinances may be printed for inclusion on a regular basis. A periodic update - supplement service is available from the League, secured through an agreement between the Town and the League, whereby the Town would send new ordinances and amendments to the League, which would print replacement pages for the Code. Also, the League will supplement the sections on State laws and local acts as amendments, changes or new enactments occur in the General Assembly.
We gratefully acknowledge the cooperation and assistance rendered by the municipal officials in the preparation of this Code.
S. Leigh Wilson
Executive Director
North Carolina League of Municipalities
AN ORDINANCE
REVISING, CONSOLIDATING, ELABORATING AND ADDING TO THE ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF
ERWIN, NORTH CAROLINA
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWN OF ERWIN OF THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA THAT:
Section 1. The following compilation of ordinances set out immediately after the Charter, Other Local Laws, and Related State Laws portions of this volume and designated as Division 11, Parts 1-9 inclusive, is hereby adopted as the official Code of Ordinances of the Town of Erwin, North Carolina.
Section 2. (a) All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the town enacted on or
before_____________________________ and not included within this code, or recognized and
continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as provided in Section 3.
(b) To the extent that ordinances or portions of ordinances included within this code are the same in substance as ordinances in effect prior to the adoption of this code, it is intended that they be treated as continuations and not as new enactments or amendments, in order that all rights and liabilities that have accrued are preserved and may be enforced.
Section 3. This code of ordinances contains all of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Erwin, but it does not contain, and is not intended to affect, the following classes of ordinances or actions
having the effect of ordinances:
(1) Annexation ordinances;
(2) Budget ordinances or amendments thereto;
(3) Bond orders and ordinances;
(4) Ordinances granting a franchise;
(5) Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the exercise of the power of eminent domain;
(6) Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the levy of special assessments;
(7) Ordinances amending the charter of the Town of Erwin, pursuant to Article 5, Part 4 of Chapter 160A,General Statutes of North Carolina;
(8) Ordinances, resolutions, or orders naming, renaming, or closing a street;
(9) Resolutions of any type;
(10) Ordinances or resolutions redrawing the boundaries of wards or election districts.
Section 4. No provision of this ordinance is intended, nor shall be construed, to affect in any way any rights or interests (whether public or private):
(a) Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provision of an ordinance repealed by the adoption of this code.
(b) Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in reliance upon, action heretofore taken pursuant to or within the scope of any ordinance repealed by the adoption of this code.
Section 5. No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal, judicial or administrative or otherwise) pending on the effective date of this ordinance by or against the Town of Erwin or any of its departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this code.
Section 6. If any portion of this code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this code which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this code are declared to be severable.
Section 7. A copy of this code shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk and it shall be the express duty of the clerk, or someone authorized by the clerk, to insert in their designated places all duly adopted amendments to this code, and to extract from this code all provisions which may be from time to time duly repealed. A copy of this code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it during reasonable times, under the supervision of the clerk.
Section 8. It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this code or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the ordinances of the Town of Erwin to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in Section 14-4 of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
Section 9. This ordinance, and the Code of Ordinances which it adopts, shall be in full force and effect from and after the _________________day of _______________19__.
Adopted, this ____________________________day of _______________197_.
TOWN OF ERWIN
By ________________________
George R. Joseph, Sr., Mayor
ATTEST:
Ramona 0. Warren, Clerk
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
DIVISION I THE CHARTER AND OTHER RELATED LAWS
THE CHARTER ……… ………………………………………………………………..….C-1 RELATED LOCAL LAWS ………………………………………………………………..L-1 RELATED STATE LAWS …………………………………………………………….….S-1 DIVISION II CODE OF GENERAL ORDINANCES
PART 1 INTRODUCTION ………….…………………………………… ....…….I-1
Chapter 1 Use of the Code and Penalties ……………………...………….….…….... I -1
PART 2 GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION ………………………........... 2-1
Chapter 1 Board of Commissioners ………………………………………...…...….. 2-1
Chapter 2 Administration Organization ………………………………….....……..... 2-4
Chapter 3 Departmental Operating Organization ……...……………………….…... 2-8
Chapter 4 Financial Administration ……………………………………………….... 2-8
Chapter 5 Social Security and Retirement …………………………………...….… 2-12
Chapter 6 Personnel Policy ………………………………………………..…..….. 2-12
Chapter 7 Boards and Commissions ………………………………………......... ..… 2-37
PART 3 PUBLIC SAFETY …………………………………………………..……. 3-1
Chapter 1 Law Enforcement ………………………………….…………………...... 3-1
Chapter 2 Fire Prevention and Protection …………………………………….…...... 3-4
Chapter 3 Emergency and Rescue ……….………………………………………..... 3-6
PART 4 PUBLIC WORKS…………………………………….……..……………..4-1
Chapter 1 Streets and Sidewalks………………………………………...………..…...4-1
Chapter 2 Garbage and Refuge Collection and Disposal…………………...…...…….4-5
Chapter 3 Municipally Owned Cemeteries……………………….....………………...4-8
Chapter 4 Parks and Recreation……………………..…………...……………….…...4-8
PART 5 MUNICIPAL UTILITIES…………………………………………...……..5-1
Chapter 1 Water and Supply Distribution……………………………………..………5-1
Chapter 2 Sewage Collection and Disposal…………………………………..……….5-3
Chapter 3 General Utility Regulations………………………………………..……….5-7
PART 6 LICENSING AND REGULATION………………………….………..…..6-1
Chapter 1 Business and Trades…………………………………...……………..….…6-1
Chapter 2 Street and Sidewalk Use and Regulation………………………...…..…….6-9
PART 7 MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC………………………...…………..7-1
Chapter 1 General Traffic Regulations……………………………………….……….7-1
PART 8 NUISANCES……………………………….…………………………..…..8-1
Chapter 1 Definition and Authority………………………………….………………..8-1
Chapter 2 Animals…………………………………………………….………………8-6
Chapter 3 Abandoned/ Nuisance Vehicles…………………………………………...8-10
Chapter 4 Weeds, Hedges, Tall Grasses, and Other Vegetation…………….….……8-14
Chapter 5 Rubbish, Litter…………………………………………………….………8-16
Chapter 6 General Health Regulations…………………………………………….....8-18
Chapter 7 Disorderly Conduct………………………………………………….……8-20
Chapter 8 Other General Nuisances…………………………………………….……8-21
PART 9 PLANNING AND REGULATION OF DEVELOPMENT………..……...9-1
Chapter 1 Building Code Enforcement………………………………..………...…….9-1
Chapter 2 Building Regulations……….……..………………………….…………….9-9
Chapter 3 Subdivision Regulations…………………….…………..….………….….9-13
Chapter 4 Zoning………………..………………………….……………..…………9-35
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention………………………………………...………9-85
Chapter 6 Public Water Supply Watershed Protection…………….……………….9-100
Chapter 7 Water and Sewage Systems…………………………….………………..9-104
Chapter 8 Trees………..…………………………………..……………..………....9-113
Chapter 9 Mobile Homes……………………………….………………………..…9-116
Chapter 10 Minimum Housing Code…………………………….….……………….9-128
Chapter 11 Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Boundary Map………….……………..…...9-141
APPENDIX I - TRAFFIC……………………………………………………………..…...A-1 APPENDIX II - PERSONNEL…………………………...……………………………... ..A-22
ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE………………………………... ..…………………O -1
INDEX TO CHARTER…………………………...………………… ……………..………CI-1 INDEX TO CODE OF GENERAL ORDINANCES……………………………...………... .I-1
Section 1.1 Charter
DIVISION I
THE CHARTER
AND OTHER RELATED
LAWS
THE
CHARTER
ARTICLE I
Incorporation and Corporate Powers
Section 1.1 Incorporation and general powers.
Section 1.2 Exercise of powers.
Section 1.3 Enumerated powers not exclusive.
ARTICLE II
Corporate Boundaries
Section 2.1 Corporate boundaries.
ARTICLE III
Mayor and Board of Commissioners
Section 3.1 Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore.
Section 3.2 Composition of Board of Commissioners.
Section 3.3 Terms; qualifications; vacancies.
Section 3.4 Compensation of Mayor and
Commissioners.
Section 3.5 Organization of board; oaths of office.
Section 3.6 Meetings of board.
Section 3.7 Quorum; votes.
Section 3.8 Ordinances and resolutions.
ARTICLE IV
Election Procedure
Section 4.1 Regular municipal elections.
Section 4.2 Voting.
ARTICLE V
Town Attorney
Section 5.1 Appointment; qualifications; term;
compensation
Section 5.2 Duties of Town attorney.
ARTICLE VI
Council-Manager Form of Government
Section 6.1 Council-Manager form of government.
Section 6.2 Effective date.
C-1
ARTICLE VII
Administrative Officers and Employees
Section 7.1 Town clerk.
Section 7.2 Town tax collector.
Section 7.3 Town accountant.
Section 7.4 Consolidation of functions.
Section 7.5 Other employees.
ARTICLE VIII
Finance
Section 8.1 Custody of Town money.
Section 8.2 Issuance of bonds.
Section 8.3 Purchases and contracts.
Section 8.4 Independent audit.
Section 8.5 Taxation.
ARTICLE IX
Claims Against the Town
Repealed by S. L. 1975, Ch. 361
ARTICLE I
Incorporation and Corporate Powers
Section 1.1 Incorporation and general
powers.
The inhabitants of the area described in Section 2.1 of this Charter shall be and constitute a body politic and corporate under the name of the "Town of Erwin" and shall be vested with all property which may be acquired by the Town, and all rights herein delegated to it; shall have perpetual succession; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at pleasure; may sue and be sued; may contract; may acquire and hold all such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to it, or otherwise acquired by it, and may from time to time hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; and shall have and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature.
Section 1.2 Exercise of powers.
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the Town, its officers, agencies, or employees, shall be carried into execution as
Section 1.2
provided by this Charter, or, if this Charter makes no provision, as provided by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Commissioners and as provided by the general laws of North Carolina pertaining to municipal corporations.
Section 1.3 Enumerated powers not exclusive.
The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or those appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the Town of Erwin shall have and may exercise all powers which are granted to municipal corporations by the general laws of North Carolina and all powers which, under the Constitution of North Carolina, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate.
Charter C-2
ARTICLE II
Corporate Boundaries
Section 2.1 Corporate boundaries.
(a) For the purposes of conducting the special
election on the question of incorporation and for
conducting the first election of Town officers
should the special election result in incorporation,
the corporate boundaries of the Town of Erwin
shall be as follows until changed in accordance
with subsection (b) of this Section or in
accordance with other law:
Beginning at a point on the South margin of West
"E" Street, as shown on plat of Erwin subdivision
said point being 400 feet West of the western
margin of S-18th Street and runs in a northerly
direction crossing West "E" Street 60 feet to a
property line corner between Lots "E" and "F" as
shown on Map 3 of Erwin Mills Property; thence
along the line between said lots North 3 degrees 04
minutes East to West "F" Street extended a
distance of 299.60 feet; then crossing said street on
the same course 60 feet to a corner between lot
"B" and tract No. 23 shown on Map No. 3; thence
along a line between Lots "A" and "B" and tract
No. 23 South 3 degrees 04 minutes West about
320 feet plus minus to the corner of lot "B", and
tract 22, 23, 24, shown on Map No. 3; thence
North 0 degrees 41 minutes West 791.4 feet to a
corner of tract No. 21 in the line of tract No. 24;
thence the same course North 0 degrees 41
minutes West, 639.10 feet to a corner between
tracts 20, 21, as shown on Map No. 3; thence as
the line between tracts 20 and 21 North 49 degrees
17 minutes East 509.40 feet to a stone in the West
margin of the Old Dunn and Lillington Road;
thence crossing said road 60 feet to a corner on the
East margin of said road and then along the
property line of tract No. 18 as shown on
subdivision Map No. 2 of the Erwin Mills Property
North 51 degrees 09 minutes East 400.28 feet to a
corner; thence along another line of tract No. 18
South 86 degrees 59 minutes East 683.25 feet to a
corner; thence along another line of tract No. 18
North 3 degrees 01 minutes East 1165.00 feet to a
corner in a farm road; thence along said farm road
a line between tracts Nos. 16 and 17, North 74
degrees 14 minutes East 825.50 feet to a corner in
said road, the corner between tracts Nos. 16 and
Section 2.1
17, Map No. 2; thence a straight line following the old farm road as near as possible running in an easterly direction to US 421 and NC 55 Highways and crossing said highways on same course to a point 300 feet at right angle to the dual lane US 421 and NC 55 Highway right of way on the northeast side to a corner; thence a line parallel to said highway and 300 feet northeast from said right of way to a corner in the East side of the Carolina Power and Light Company steel tower transmission power line right of way, said point being 300 feet northeast at right angle to the right of the dual lane highway US 421 and NC 55 and this point is also southeast of the Old Field Church Road near Zola's Barbecue; thence a line along the East margin of said power line and crossing the dual lane highway US 421 and NC 55 and
following its various courses to a point where said power line crosses the southern margin of McKay Street shown on Map "D" of the subdivision of Erwin Mills Property; thence along the southern margin of said McKay Street to a point 300 feet East of SR No. 1741; thence parallel with said road southwest to a point that is 1320 feet
southwest of the southern margin of the Old Post Road SR No. 1746; thence along a line 1320 feet southeast of the southern margin of Old Post Road SR No. 1746 and parallel to same to a corner that is located in line with a ditch at a distance of 3500 feet plus minus the corner; thence a line along said ditch in a northwestern direction to the center line of the intersection of Old Post Road SR No. 1746 and Highway No. 217; thence along the center line of Old Post Road and SR No. 1746 extended to and around the Cates Property and intersecting a line parallel and 300 feet South of the southern margin of "A" Street; thence 300 feet South and parallel to said "A" Street's southern margin to a point that intersects with the western margin of S18th Street; thence along the western margin of South 18th Street to the southern margin of West "E" Street; thence along the southern margin of West "E" Street 400 feet to the beginning. (b) As soon as practicable following their election, the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Erwin shall cause to be made an accurate survey of the corporate boundaries and shall cause to be made an accurate map based upon such survey. Such survey may vary from the description in subsection (a) of this Section by using,
wherever practical, natural or man-made topographic features such as ridge lines, streams,
Charter C-3
creeks, or streets as boundaries or as references to
boundaries. After such survey and map is
completed, and after the Board of Commissioners
of the Town of Erwin finds and declares upon its
minutes that the boundaries shown on such map do
not vary to an unreasonable degree from the
description in subsection (a) of this Section, they
shall cause accurate copies of such map to be filed
in the office of the register of deeds of Harnett
County and in the office of the Secretary of State
of North Carolina. From and after the time a copy
of such map is filed in the office of the register of
deeds of Harnett County, the corporate boundaries
as shown thereon shall be the corporate boundaries
of the Town of Erwin until changed in accordance
with law. An accurate copy of such map shall also
be maintained in the Town offices.
Section 3.1
ARTICLE III
Mayor and Board of Commissioners Section 3.1 Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore.
The Mayor shall be elected by and from the qualified voters of the Town voting at large in the manner provided in Article IV. The Mayor shall be the official head of the Town government and shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Commissioners. When there is an equal division upon any question, or in the appointment of officers, by the Board, the Mayor shall determine the matter by his vote, and shall vote in no other case. The Mayor shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are or may be conferred upon him by the general laws of North Carolina, by this Charter, and by the ordinances of the Town. The Board of Commissioners shall choose one of its number to act as Mayor Pro Tempore, and he shall perform the duties of the Mayor in the Mayor's absence or disability. The Mayor Pro Tempore as such shall have no fixed term of office, but shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the remaining members of the Board.
Section 3.2 Composition of Board of
Commissioners
The Board of Commissioners shall consist of six (6) members which members shall be residents of six (6) wards established by the Town Council in accordance with the map attached to Charter amending Ord. of 8/4/88 and incorporated herein as if fully set out and the six (6) members, each of whom shall reside within the ward from which he or she is elected, shall be elected by and from the qualified voters of the Town who live within the ward in which the candidate resides. (Ord. of
8/4/88)
Section 3.3 Terms; qualifications; vacancies.
(a) Except for the initial terms of office specified in division (d) below, the Mayor and the members of the Board of Commissioners shall serve for terms of four years, beginning the day and hour of the organizational meeting following their election, as established by ordinance in accordance with this Charter; provided, they shall serve until their successors are elected and qualify.
Charter C-4
(b) No person shall be eligible to be a candidate
or be elected as Mayor or as a member of the
Board of Commissioners, or to serve in such
capacity, unless he is a resident and a qualified
voter of the Town.
(c) If any elected Mayor or commissioner shall
refuse to qualify, or if there shall be any vacancy
in the office of Mayor or commissioner after
election and qualification, the remaining members
of the Board shall by majority vote appoint some
qualified person to serve for the unexpired term.
Any Mayor or commissioner so appointed shall
have the same authority and powers as if regularly
elected.
(d) (1) The 1989 General Election shall place in
contention candidates to be elected from Wards 1,
2, and 4 who shall serve for four. (4) years.
(2) Wards 3, 5, and 6 shall be served by at
large Commissioners David Ennis, Purdie
Lockamy and James Wilson who shall serve their
remaining terms ending in 1991.
(3) Wards 3, 5, and 6 shall elect
commissioners from each ward during the 1991
General Elections which commissioners shall
serve two-year term. The Mayor shall also be
elected in 1991 in accordance with Article III,
Section 3.1 and shall serve a two-year term.
(4) Unless later modified, all wards and the
office of Mayor shall elect their respective
representatives in 1993 which representative shall
hold office for four years, and all the above
offices, beginning in 1993, and thereafter shall
stand for election simultaneously.
(e) The foregoing plan is adopted pursuant to
North Carolina General Statutes 160A-101, et.
seq., to wit:
(1) Expiration of terms served to be
simultaneous 160A-101(4)
(2) Number of council members
16OA-101(5)
(3) Mode of Election 160A-101(6)(b)
(4) And such other sections therein as shall be
applicable to the amendments made. (Ord. of
8-4-88)
Section 3.4 Compensation of Mayor and
Commissioners
The Mayor shall receive for his services such
salary as the Board of Commissioners shall
determine, but not less than three hundred dollars
($300.00) per annum, and no reduction in his
Section 3.4
salary shall be made to take effect during the term in which it is voted. The Board of Commissioners may establish a salary of not less than one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per annum for its
members. Such salary may be increased or reduced, but no reduction shall be made to take effect as to any commissioner during the respective term of office which he is serving at the time the increase is voted.
Section 3.5 Organization of board; oaths of
office.
The Board of Commissioners shall meet and organize for the transactions of business at a time established by ordinance, following each biennial election and prior to July 1. Before entering upon their offices, the Mayor and each commissioner shall take, subscribe, and have entered upon the minutes of the Board the following oath of office: "I _______________________________ do
solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution and laws of North Carolina not inconsistent therewith and that I will faithfully perform the duties of the office of ___________________________________on which I am about to enter, according to my best skill and ability; so help me, God."
Section 3.6 Meetings of board.
(a) The Board of Commissioners shall fix suitable times for its regular meetings, which shall be as often as once monthly. Special meetings may be held on the call of the Mayor or a majority of the commissioners, and those not joining in the call shall be notified in writing. Any business may be transacted at a special meeting that might be transacted at a regular meeting.
(b) All meetings of the Board of Commissioners shall be open to the public. The Board shall not by executive session or otherwise formally consider or vote upon any question in private session.
Section 3.7 Quorum; votes.
(a) A majority of the members elected to the Board of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business, but a less number may
Charter C-5
adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members in such manner as
may be prescribed by ordinance.
(b) The affirmative vote of a majority of the
members of the Board of Commissioners shall be
necessary to adopt any ordinance, or any
resolution or motion having the effect of an
ordinance. All other matters to be voted upon shall
be decided by a majority vote of the members
present and voting.
Section 3.8 Ordinances and resolutions.
The adoption, amendment, repeal, pleading, or
proving of ordinances shall be in accordance with
the applicable provisions of the general laws of
North Carolina not inconsistent with this Charter.
The ayes and noes shall be taken upon all
ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the
minutes of the Board. The enacting clause of all
ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Board
of Commissioners of the Town of Erwin." All
ordinances and resolutions shall take effect upon
adoption unless otherwise provided therein, or
unless some provision of the General Statutes
provides otherwise.
Section 4.1
ARTICLE IV
Election Procedure
Section 4.1 Regular municipal elections.
Following the initial election hereinbefore provided for, regular municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday after the first Monday in May of each odd-numbered year, beginning in 1969. In the regular 1969 election and quadrennially
thereafter, there shall be elected by the qualified voters of the Town voting at large, two (2)
commissioners to serve for ten of four (4) years, or until their successors are elected and qualify. In the regular 1971 election and quadrennially
thereafter, there shall be elected by the qualified voters of the Town voting at large, a Mayor and three (3) commissioners to serve for terms of four (4) years, or until their successors are elected and qualify.
Editorial Note: Under state law (C.S. Chapter 163), which supercedes this charter provision, municipal elections are now held in November of odd-numbered years.
Editorial Note. Article III Section 3.2 and 3.3, have been substantially amended so that commissioners are now elected by ward rather than at large.
Section 4.2 Voting.
In the regular 1969 election and quadrennially
thereafter, each voter shall be entitled to vote for two (2) candidates for commissioner, and the two (2) candidates for commissioner, who receive the largest numbers of votes cast for commissioner shall be declared elected. In the regular 1971
election and quadrennially thereafter, each voter shall be entitled to vote for one (1) candidate for Mayor and for three (3) candidates for
commissioner, and the candidate for Mayor who receives the largest number of votes cast for Mayor shall be declared elected and the three (3) candidates who receive the largest numbers of votes cast for commissioner shall be declared elected. In case of a tie between opposing candidates, the election officials shall determine the result by lot.
Editorial Note: Sections 4.3 through 4.5, dealing with
marking of ballots, candidates filing for election, and general regulations of elections, have been deleted because these matters are now regulated by state law, G.S. Chapter 163.
Charter C-6
ARTICLE V
Town Attorney
Section 5.1 Appointment; qualifications;
term; compensation.
The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Town
attorney who shall be an attorney at law licensed
to engage in the practice of law in. North Carolina
and who need not be a resident of the Town during
his tenure, The Town attorney shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board of Commissioners and shall
receive such compensation as the Board shall
determine.
Section 5.2 Duties of Town attorney.
It shall be the duty of the Town attorney to
prosecute and defend suits for and against the
Town; to advise the Mayor, Board of
Commissioners, and other Town officials with
respect to the affairs of' the Town; to draw all legal
documents relating to the affairs of the Town; to
draw proposed ordinances when requested to do
so; to inspect and pass upon all agreements,
contracts, franchises and other instruments which
with the Town may be concerned; to attend all
meetings of the Board of Commissioners; and to
perform such other duties as may be required of
him by virtue of his position as Town attorney.
Section 6.1 Charter
ARTICLE VI
Council -Manager Form of Government
Section 6.1 Council-Manager form of
government.
Pursuant to G.S. 160A-101 and 160A-102, the
Charter of the Town of Erwin as set forth in Chapter 12 of the 1967 Session Laws of North Carolina, as amended, is hereby further amended
as follows to provide that the Charter clearly establishes that the town operates under the council-manager form of government in
accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of G.S.
Chapter 160A and any charter provisions not in conflict therewith.
Section 6.2 Effective date.
Subject to any referendum petitioned for and conducted pursuant to G.S. 160A-103, this
ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the day of Feb. 6, 1992. (Ord. of 2/6/92)
C-7
ARTICLE VII
Administrative Officers and Employees Section 7.1 Town clerk.
The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Town clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the Board and to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the Town, and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the Board may direct.
Section 7.2 Town tax collector.
The Board of Commissioners may appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other moneys belonging to the Town, subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the Town, and he shall diligently comply with and enforce all the general laws of North Carolina relating to the collection, sale, and foreclosure of taxes by municipalities.
Section 7.3 Town accountant.
The Board of Commissioners may appoint a Town' accountant to perform the duties of the accountant as required by the Municipal Fiscal Control Act.
Section 7.4 Consolidation of functions.
The Board of Commissioners may, in its discretion, consolidate the functions of any two or more of the positions of Town clerk, Town tax collector, and Town accountant, or may assign the functions of any one or more of these positions to the holder or holders of any other of these positions. The Board may also, in its discretion, designate a single employee to perform all or any part of the functions of any of the named positions, in lieu of appointing several persons to perform the same.
Section 7.5 Other employees.
The Board of Commissioners may create and fill by appointment such other positions as it deems advisable to insure the efficient administration of the Town's affairs, and may, in its discretion,
Section 7.5 Charter
appoint a person to supervise all Town departments and may delegate to such person the power of appointment and removal of department
heads and employees, other than the Town attorney.
C-8
ARTICLE VIII
Finance
Section 8.1 Custody of Town money.
All moneys received by the Town for or in connection with the business of the Town government shall be paid promptly into the Town depository. Such institution shall be designated by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by the General Statutes of North Carolina. All interest on moneys belonging to the Town shall accrue to the benefit of the Town. All moneys belonging to the Town shall be disbursed only in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Fiscal Control Act.
Section 8.2 Issuance of bonds.
The Town may issue bonds for the purposes and in the manner prescribed by the General Statutes of North Carolina relating to the issuance of bonds by municipalities.
Section 8.3 Purchases and contracts.
Purchases of apparatus, supplies, materials, and equipment, and contracts for construction or repair work shall be made in accordance with the General Statutes of North Carolina relating thereto.
Section 8.4 Independent audit.
As soon as practicable after the close of each fiscal year, an independent audit shall be made of all books and accounts of the Town government by a certified public accountant or a qualified public accountant registered under Chapter 93 of the
General Statutes of North Carolina, who shall have no personal interest directly or indirectly in the affairs of the Town or of any of its officers. The Board of Commissioners shall select the public accountant, and the results of each audit shall be made available for inspection by an interested citizen of the Town, and may be published if so ordered by the Board of Commissioners.
Section 8.5
Section 8.5 Taxation.
The territory within the corporate limits, and its citizens and property, shall be subject to municipal taxes levied by the Town for the fiscal year, 1967-1968 and subsequent years. The Town may obtain from Harnett County, and the County shall provide upon request, a record of property within the corporate limits which was listed for taxation as of January 1, 1967.
Charter C-9
ARTICLE IX
Claims Against the Town
[Repealed by S.L. 1975, Ch. 361]
Reserved Charter L-1
Related Local Laws (Reserved)
S-1 State Laws Section 160A-64
STATE LAWS GOVERNING THE
ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES OF THE GOVERNING BODY
ARTICLE 5 quorum, and the council shall then proceed to fill
the remaining vacancies. If the number of
Form of Government. vacancies on the council is such that a quorum of
the' council cannot be obtained and the office of
Part 1. General Provisions. mayor is vacant, the Governor may fill the
vacancies upon the request of any remaining
Section 160A-60 Qualifications for appointive member of the council, or upon the petition of any
office. five registered voters of the city. Vacancies in
appointive offices shall be filled by the same
Residence within, a city shall not be a
qualification for or prerequisite to appointment to any city office not filled by election of the people, unless the charter or an ordinance provides otherwise. City councils shall have authority to fix qualifications for appointive offices, but shall have no authority to waive qualifications for appointive offices fixed by charters or general laws.
Section 160A-61 Oath of office.
Every person elected by the people or appointed to any city office shall, before entering upon the duties of the office, take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed in Article VI, Section 7 of the Constitution. Oaths of office shall be administered by some person authorized by law to administer oaths, and shall be filed with the city clerk.
Section 160A-62 Officers to hold over
until successors qualified.
All city officers, whether elected or appointed, shall continue to hold office until their successors are chosen and qualified. This section shall not apply when an office or position has been abolished, when an appointed officer of [sic]
employee has been discharged, or when an elected officer has been removed from office.
Section 160A-63 Vacancies.
All vacancies that occur in any elective office of a city shall be filled by appointment of the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. If the number of vacancies on the council is such that a quorum of the council cannot be obtained, the mayor shall appoint enough members to make up a
authority that makes the initial appointment. This
section shall not apply to vacancies in cities that have not held a city election, levied any taxes, or engaged in any municipal functions for a period of five years or more. In cities whose elections are conducted on a partisan basis, a person appointed to fill a vacancy in an elective office shall be a member of the same political party as the person whom he replaces if that person was elected as the nominee of a political party.
Section 160A-64 Compensation of mayor
and council.
a. The council may fix its own compensation and the compensation of the mayor and any other elected officers of the city by publication in and adoption of the annual budget ordinance, but the salary of an elected officer other than a member of the council may not be reduced during the then - current term of office unless he agrees thereto. The mayor, councilmen, and other elected officers are entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the course of performing their official duties at rates not in excess of those allowed to other city officers and employees, or to a fixed allowance, the amount of which shall be established by the council, for travel and other personal expenses of office; provided, any fixed allowance so established during a term of office shall not be increased during such term of office. b. All charter provisions in effect as of January 1, 1972, fixing the compensation or allowances of any city officer or employee are repealed, but persons holding office or employment on January 1, 1972, shall continue to receive the compensation and allowances then prescribed by law until the council
S-2 State Laws Section 160A-71
provides otherwise in accordance with this section
or G.S. 160A-162.
Section 160A-65 Fidelity bonds.
(a) Every officer, employee, or agent of a city who handles or has in his custody more than $100 of city funds at any time shall, before assuming his duties, give bond with good sureties payable to the city in an amount to be determined by the council, that he will faithfully perform the duties of his office and render a true accounting for all city funds that may come into his custody or control. Unless otherwise required by law, the council may waive the faithful performance bond, but may not waive the true accounting bond. The city may pay the premiums on all bonds. The bond, when ap- proved, shall be deposited with the city clerk. (b) Cities may adopt a system of blanket faithful performance or true accounting bonding as an alternative to individual bonds. When such a system is adopted, statutory requirements of individual bonds, except for accountants, treasurers, and tax collectors by whatever title known, shall not apply to any officer or employee covered by the blanket bond.
Part 2. Mayor and Council.
Section 160A-66 Composition of council.
Unless otherwise provided by its charter, each city shall be governed by a mayor and a council of three members, who shall be elected from the city at large for terms of two years.
Section 160A-67 General powers of mayor
and council.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the government and general management of the city shall be vested in the council. The powers and duties of the mayor shall be such as are conferred upon him by law, together with such other powers and duties as may be conferred upon him by the council pursuant to law. The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city for the purpose of service of civil process and for all ceremonial purposes.
Part 3. Organization and Procedures of the
Council.
Section 160A-68 Organizational meeting
of council.
The organizational meeting of the council shall be held on the date and at the time of the first regular meeting in December after the results of the election have been certified pursuant to Subchapter IX of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes. At the organizational meeting, the newly elected mayor and councilmen shall qualify by taking the oath of office prescribed in Article VI, Sec. 7 of the
Constitution. The organization of the council shall take place not withstanding the absence, death, refusal to serve, failure to qualify, or non-election of one or more members, but at least a quorum of the members must be present.
* * *
Section 160A-70 Mayor pro tempore;
disability of mayor.
At the organizational meeting, the council shall elect from among its members a mayor pro tempore to serve at the pleasure of the council. A councilman serving as mayor pro tempore shall be entitled to vote on all matters and shall be considered a councilman for all purposes, including the determination of whether a quorum is present. During the absence of the mayor, the council may confer upon the mayor pro tempore any of the power and duties of the mayor. If the mayor should become physically or mentally incapable of performing the duties of his office, the council may by unanimous vote declare that he is incapacitated and confer any of his powers and duties on the mayor pro tempore. Upon the mayor’s declaration that he is no longer incapacitated, and with the concurrence of a majority of the council, the mayor shall resume the exercise of his powers and duties.
Section 160A-71 Regular and special
meetings; procedure.
(a) The council shall fix the time and place for its regular meetings. If no action has been taken fixing the time and place for regular meetings, a regular meeting shall be held at least once a month at 10:00
A.M. on the first Monday of the month.
S-3 State Laws Section 160A-81
(b) The mayor, the mayor pro tempore, or any
two members of the council may at any time call a special council meeting by signing a written notice stating the time and place of the meeting and the subjects to be considered, The notice shall be delivered to the mayor and each councilman or left at his usual dwelling place at least six hours before the meeting. Special meetings may be held at any time when the mayor and all members of the council are present and consent thereto, or when those not present have signed a written waiver of notice. Only those items of business specified in the notice may be transacted at a special meeting, unless all members are present or have signed a written waiver of notice.
(c) The council may adopt its own rules of procedure, not inconsistent with the city charter, general law, or generally accepted principles of parliamentary procedure.
Section 160A-72 Minutes to be kept; ayes
and noes.
Full and accurate minutes of the council proceedings shall be kept, and shall be open to the inspection of the public. The results of each vote shall be recorded in the minutes, and upon the request of any member of the council, the ayes and noes upon any question shall be taken.
Section 160A-74 Quorum.
A majority of the actual membership of the council, excluding vacant seats shall constitute a quorum. A member who has withdrawn from a meeting without being excused by majority vote of the remaining members present shall be counted as present for purposes of determining whether or not a quorum is present.
Section 160A-75 Voting.
No member shall be excused from voting except upon matters involving the consideration of his own financial interest or official conduct. In all other cases, a failure to vote by a member who is physically present in the council chamber or who has withdrawn without being excused by a majority vote of the remaining members present, shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. The question of the compensation and allowances of members of the
council is not a matter involving a member's own
financial interest or official conduct.
An affirmative vote equal to a majority of all the members of the council not excused from voting on the question in issue (including the mayor's vote in case of an equal division) shall be required to adopt an ordinance, take any action having the effect of an ordinance, authorize or commit the expenditure of public funds, or make, ratify, or authorize any contract on behalf of -the city. In addition, no
ordinance nor any action having the effect of any ordinance may be finally adopted on the date on which it is introduced except by an affirmative vote equal to or greater than two thirds of all the members of the council (not including the mayor unless he has the right to vote on all questions before the council.)
* * *
Section 160A-80 Power of investigation;
subpoena power.
(a)The council shall have power to investigate the affairs of the city, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of evidence.
(b) If a person fails or refuses to obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this section, the council may apply to the General Court of Justice for an order requiring that its order be obeyed, and that court shall have jurisdiction to issue these orders after notice to all proper parties. No testimony of any witness before the council pursuant to a subpoena issued in exercise of the power conferred by this section may be used against him on the trial of any civil or criminal action other than a prosecution for false swearing committed on the examination. If any person, while under oath at an investigation by the council, willfully swears falsely, he is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(c) This section shall not apply to cities having a population of less than 5,000.
Section 160A-81 Conduct of public
hearings.
Public hearings may be held at any place within the city or within the county in which the city is located. The council may adopt reasonable rules governing the conduct of public hearings, including but not limited to rules (i) fixing the maximum time allotted to each speaker, (ii) providing for the
S-4 State Laws
designation of spokesmen for groups of persons supporting or opposing the same positions, (iii)
providing for the selection of delegates from groups of persons supporting or opposing the same positions when the number of persons wishing to
attend the hearing exceeds the capacity of the hall,
Section 160A-75
ARTICLE 8
Delegation and Exercise
of the
General Police Power
and (iv) providing for the maintenance of order and
decorum in the conduct of the hearing.
The council may continue any public hearing without further advertisement. If a public hearing is set for a given date and a quorum of the council is not then present, the hearing shall be continued until the next regular council meeting without further advertisement.
* * *
Section 160A-175 Enforcement of ordinances.
(a) A city shall have power to impose fines and penalties for violation of its ordinances, and may secure injunctions and abatement orders to further insure compliance with its ordinances as provided by this section.
(b) Unless the council shall otherwise provide, violation of a city ordinance shall be a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. 14-4. An
ordinance may also provide by express statement that the maximum fine or term of imprisonment to be imposed for its violation shall be some figure or number of days less than the maximum penalties prescribed by G. S. 14-4.
(c) An ordinance may provide that violation shall subject the offender to a civil penalty to be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time after he has been cited for violation of the ordinance.
(d) An ordinance may provide that it may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to the application of the city for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law.
(e) An ordinance that makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement, and the General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such an ordinance occurs the city may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.
In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that
S-4 State Laws Section 160A-75
buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished, or removed; that fixtures, furniture, or other movable property be removed from buildings on the property; that grass and weeds be cut; that improvements or repairs be made; or that other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with the ordinance. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he may be cited for contempt, and the city may execute the order of abatement. The city shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the clerk of superior court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith.
(f) Subject to the express terms of the ordinance, a city ordinance may be enforced by any one, all, or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this section.
(g) A city ordinance may provide, when appropriate, that each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.
DIVISION II
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Key to Section Numbering System Chapter
Part Section
5-1001
Key to Paragraph Indentation
(a)
(1)
a.
1.
INSTRUCTIONS Code of Ordinances
Town of Erwin, North Carolina
Supplement No. 1, November 3, 1978
This supplement contains ordinance enactments and revisions through November 3, 1978, that should be inserted in the code of ordinances.
Remove Old Pages Insert New Pages
v, vi v, vi
2-9 2-9, 2-9.1 through 2-9.9
9-6 9-6, 9-6.1
9-10 9-10, 9-10.1 through 9-10.3
O-2 O-2
I-4 I-4, I-4.1
I-6 I-6, I-6.1
I-8 I-8
1-1001 Introduction
PART 1
Introduction
CHAPTER 1. Use of the Code and Penalties
CHAPTER 1
Use of the Code and Penalties
Section 1-1001 Definitions and rules of construction.
Section 1-1002 Provisions considered as continuations of
existing ordinances.
Section 1-1003 Section designations.
Section 1-1004 Effect of repeal or expiration of
ordinances.
Section 1-1005 Criminal penalty; not exclusive remedy;
continuing violations.
Section 1-1006 Severability of parts of Code.
Section 1-1007 Damaging ordinance prohibited.
Section 1-1008 Penalties
Section 1-1009 Right of Appeal
Section 1-1001 Definitions and rules of
construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Board of Commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise.
Board. The words "the Board" shall mean the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Erwin. Clerk. The words "the Clerk" shall mean the
Town clerk of the Town of Erwin.
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last
day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Harnett, in the State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders. Joint Authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.
Mayor. The words "the Mayor" shall mean the Mayor of the Town of Erwin.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
I-1
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular number.
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property as herein defined.
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after respectively.
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
Real property. "Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write.
State. The word "State" shall be construed to mean the State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, or bridge and the approaches thereto within the Town.
Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. Town. The words "the Town" shall mean the
Town of Erwin in Harriet County, North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
1-1001 Introduction I-2
Writing. The words "writing" and "written" shall
include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
Section 1-1002 Provisions considered as
continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Section 1-1003 Section designations.
The headings of the several sections of this Code are printed in bold face type and are intended as mere catchwords to indicate of abatement within a time fixed by the judge. the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catch lines, are amended or re-enacted.
Section 1-1004 Effect of repeal or
expiration of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provisions contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect.
Section 1-1005 Criminal penalty; not
exclusive remedy; continuing violations.
(a) Unless this Code of Ordinances shall otherwise provide, violation of any provision hereof shall be a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, as provided in G.S. 14-4. A provision of this Code may provide by express statement that the maximum fine or term of imprisonment to be imposed for its violation shall be some figure or
number of days less than the maximum penalties
prescribed by G.S. 14-4.
(b) In addition, and unless otherwise provided by this Code, any provision of this Code that makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction or order of abatement, and the General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such an ordinance occurs the Town may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.
(c) In addition to any injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished, or removed; that fixtures, furniture, or other movable property be removed from buildings on the property; that grass and weeds be cut; that improvements or repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with the ordinance. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he may be cited for contempt, and the Town may execute the order of abatement. The Town shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and material man’s lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the clerk of superior court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith. (d) Except as otherwise provided in this Code or in any ordinance of the Town, each day any violation of such Code or ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
1-1001 Introduction
Section 1-1006 Severability of parts of Code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the Board without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
Section 1-1007 Damaging Ordinances Prohibited.
No person shall tear or deface any of the Town Ordinances.
SECTION 1-1008 Penalty
The Manager or his designee shall be authorized to use any one (1) or more of the methods described in this Section, or action authorized by law, to insure compliance with or to prevent a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance.
1-1008.1Civil Penalties
Any person(s), corporation(s), LLC(s), or other entities, who violate any provision of this Ordinance may be subject to assessment of the maximum civil penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary the penalties set forth herein shall be applicable only to the extent that they do not conflict with penalties set forth in any particular section of these ordinances. The penalties set forth in a particular ordinance shall control over this ordinance. To the extent this ordinance adds to the penalties of a particular ordinance, but does not conflict with the same these penalties shall apply in addition.
1-1008.1.1 Civil Citations
A civil citation shall be issued by the Manager or his designee to any person(s), corporation(s), LLC(s), or other entity, failing to take corrective action according to and within the specific compliance period ordered by the Manager or his designee. Each day such violation exists after the expiration of the compliance period shall constitute a separate offense and be charged as a separate violation. Each said violation shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day until such violation has reached compliance. Failure to pay the penalty within 15 days from the receipt of the notice of civil penalty shall subject said person(s), corporation(s), LLC(s), or other
I-2
entities to a civil action in the nature of debt for the stated penalty plus any additional penalties, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the Court.
1-1008.1.2 Citation Content
A citation issued for a violation of this ordinance shall, among other things:
A. State upon its face the amount of the penalty for the specific violation if the penalty is paid within 15 days from and after issuance of the citation;
B. Notify the offender that a failure to pay the penalty within the prescribed time shall subject the offender to a civil action in the nature of debt for the stated penalty plus any additional penalties, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the Court;
C. Further Provide that the offender may answer the citation by mailing the citation and the stated penalty to Post Office Box 459, Erwin, North Carolina, 28339, or may pay the amount in person at the Town of Erwin; and/or
D. It shall further state that a citation which follows the original notice of violation may be appealed to the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the appeal rights set forth in Section 1-1009 herein.
1-1008.1.3 Settlement of Civil Claims
The Town of Erwin is authorized to accept payment in full and final settlement of the claim(s), rights or rights of action which the Town may have to enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt. Acceptance of a penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all claims, or right of action arising out of contended violations, only if the activities or non-activities which gave rise to the violations are abated or otherwise made lawful.
1-1008.2 Criminal Prosecution
Violations of this Ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor or infraction penalty and are punishable as provided in NC Gen. Stats. 14-4(b) and the maximum fine, term of imprisonment or infraction penalty allowed by law is hereby authorized.
1-1008.3 Injunction
Enforcement may also be achieved by injunction. When a violation occurs the Town may either before or after the institution of any other
authorized action or proceeding, apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction commanding the defendant, or in the case of counterclaims the plaintiff, to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of the property.
1-1008.4Order of Abatement
The Town may apply for and the Court may enter an order of abatement. An order of abatement may direct:
A. The buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished, or removed; that fixtures, furniture, or other moveable property be removed;
B. That improvements or repairs be made; or
C. That any other action be taken that is necessary to bring property into compliance with this Ordinance.
Whenever the party is cited for contempt by the Court and the Town has executed the order of abatement the Town shall have a lien, in the nature of a mechanic’s and material man’s on the property for the cost of executing the order of abatement.
SECTION 1-1009 Right of Appeal
Except when court action is filed any person aggrieved by the notice of violation has 30 days to appeal the action of the Administrator to the Board of Commissioners. Beyond the decision of the Board of Commissioners, recourse shall be to the Courts as provided by law.
2-1001 Government and Administration
PART 2
Government and Administration
Chapter 1 Board of Commissioners Section 2-1001
Chapter 2 Administrative Organization
Chapter 3 Departmental Operating Organization
2-1
ARTICLE A
General
Office of Mayor; duties.
Chapter 4 Financial Administration
Chapter 5 Social Security and Retirement
Chapter 6 Personnel Administration
Chapter 7 Boards and Commissions
CHAPTER 1
Board of Commissioners
ARTICLE A
General
Section 2-1001 Office of Mayor; duties.
Section 2-1002 Committees.
Section 2-1003 Resignation of members.
Section 2-1004 Compensation.
Sections 2-1005 through 2-1010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Meetings
Section 2-1011 Regular meetings; time and place.
Section 2-1012 Special meetings.
Section 2-1013 Minutes.
Section 2-1014 Mayor to preside.
Section 2-1015 Mayor not to vote.
Section 2-1016 Committees.
Sections 2-1017 through 2-1030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Ordinances
Section 2-1031 Procedure, form; publication.
Section 2-1032 Effective date.
Section 2-1033 Ordinances confined to one subject.
Section 2-1034 Official copy.
Section 2-1035 Amending.
Section 2-1036 Adding to; title.
Section 2-1037 Repeal or ordainment of chapters, articles
or sections.
The Mayor shall:
(1) Keep himself informed as to the Town’s business;
(2)Outline the powers and duties of committees as the Board may direct;
(3) Make recommendations to the Board; and (4) Perform other duties as authorized by law or this Code.
State Law Reference: Duties of the Mayor. G.S. 160A-67, 160A-69.
Cross Reference: See Charter, Section 3.1 for powers and duties of Mayor.
Section 2-1002 Committees.
The Mayor shall appoint such standing committees of the Board as he deems best. He shall appoint all special committees except where the Board shall otherwise order.
Section 2-1003 Resignation of members.
Resignation of members of the Board shall be in writing; no final action shall be taken thereon by the Board until the next regular meeting.
Section 2-1004 Compensation.
The compensation of Board members shall be as provided in the annual budget ordinance.
Sections 2-1005 through 2-1010 reserved.
2-1011 Government and Administration 2-2
ARTICLE B ARTICLE C
Meetings Ordinances
Section 2-1011 Regular meetings; time Section 2-1031 Procedure, form;
and place. publication.
The Board of Commissioners shall hold regular
meetings on the first Thursday of the month at 7:00 p.m., unless the regular meeting is otherwise cancelled by majority vote of the Town Board. Every member of the Board and officer shall attend all meetings of the Board, unless excused. (Ord. of 11/3/88)(Ord. of 6/11/92)
Cross Reference: Meetings of Board, Charter, Sec. 3.6,
Quorum. G.S. 16OA-74
Section 2-1012 Special meetings.
Special meetings of the Board may be held and called in accordance with state law.
State Law Reference: G.S. 160A-71
Section 2-1013 Minutes.
It shall be the duty of the clerk to be present at all meetings of the Board, to keep in a book provided for that purpose a record of all the proceedings of the Board. (Code 1967, Ch. A, Art. I Sec. 4)
Section 2-1014 Mayor to preside.
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board and in his absence the Mayor Pro Tempore shall preside. (Code 1967, Ch. A, Art. 1, Sec. 5)
Section 2-1015 Mayor not to vote.
The Mayor shall not vote on any question before the board except in the case of a tie vote deadlocking a decision of the Board. (Code 1967, Ch. A, Art. I, Sec. 6)
Section 2-1016 Committees.
The Mayor and Commissioners may create such committees of the Board for special purposes as they deem best. (Code 1967, Ch. A, Art. I, Sec. 7)
Section 2-1017 through 2-1030 reserved.
Every ordinance amending or repealing any
ordinance and every new ordinance shall be proposed in writing and shall be approved as to form to the Town attorney. Ordinances shall have ordinance and section captions.
Section 2-1032 Effective date.
All ordinances shall be effective after the ratification thereof except ordinances specifying some other effective date or ordinances required by state law to be effective only after having met specific date requirements. (Code 1967, Ch. A,
Art. II, Sec. 1)
Section 2-1033 Ordinances confined to
one subject.
All ordinances shall be confined to one subject except appropriation ordinances, which shall be confined to the subject of appropriations only. (Code 1967, Ch. A, Art. II, Sec. 2)
Section 2-1034 Official copy.
A true copy of an ordinance, which has been duly enacted by the Board, signed by the Mayor and attested to by the clerk, shall be known as an official copy of any ordinance of the Town. All ordinances or a true copy thereof shall be inserted in this Code in the proper chapter. (Code 1967, Ch. A, Art. II, Sec. 3)
Section 2-1035 Amending.
It shall be unlawful for members of the Board to annul, abridge, modify, or in any way change any ordinance of the Board except at a regular or special meeting of the Board. Any consent obtained relative to the amendment of an ordinance except in such manner shall in all cases be inoperative and void.
2-1036 Government and Administration 2-3
Section 2-1036 Adding to, title.
An ordinance proposed to add to or replace provisions of a current ordinance of the Town shall set out:
(1) Each paragraph to be amended as it stands;
(2) The words proposed to be stricken out and those to be inserted; and
(3) The paragraph as it would stand if so amended.
The title of the new ordinance shall contain the entire title of the ordinance amended thereby.
Section 2-1037 Repeal or ordainment of
chapters, articles or sections.
Whenever a chapter, article or section of this Code is repealed, the clerk shall make a notation of such repeal in the official copy of this Code. Whenever a new chapter, article or section of this Code is ordained, the clerk shall make a notation of such new ordinance in the official copy of this Code. Not later than twelve (12) months after the
enactment of all ordinances, such ordinances shall be printed in the format of this Code and inserted in the appropriate places herein.
Cross Reference: See section 3.8 of Charter for its provisions on ordinances.
State Law Reference: Code of ordinances, G. S. 160A-77; ordinance book requirements, G. S. 160A-78; pleading and proving of city ordinances, G. S. 160A-79.
2-2001 Government and Administration 2-4
CHAPTER 2 ARTICLE A
Administrative Organization Administrative Offices
ARTICLE A Section 2-2001 Town manager.
Administrative Offices
(a) Pursuant to the authority of Section
Section 2-2001 Town manager.
Section 2-2002 Town attorney.
Section 2-2003 Tax collector.
Section 2-2004 Personnel director.
Section 2-2005 Clerk-treasurer.
Section 2-2006 Employees' bonds.
Sections 2-2007 through 2-2010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Other Administrative Provisions
(Reserved)
160A-147 the General Statutes of North Carolina
granting the Board of Commissioners power to appoint such officers and agents as may be necessary to enforce their ordinances and regulations, keep their records and conduct their affairs, the Board shall appoint an officer whose title shall be Town manager and who shall be the chief executive officer and the head of the administrative branch of the Town government. The Town manager shall be chosen by the Board solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office as hereinafter outlined. At the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the Town or State, but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the Town. No person elected to membership on the Board shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as Town manager until one (1) year has elapsed following the expiration of the term for which he was elected. (Ord. of 10/3/68, Sec. 1)
(b) The Town manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term but may be removed by a majority vote of the members of the Board. At least thirty
(30) days before such removal may become effective the manager shall be furnished with a formal statement in the form of a resolution passed by a majority vote of the members of the Board stating the Board's intention to remove him and the reasons therefor. The manager may reply in writing to such resolution. If so requested by the manager, the Board shall fix a time for a public hearing upon the question of his removal and the final resolution removing the manager shall not be adopted until such public hearing has been held. Upon passage of a resolution stating the Board's intention to remove the manager, the Board may suspend him from duty, but his pay shall continue until his removal shall become effective as herein described. The action of the Board in removing the manager shall be final. In case of the absence or disability of the manager the Board may designate a qualified administrative officer of the Town to
2-2001 Government and Administration 2-5
perform the duties of the manager during such
absence or disability. (Ord. of 10/3/68, Sec. 1) (c) The Town manager shall be responsible to the Board for the proper administration of all affairs of the Town placed in his charge, and to that end, subject to the provisions of the Town Charter and, except as otherwise provided herein, he shall have the power to appoint and remove all officers and employees in the administrative service of the Town. The manager may authorize the head of a department or office responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office. Appointments made by, or under the authority of, the Town manager shall be on the basis of executive and administrative ability and of the training and experience of such appointees in the work which they are to perform. All such appointments shall be without definite term unless for provisional, temporary or emergency services. (Ord. of 10/3/68, Sec. 2) (d) Any officer or employee to whom the Town manager, or a head of a department or office, may appoint a successor, may be removed by the manager or other appointing officer at any time. Subject to the provisions of subsection (c), the
decision of the manager, or other appointing officer, shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom to any other office, body or court whatsoever. (Ord. of 10/3/68, Sec. 3)
(e) Neither the Board nor any of its committees or members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office by the Town manager or any of his subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment' or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the Town. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Board and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the manager, and neither the Board of Commissioners nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the Town manager either publicly or privately. (Ord. of 10/3/68, Sec. 4)
(f) It shall be the duty of the Town manager: (1) to act as Director of Finance and Purchasing Agent;
(2) to act as Chief Conservator of the peace within the Town;
(3) to supervise the administration of the affairs of the Town;
(4) to see that the ordinances of the Town and
the laws of the State are enforced;
(5) to make such recommendations to the Board of Commissioners concerning the affairs of the Town as may seem to him desirable;
(6) to keep the Board advised of the financial condition and future needs of the Town; (7) to prepare and submit to the Board the annual budget estimates;
(8) to prepare and submit to the Board such reports as may be required by that body; and (9) to perform such other duties as may be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Commissioners. (Ord. of 10/3/68, Sec. 5)
Cross Reference: The Charter, section 6.5, provides that the Board may delegate the power of appointment and removal of department heads other than the attorney to an appointed person.
Section 2-2002 Town attorney.
The Town attorney shall:
(1) Prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the Town may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by, any officer of the Town, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the Town;
(2) See to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the Town and of all similar interlocutory orders;
(3) See to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings;
(4) Draft or review any contract, lease or other document or instrument to which the Town may be a party;
(5) At the request of the Board, draft ordinances covering any subjects within the power of the Town; and
(6) Perform any other duties required of him by G. S. 160A-173 and other laws and ordinances.
Section 2-2003 Tax collector.
The tax collector shall at least once a day pay over to the Town clerk-treasurer all monies collected or received by him and shall also once a month
2-2003 Government and Administration 2-6
furnish the finance committee with an itemized Section 2-2005 Clerk-treasurer.
statement of the amount of funds collected by him
and the sources from which they were obtained, The clerk-treasurer shall be appointed by the
together with the receipts of the clerk-treasurer for
the amounts turned over to him; and he and the sureties on his official bond shall be liable for all taxes and other revenues which he collected or might have collected.
Cross Reference: Tax collector, Charter, section 6.2. Section 2-2004 Personnel director.
The Town manager shall serve as personnel director and as such shall:
(1) Establish and maintain a roster of all employees, in which there shall be set forth as to each employee the class title of the position held, the salary or pay status, and any other necessary data;
(2) Assign and direct the work of any and all assistants provided for by the Board;
(3) Advise and consult with the department heads in the development of training programs; (4) Develop in consultation with the department heads a system of periodic service ratings of employees, to be administered by the department heads;
(5) Make annual reports and such special reports as he deems advisable regarding personnel administration and recommendations for
improvement therein to the Board;
(6) Prepare and maintain the classification and compensation plans and after consultation with department heads prepare and present to the Board class specifications and amendments thereto;
(7) Recommend to the Board amendments to this part and cause all rules and regulations to be published and copies thereof to be given to the department heads and the Board, and to maintain copies in his office;
(8) Maintain all registers of eligible persons for appointment and make certification from such registers;
(9) Make such regulations and other
administrative memoranda as he may deem necessary, consistent with this Code, relative to his authority hereunder; and
(10) Perform such other duties as may be required of him by statute or ordinance.
Town manager.
(a) The clerk-treasurer shall attend all meetings of the Board and shall regularly and fairly record all of their proceedings in a book to be kept by him for that purpose. He shall also keep a well-bound book to be styled the Code of Ordinances, in which he shall fairly and correctly transcribe all ordinances which are enacted by the Board.
(b)It shall be the duty of the clerk to keep true, accurate and just books of accounts of the dealings and transactions of the Town, which books shall show at all times the true condition of the said Town, its resources and liabilities and the disposition and use of the monies coming under the control of the Town.
(c) The clerk-treasurer shall keep or cause to be kept in a safe place all monies, records, and accounts.
(d) The clerk-treasurer shall disburse funds for the various purposes of the Town only when an appropriation for such purpose has been made in the annual budget and the disbursement is authorized by the Board.
(e) The clerk-treasurer shall perform such other duties as the Board may from time to time require. (Code 1967, Ch. A, Art. III, Sec. 2; as amended)
Cross Reference Specific provision on ordinances, official copy, etc., section 2-1031 et seq. Disbursement of funds; purchasing are found in section 2-4001 and 2-4002. Board
authority to consolidate offices, Charter, section 6.4; Town clerk, Charter, section 6.1.
Section 2-2006 Employees' bonds.
The clerk-treasurer and other officers or employees required by the Board shall, before entering upon their duties, post bond in amounts specified by the Board. All bond premiums shall be paid from Town funds. Provided, that when two (2) officers are combined, such as clerk-treasurer, only one (1) bond shall be required. (Code 1967, Ch. A, Art. III, Sec. 4)
State Law Reference: Every officer who handles or has in his custody more than $100 of City funds at one time must give fidelity bond. G.S. 160A-65.
Sections 2-2007 through 2-2010 reserved.
2-2011 Government and Administration 2-7
ARTICLE B
Other Administrative Provisions (Reserved)
2-3001 Government and Administration 2-8
CHAPTER 3 CHAPTER 4
Departmental Operating Organization Financial Administration
Section 2-3001 Departments enumerated. ARTICLE A
Section 2-3001 Departments enumerated. Purchasing
The following departments are designated:
Park and Recreation Department
Police Department
Street Department
Sanitation Department
Water and Sewer Department
Editorial Note: The Town provides for fire department protection by contract.
Section 2-4001 Disbursement of funds.
Section 2-4002 Purchasing.
Section 2-4003 Disposal of surplus property.
ARTICLE B
Privilege License Taxes
Section 2-4011 Definitions.
Section 2-4012 License tax upon certain trades and
business operations.
Section 2-4013 Unlawful to conduct business without a
license.
Section 2-4014 License taxes shall be for twelve
months.
Section 2-4015 License required for every place of
business.
Section 2-4016 License required for every separate
business.
Section 2-4017 Licensed must be displayed at the place
of business licensed.
Section 2-4018 No abatement of license tax.
Section 2-4019 Schedule of annual privilege licenses.
Sections 2-4020 through 2-4030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Fiscal Procedures
(Reserved)
ARTICLE A
Purchasing
Section 2-4001 Disbursement of funds.
(a) In accordance with the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, no bill or claim against the Town may be paid unless it has been approved by the officer or employee responsible for the function or agency to which the expense is charged. No check or draft of the Town shall be valid unless it bears on its face the certificate of the clerk as follows:
"Provision for the payment of this check has been made by an appropriation duly made, pursuant to the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act.”
2-4001 Government and Administration 2-9
(b) No contract, agreement or purchase order
shall be valid unless it bears the clerk's certificate as follows:
"Provision for the payment of monies to fall due under this agreement has been made by appropriation duly authorized, as required by the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act."
Section 2-4002 Purchasing.
The Town manager shall serve as purchasing agent and as such shall:
(1) Make all purchases of material, equipment and supplies authorized by the Board at the most favorable price for the Town and shall see that the material, equipment and supplies delivered are correct in number or amount and comply with the standards and specifications agreed to at the time of purchase;
(2) Establish sets of standards and
specifications to control purchases by the Town; (3) Prepare and publish specifications and notices to bidders;
(4) Advise the Board as to anticipated needs for purchases and make purchases in advance of needs as authorized by the Board;
(5) Store material, equipment and supplies in advance of actual need;
(6) Keep records of all purchases made by him and of the destination or ultimate use of such material, equipment and supplies; and
(7) Cause to be kept an inventory of all municipal property in his custody and of all municipal property in the custody of the other officers and employees of the Town.
Cross Reference: Charter provision on purchases and contracts, Charter, section 7.3.
Section 2-4003 Disposal of surplus property.
(a) The Town manager is hereby authorized, pursuant to G.S. 160A-266 (c), to dispose of any surplus personal property owned by the Town whenever he determines, in his discretion, that:
(1) The item or group of items has a fair market value of less than rive five hundred thousand dollars ($500) ($5,000).
(2) The property is no longer necessary for the conduct of public business; and
(3) Sound property management principles and financial considerations indicate that the interest
of the Town would best be served by disposing of
the property.
(b) The Town manager may dispose of any such surplus personal property by any means which he judges reasonably calculated to yield the highest attainable sale price in money or other consideration including but not limited to the methods of sale provided in Article 12 of G.S. Chapter 160A. Such sale may be public or
private, and with or without notice and minimum waiting period.
(c) The surplus property shall be sold to the party who tenders the highest offer, or exchanged for any property or services useful to the Town if greater value may be obtained in that manner, and the Town manager is hereby authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title documents. If no offers are received within a reasonable time, the Town manager may, retain the property, obtain any reasonable available salvage value, or cause it to be disposed of as waste material. No surplus property may be donated to any individual or organization except by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. (d) The Town manager shall, on or before the first day of February, report in writing to the Board of Commissioners on any property disposed of under these provisions from July I through December 31 of the previous year, and shall, on or before the first day of August, report in writing to the Board of Commissioners on any property disposed of under these provisions from January I through June 30 of that year. The
written report shall generally describe the property sold or exchanged, to whom it was sold, or with whom exchanged, and the amount of money or other consideration received for each sale or exchange since the last such report was submitted. (Ord. of 7/5/84)
Sections 2-4004 through 2-4010 reserved.
2-4011
ARTICLE B
Privilege License Taxes
Section 2-4011 Definitions.
Government and Administration 2-10
Section 2-4013 Unlawful to conduct business
without a license.
It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent or
servant to engage in or carry on a business in the
Town for which there is required a license,
Wherever in this article the words hereinafter
defined or construed in this section are used, they shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be deemed to have the following meaning:
(a) Agent. The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer, or distributor.
(b) Business. Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any kind, subject, by the provision of this article, to a license tax.
(c) Engaged in the Business. Engaged in the business as owner or operator.
(d) Fiscal Year. The period beginning with the 1st day of July and ending with the 30th day of June next following.
(e) Person. Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation.
(f) Quarter. Any three consecutive months. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. 1, Sec.I)
Section 2-4012 License tax upon certain trades and business operations.
(a) In addition to the tax on property and polls, as otherwise provided for, and under the power and authority conferred in the laws of North Carolina, there shall be levied and collected annually or more often, where provided for, a privilege license tax on trades, professions, business operations, exhibitions, circuses, and all subjects authorized to be licensed, as set out in the following sections and schedule. All licenses shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable.
(b) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the Board of Commissioners from imposing from time to time, as they may see fit, such license taxes as are not specifically herein defined, or from increasing or decreasing the amount of any special license tax, or from prohibiting or regulating the business or acts licensed, and all licenses are granted subject to the provisions of existing ordinances for those hereafter enacted. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. 1, Sec. 2)
without first having paid the license tax and
obtained the license. For the purpose of this section the opening of a place of business or offering to sell, followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing in furtherance of the business shall be construed to be engaging in or carrying on such business; and each day that such person, firm or corporation shall engage in or carry on such business as aforesaid, shall be construed to be a separate offense. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. 1, Sec. 3)
Section 2-4014 License taxes shall be for twelve months.
All taxes provided for and fixed in the following sections and schedule shall be for twelve (12) months, unless otherwise specified, and shall so remain for twelve (12) months beginning July 1, and ending June 30; provided, that where the license is issued after January 1, then the licensee shall be required to pay one-half (1 /2) the tax prescribed, except where otherwise specifically provided for. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. 1, Sec. 4)
Section 2-4015 License required for every place of business.
A license issued for the privilege of conducting a business is only valid for the business conducted at the place and by the licensee named therein. Every person doing business in more than one factory, mill, or other place of business, shall secure a separate license for each such place of business, unless such warehouse or store, stall or stand, places of business are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with an opening into each other and are operated as a unit. If the business is moved or if the licensee sells to another, then a new license is necessary, unless a special permit to continue business under the original license is obtained from the Board. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. I, Sec. 5)
2-4016 Government and Administration 2-11
Section 2-4016 License required for every
separate business.
The payment of any particular tax imposed by this article shall not relieve the person paying the same from the payment of any other tax imposed by this article for any other business he may carry on, unless so provided by the section imposing such tax; it being the intent of this article that license taxes "prescribed by various sections or subsections of this article applicable to any business shall be cumulative except where otherwise specifically provided. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. 1, Sec. 6)
Section 2-4017 License must be displayed at the place of business licensed.
Every license must be kept prominently displayed at the place of business of the licensee named in the license, or, if the licensee has no fixed place of business, such licensee must keep the same wherever such business is being operated and where it can be inspected at any time by the proper municipal official. (Code 1967, Ch. H,
Art. 1, Sec. 7)
Section 2-4018 No abatement of license tax.
No license tax shall be abated nor shall any refund of any part thereof be made, in any case where the licensee discontinues his business before the end of the period for which such license was issued. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. 1, Sec. 8)
Section 2-4019 Schedule of annual privilege licenses.
The schedule of Town privilege license taxes shall be as follows:
(1) Abattoirs. Every person engaged in the business of operating an
abattoir………………………..……….….$10.00 (2) AddingMachines (See Office Supplies). (3) Advertising.
a. Every person, firm or corporation who or which is engaged in the business of outdoor advertising by placing, erecting or maintaining advertising signs or structures (e.g., sign boards, poster boards, or printed bulletins) or any other outdoor advertising devices.
Per annum……………………….…….….$20.00
b. Sound trucks or use of vehicles with loud
speaker or other sound magnifying device. Per vehicle……………………………..….$10.00 c. Distributing handbills or printed matter for commercial purposes.
Per day……………………………... ...…..$10.00
Per annum.
Per annum……………………...…...…….$10.00 e. Distributing samples, favors or novelties. Per day……………………………... ...……$5.00
f. Advertising not otherwise specifically taxed. Per annum………………...…………...….$10.00 (4) Agents and Agencies
a. Collecting and claim agencies: Every person, firm or corporation operating for a profit a collection agency for the purpose of collecting accounts, notes, or other indebtedness for others. ( Does not apply to licensed attorneys.)
Per annum……………..………………….$50.00 b. Detective agencies and detectives: Every person operating a private detective agency and every individual acting as a private detective, even though a salaried employee.
Per annum…………….…………………..$50.00 c. Emigrant and employment agents: 1. Emigrant agents: Every person engaged in the business of procuring laborers for employment outside the state.
Per annum………………….……………$500.00 2. Employment agencies: Every person engaged in operating a business of securing employment for another person for a fee or a commission. ( Not applicable to federal or state agencies. )
Per annum……………………..……...…$200.00 (i) Agencies for teachers, when approved by State Department of Public Instruction.
Per annum…………………..………... ..…$25.00
(ii) Domestic help and unregistered nurses, where sole business is placement.
Per annum………………………... ..…..…$25.00
d. Lightning rod agents: Every person selling or distributing lightning rods.
Per annum……………………... ..………..$20.00
e. Lumber brokers or agents: Every person, broker, or lumber agent.
Per annum………………..……………... ..$25.00
(5) Ambulances.
Every person operating an ambulance or ambulances. Per vehicle.
Per annum………………..…...…………..$15.00 (6) Amusements ( See also Circuses, Moving Pictures, Vaudevilles).
2-4019 Government and Administration 2-11.1
a. Parks, open to the public as a place of
amusement.
Per annum…………..……...……………..$50.00 b. Traveling theatrical companies: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of a traveling theatrical, traveling moving picture, or a traveling vaudeville company giving exhibitions or performances in any tent, hall, or other place not licensed as park, moving picture or vaudeville.
Per day……………..……...………………$25.00 1. If admission is not more than fifty cents ($0.50), including reserve seat, and exhibit in same place as much as one (1) week.
Per week………………………….……... ..$25.00
2. If consists of less than ten (10) performers, charges less than fifty cents ($0.50), and exhibits in same place as much as one (1) week.
Per week………………………….……….$10.00 (7) Antique Furniture
Every person dealing in antique furniture. Per annum…………………...…..………..$25.00 (8) Auction Sales.
a. Every person engaged in the business of selling real estate by auction, except sales conducted under court order.
Per sale……………………………….…...$12.50 Per annum……………………...……..…..$25.00 b. All other auctioneers, except tobacco.
Per day…...……………………………….$25.00 Per annum……………….…..…..…... .…$100.00
(9) Automatic Sprinklers (See Elevators). (10) Automobile, Motorcycle Dealers and Service Stations.
a. Automotive service stations: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of servicing, storing, painting, repairing, etc. or in the business of retailing, and or delivering tires, tools, batteries, auto radios, motor fuels and or lubricants and other automotive accessories. Per annum……………………...………..…$3.75 b. Motorcycle dealers: Every person engaged in the business of selling, buying or distributing motorcycles or motorcycle accessories.
Per annum………………………...…..…..$10.00 (A motorcycle dealer may also handle bicycles and bicycle supplies without additional tax.)
c. Automotive equipment and supply dealers at wholesale: Every person or firm engaged in the business of buying, selling or distributing automotive accessories, including auto radios, batteries, parts, tires and other automotive supplies at wholesale.
Per annum……………………….………..$15.00
d. Motor vehicle dealers: Every person or firm engaged in buying, selling, distributing, servicing or storing motor vehicles, trailers, and other automotive accessories or supplies.
Per annum …………………..……...…….$20.00 (11) Awning or Tent Makers.
Every person or business operating any business of making, selling, or installing awnings or erecting tents.
Per annum …………………….………….$15.00 (12) Bakery Products.
Every Person or business selling bakery products: a. Wholesale………..………...…………$25.00 b. Retail……………………...…….……$15.00
(13) Balloons, Novelties, Souvenirs, Curios and Flags.
Every person or business offering for sale balloons, novelties, souvenirs, curios, and flags. Per annum …………….………………….$15.00 (14) Bankrupt or Fire Sales.
Every person or business conducting a bankrupt, fire, receivership, assignment, smoke or water damage, closing out sale, or other sale of similar character of wares or merchandise.
Per Week ………………………………..$ 50.00 (This is not applicable to sales conducted by order of court or to persons who or businesses which have paid; license tax levied by this schedule upon the same business for the preceding year, or who or which have for twelve (12) months preceding sale operated the business in the preceding sale operated the business in the Town, or who or which do not during such sale increase or add to the stock of wares or merchandise on hand.)
(15) Banks and Trust Companies, including Morris Plan and Industrial Banks (National
Banks are exempt).
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a general banking or trust business.
Per annum ………………….…………… $50.00 (16) Barber shops and Beauty Shops. a. Barber shop: Every person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business of conducting a barber shop, for each chair ………………………………..……………$2.50 b. Beauty shop: Every barber, manicurist, cosmetologist, beautician or operator.
Per annum …………………………….. …$2.50 (17) Bicycles (See also Automobile and
Motorcycle Dealers).
2-4019 Government and Administration 2-11.2
Every person engaged in buying, selling or b. Distributors and jobbers of soft drinks:
trading bicycles and or bicycle supplies and
accessories.
Per annum ……………………….…..….. $10.00 (If dealer pays tax under section governing motorcycle dealers, no additional tax may be levied for handling bicycles and bicycle supplies, etc.)
(18) Billiards and Pool Tables.
Every person, firm or corporation renting, maintaining or owning a building wherein there is a table or tables at which billiards or pool is played, either operated by slot or otherwise, shall pay a license for each table.
Per annum.
Tables measuring not more than
2 feet x 4 feet ……………………….…….. $5.00 Tables measuring not more than
2 ½ feet x 5 feet ………….…………….…$10.00 Tables measuring not more than
3 feet x 6 feet …………………….……… $15.00 Tables measuring not more than
4 feet x 8 feet ………………………….….$20.00 Tables measuring not more than
4 ½ feet x 9 feet ……………..……...…... . $25.00
All tables measuring more than
4 ½ feet x 9 feet ………………….……... . $30.00
(This section does not apply to fraternal organizations having a national charter or to American Legion, Y.M.C.A. and Y.W.C.A.)
(19) Boarding Houses (See also Tourist Hotels). Every person serving for pay within a residence at least one (1) meal a day for as may as ten (10) people shall be classified as a boarding house operator and shall pay a license tax.
Per annum .………………...…..…….….. $10.00 (20) Bonds and or Securities Dealers.
Every person engaged in selling stocks or bonds as a dealer.
Per annum……………………….………..$25.00 (21) Bondsmen.
Every person engaged in the business of writing or executing, for a consideration, appearance, compliance, or bail bonds, or any type bond required in connection with criminal proceedings. Per annum…………………………..…….$15.00 (22) Book Stores.
Every person operating a book store.
Per annum…………………………….…..$10.00 (23) Bottlers.
a. Soft drinks: Depends upon whether manufacturer uses high or low pressure equipment and the number of spouts.
Every person distributing or jobbing soft drinks.
Per annum………………..……...…………$7.50 c. Distribution by motor vehicles: Every person with a motor vehicle coming into this state from another state and selling and or delivering carbonated beverages on which the tax provided for in subsection a. above has not been paid. Per vehicle.
Per annum…………………….…………..$25.00 (24) Bowling Alleys
Every person engaged in operating a bowling alley. Per alley.
Per annum………………………..……….$10.00 ( This section does not apply to fraternal organizations having a national charter or to American legion, Y.M.C.A. and Y.W.C.A.)
(25) Boxing ( See Wrestling and Boxing). (26) Brick Dealers and Manufacturers. Every person engaged in dealing or in manufacturing brick.
Per annum……………………..………….$25.00 (27) Brokers and Commission Merchants. Every person engaging in the business of buying and or selling on commission cotton, grain, provisions, or other commodities, either for actual, spot, or instant delivery, not otherwise taxed herein.
Per annum………………………..……….$50.00 (28) Cafes, Restaurants, Cafeterias, Lunch Stands.
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a restaurant, café, cafeteria, hotel with dining service on the European plan, drug store or lunch stand, or other place where prepared food is sold.
Per annum.
a. Fifty cents ($0.50) per person provided with chairs, stools or benches, with a minimum tax of………………….……………….……….$2.50 b. All stands where prepared sandwiches only are served…………………….………..…...$2.50 (29) Carnival Companies.
Every person engaged in the business of a carnival company or a show of like kind. Per week………………...……………….$100.00 Provided when a person, firm or corporation exhibits only riding devices which are not a part of nor used in connection with any carnival company. Per device.
Per week………………………..………….$5.00 (30) Cartridges ( See Metallic Cartridges) (31) Chain stores.
2-4019 Government and Administration 2-11.3
Every firm, person or corporation engaged in the
business of operating or maintaining under the same general management, supervision, or ownership, two (2) or more stores, or mercantile establishments where merchandise is sold or offered for sale, or from which such merchandise are sold and or distributed at wholesale or retail, is deemed a branch or chain store operator. Per each chain store located in Town, except for the particular store in which the principal office of the chain is located and so designated by the chain.
Per annum…………...……………………$50.00 (32) Cigar, Cigarette and Tobacco Retailers and Jobbers.
Every firm, person or corporation engaged in the business of retailing and or jobbing cigars, cigarettes, tobacco and other tobacco products. Per annum………………………...………$10.00 (33) Circuses, Menageries, Wild West, Dog and Pony Shows.
Every firm, person or corporation engaged in he business of exhibiting performances, such as a circus, menagerie, wild west shows, dog and or pony shows or other similar exhibitions.
a. Such shows and exhibitions traveling on railroads and requiring transportation of not more than two (2) cars.
Per day…………………………………….$15.00 b. Such shows and exhibitions traveling in automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles other than railroad cars and requiring transportation of not more than two (2) cars.
Per day……………………………………...$3.75 Every vehicle used in transporting circus property or personnel, whether owned by the circus or by others, shall be counted in computing the tax. (34) Clairvoyants ( See Fortune Tellers).
(35) Cleaners ( See Dry Cleaners).
(36) Clothing Stores.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a clothing store.
Per annum………………………………...$25.00 (37) Coal and Coke Dealers.
Every person, either as agent or principal, engaged in the business of selling and or delivering coal or coke.
a. Wholesalers: Selling and or delivering coal or coke in carload lots, or greater quantities. Per annum………………………………...$75.00 b. Retailers: Selling coal or coke at retail. Per annum…………………………..……$15.00
c. Dealers or peddlers: Selling in quantities of
one hundred (100) pounds or less.
Per annum……………………………..…..$5.00 (38) Cold Storage Plants or Freezer Lockers. Every person operating a cold storage plant wherein anything is stored for compensation. Per annum………………………..………$25.00 (39) Commission Merchants.
Every person engaged in buying and selling any cotton, grin or other commodities on commission, either actual, spot or instant delivery.
Per annum……………………………..….$50.00 (40) Confectionery, Fruit, Vegetable, and Produce Stands.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a confectionery, fruit, vegetable or produce stand.
Per annum……………………………..….$15.00 (41) Contractors and Construction Companies. Every person who for a fixed fee or price offers or bids to construct any building, street, sidewalk, bridge, sewer or water systems, grading or other improvement or structure.
Per annum…………………………….…..$10.00 (42) Cotton Buyers (See Commission
Merchants).
(43) Cotton Mills ( See Manufacturers). (44) Cotton Warehouses.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a cotton warehouse.
Per annum………………………………..$50.00 (45) Creameries or Dairies.
Every person operating a creamery within the corporate limits or operating outside the corporate limits but making deliveries within the corporate limits.
Per annum……………………..………….$25.00 (46) Dances and Athletic Contests.
Every person offering or managing any dance or athletic contest of any kind, except high school and elementary school dances and athletic contests.
Per annum……………………………..…...$2.50 (47) Directories.
Every person compiling or selling directories. Per annum………………………………...$50.00 (48) Dog and Pony Shows (See Circuses). (49) Drug Store
Every person engaged in the business of operating a drug store.
Per annum…………………...……………$12.50 (50) Dry Cleaners, Pressing Clubs and Hat Blockers.
2-4019 Government and Administration 2-11.4
Every person, firm or business operating a dry
cleaning plant, pressing club or hat blocking Per annum…………………..………...….$25.00 ( Tax applies to retail outlets and branch offices.) (51) Electric Light, Power and Gas, Street Railway, Gas, Water or Other Similar Business. State tax collected and distributed locally.
(52) Electricians ( See Plumbers).
(53) Embalmers ( See Undertakers).
(54) Employment Agencies ( See Agents and
Agencies).
(55) Engravers and Lithographers.
Every person engaged in engraving and lithographing.
Per annum………………………………...$20.00 (56) Entertainment.
Every person engaged in the business of offering or managing any form of entertainment or amusement (not theaters, vaudeville shows,
traveling shows, or entertainment otherwise taxed).
Per annum...………………………...…….$10.00 (57) Express Companies.
Every express company doing business within the corporate limits.
Per annum……………………………...…$20.00 (58) Fertilizer Dealers.
Every person engaged in the sale of fertilizer. Per annum……………………………...…$50.00 (59) Fertilizer Manufacturing.
Every person manufacturing fertilizer.
Per annum……………………...……...….$75.00 (60) Filling Stations ( See Automobiles).
(61) Fish and Oyster Dealers.
Every person engaged in the retail of oysters and fish.
Per annum……………………………...…$15.00 (62) Florists.
Every person selling or growing flowers, bulbs, plants and or shrubs for commercial purposes. Per annum………………………...………$10.00 (63) Fortune Tellers, Clairvoyants and Similar Trades.
Every fortune teller, clairvoyant or person following similar trades.
Per annum………………………...……..$500.00 (64) Foundry and Machine Shops.
Every person operating a foundry or machine shop.
Per annum…………………………...……$15.00 (65) Freezer lockers ( See Cold storage Plants). (66) fresh meats ( See Meats ).
(67) Fruit Stands ( See Confectionery).
establishment, and solicitors for plants located
outside the corporate limits. Per business. (68) Funeral Directors ( See Undertakers). (69) Furniture Dealers.
Every person operating a furniture business. Per annum………………………..……….$20.00 (70) Games (See Shooting Galleries). (71) Garages (See Automobiles).
(72) Gasoline, Benzene, Lubricating Oils and Grease.
Every person selling illuminating or lubricating oil or grease, or benzene, naptha, gasoline or other similar products.
Per annum……………………….………..$25.00 (73) Gasoline Engines.
Every dealer or manufacturer’s agent for gasoline engines.
Per annum………………………..……….$20.00 (74) Grocery Stores.
Per annum……………………..………….$10.00 (75) Guns and Locksmiths.
Every person engaged in the business as a gun or locksmith.
Per annum……………………..………….$10.00 (76) Hardware Stores.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a hardware store.
Per annum………………………..…….…$15.00 (77) Harvesting and Agricultural Machinery. Every person engaged in business of selling, trading or dealing in harvesting and agricultural machinery.
Per annum………………………..……….$25.00 (78) Hatchery.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a hatchery.
Per annum………………………..……….$15.00 (79) Heating Contractor (See Plumbers). (80) Horse and Mule Dealers.
Every person engaged in buying for the purpose of resale, selling or trading either at wholesale or retail or at a public auction horses or mules.
Per annum…………………………..…….$12.50 (81) Hotels (See also Tourist Homes and Camps, Boarding Houses).
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business or operating of a hotel shall pay tax as follows:
a. Hotels operating on the American Plan for rooms in which rates per person per day are: Per annum.
Less than $2.00 per room………….……... ..$0.30
$2.00 and less than $3.00 per room….…….$0.45
2-4019 Government and Administration 2-11.5
$3.00 and less than $4.50 per room….…….$0.90
$4.50 and less than $6.00 per room…..……$2.10 $6.00 and less than $7.50 per room…..……$2.70 $7.50 and less than $15.00 per room…..…..$3.00 $15.00 and over per room………..………...$3.60 b. Hotels operating on the European Plan for rooms in which rates per person per day: Per annum.
Less than $2.00 per room………………... .$0.625
$2.00 and less than $3.00 per room……..…$1.50 $3.00 and less than $4.50 per room……... ...$2.25
$4.50 and less than $6.00 per room…..……$2.75 $6.00 and less than $7.50 per room……..…$3.25 $7.50 and less than $10.00 per room…..…..$3.75 $10.00 and over per room………………... ..$4.25
c. The office, dining room, one (1) parlor,
kitchen and two (2) other rooms shall not be
counted when calculating the number of rooms in the hotel.
d. Only one half (1/2) of the annual license tax levied in this section shall be levied or collected from resort hotels and boarding houses which are open for only six (6) months or less in the year. (82) Ice Cream Dealers and Manufacturers. a. Wholesale: Every person engaged in manufacturing and or storing for distribution ice cream shall pay the following base tax: On each factory or place where manufactured and or stored for distribution where the machine or equipment used is of continuous freezer type. Thirty seven and one-half cents ($0.375) per gallon capacity based on rated capacity per hour according to manufacturers rating provided in no case shall the tax be less than $2.50 per annum, for any freezer used.
b. Retail: Every person engaged in retail selling or distributing ice cream (purchased from a
manufacturer who has not paid the wholesale tax). Per annum………………………...………..$2.50 (83) Ice Dealers and Manufacturers.
a. Every retail dealer in ice shall pay tax for each vehicle used in delivering to consumers. Per vehicle.
Per annum………………………...………..$5.00 b. Every person engaged in the business of manufacturing ice.
Per annum………………………...………$25.00 (84) Itinerant Merchants and Salesmen (See also Peddlers).
a. Every itinerant salesman or merchant who shall expose for sale goods, wares or merchandise, either on the streets or in a building, not being a regular merchant of the municipality.
Per annum……………………...………..$100.00
b. Any salesman or merchant offering for sale goods, wares or merchandise, other than fruits and farm produce shall be deemed an itinerant within the meaning of this section, who conducts said business within the municipality for less than six (6) consecutive months, except in case of discontinuance for one (1) of the reasons
hereinafter mentioned. When any salesman or merchant does not pay tax herein levied on the ground of stated intention to become a regular merchant, The tax collector may require him to post a cash deposit in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which bond shall be forfeited for the payment of the tax herein levied in case such person discontinues said business within six (6) months for any reason other than death, disability, insolvency, or destruction of stock by fire or other catastrophe.
c. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons who sell books, periodicals, printed music, ice, wood for fuel, fish, beef, mutton, pork, bread, cakes, pies, dairy products, poultry, eggs, livestock or articles produced by the individual offering them for sale, but shall apply to medicines, drugs, or articles assembled.
(85) Itinerant Photographers.
Any person who practices the profession or occupation of an itinerant photographer, including an itinerant photographer’s employees, agents or servants. Itinerant photographer is defined as a person, partnership or corporation having no regularly established place of business in this State who personally or through officers, employees, agents or servants goes from town to town or from place to place soliciting the making of photographic pictures or reproductions with a view of selling same to the persons solicited. Per annum…………………..…………...$100.00 (86) Jewelry Stores and Watch and Jewelry Repair.
a. Every person engaged in the business of buying and or selling of jewelry.
Per annum…………………..…………….$25.00 b. Every person engaged in the business of repairing watches or jewelry.
Per annum……………………..…….……$10.00 (87) Junk Dealers.
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of buying and or selling what is commonly known as junk, including scrap materials, waste paper, etc., shall pay a license tax. Per annum……………..………………….$15.00
2-4019 Government and Administration 2-11.6
(This tax is not applicable to persons dealing (96) Manufacturers.
solely in waste paper; however, the license levied
herein shall apply to the persons engaged in the collection of scrap who maintain no regular place of business but sell only to licensed dealers or manufacturers in this State. Salvage committees where personal profit does not accrue not be liable for the license under this section.)
(88) Knitting Mills and Hosiery Finishers. Every person engaged in the business of operating a knitting mill or finishing plant.
Per annum………………………...…...….$20.00 (89) Laundries.
a. Out of Town Laundries: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of laundry work and or supplying or renting clean linens or towels or wearing apparel when the work is performed outside the municipality or when linen or towels or wearing apparel are supplied by businesses outside the municipality.
Per annum…………………...………...….$12.50 b. Steam, Electricity or Other Motor Power: Every person engaged in washing or laundering clothes or any other articles of any description by machinery for compensation.
Per annum……………………...…………$25.00 c. Hand Laundries: Every person engaged in the business of operating a hand laundry, except washer-women.
Per annum…………………...……………..$8.35 (90) Lightning Rod Agents (See Agents).
(91) Loan Agents or Brokers.
Every person engaged in the regular business of making loans or lending money, accepting liens on, or contracts of assignments of salaries or wages or other security or evidence of debt for repayment in installment payments or otherwise and maintaining in connection with same any office or established place for conduct of business and or advertising or soliciting such business in any matter.
Per annum……………………………... ..$100.00
(This section is not applicable to banks, building and loan associations, credit unions nor installment paper dealers, nor to loans on real estate or pawnbrokers.)
(92) Lumber Brokers (See Agents).
(93) Machine Shops (See Foundries).
(94) Machinery.
Every person engaged in the business of dealing in machinery not otherwise taxed hereunder. Per annum……………………...…………$20.00 (95) Magazines (See Newsdealers).
Every person engaged in the business of
manufacturing which business is not specifically taxed herein shall pay a license tax.
Per annum………………...………………$25.00 (97) Meats.
a. Retailers: Every person engaged in the business of selling fresh meats at retail. Per annum…………………………... ..…..$15.00
b. Wholesale and Packing Houses: Every person engaged in the business of selling fresh meats at wholesale or in operating a packing house.
Per annum…………………..……...……..$50.00 (98) Merchandising Dispensers.
Every person engaged in the business of Operating or placing any machine or machines in which is kept any articles of merchandise to be purchased, any machine which plays records or produces music, or any weighing machine shall pay a license tax.
Per annum…………………..……………...$5.00 Operators of cigarette machines shall pay a license tax.
Per annum………………………..……….$10.00 (This section is not applicable to vendors selling soft drinks at or from machines nor to machines that vend peanuts and candies.)
(99) Merry-go-rounds, etc.
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a ferris wheel, merry-go- round or other riding devices, shooting gallery, skating rink, swimming pool or other amusements of a like kind, or a place for other games or play, with or without a name. If operated on a permanent basis, subject as enumerated.
Per annum……………………..………….$10.00 (100) Metallic Cartridges.
Every dealer in metallic cartridges.
Per annum……………………..…………...$5.00 (101) Mobile Home Parks.
Every person engaged in the operation of a trailer and or mobile home park or the business of renting land for the location of one (1) or more house trailers. For each space prepared for occupancy. Per annum…………………..……………...$5.00 (102) Monuments.
a. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of erecting, selling or offering for sale monuments or articles of a like kind.
Per annum………………….……………..$25.00 b. Solicitors: In addition to the tax levied in section a. hereof, an additional tax shall be paid by each person soliciting or selling monuments.
2-4019 Government and Administration 2-11.7
Per annum…………...……………………$10.00 (115) Pawnbrokers.
(103) Motorcycle Dealers (See Automobiles).
(104) Moving Pictures and Vaudeville Shows. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a moving picture show or place where vaudeville shows or exhibitions, or theatre or opera house where public exhibitions or performances are given for compensation. Per annum…………………...……………$62.50 (105) Music Machines (See Merchandising
Machines).
(106) Musical Instruments.
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling or offering for sale pianos, organs, victrolas or victrola records, radios and or radio accessories, and television sets and accessories, parts and repairs.
Per annum…………………...……………..$5.00 Agents when selling these commodities when dealer located outside of municipality.
Per annum…………………...……………..$5.00 (107) Newsdealers.
Every person engaged in the business as as dealer in newspapers or periodicals.
Per annum…………………...……………$10.00 (108) Newspaper Contest.
Every person, firm or corporation who or which conducts contests and offers prizes or other compensation to obtain subscriptions to newspapers or magazines.
Monthly or semi-weekly newspapers or magazines……………………..…………..$25.00 Daily newspaper or other daily
periodical……………………..………….$100.00 (109) Newspaper.
Every person publishing a newspaper.
Per annum…………………...……………$50.00 (110) Office Supplies and or Servicing Certain Machines.
Every person dealing in office supplies or servicing and repairing machines.
Per annum…………………...……………$15.00 (111) Oyster Dealers (See Fish and Oyster
Dealers).
(112) Packing Houses (See Meats).
(113) Painting.
Every person engaged in business as a painting contractor.
Per annum…………………………...……$15.00 (114) Paper Hanging.
Every person engaged in the business of paper hanging.
Per annum……………………..…………...$7.50
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of lending or advancing money or other thing of value for profit and taking as a pledge for such loan a specific article or articles of personal property to be forfeited if payment is not made within a definite time shall be deemed a pawnbroker and pay an annual license.
Per annum…………………..…………….$75.00 (116) Peddlers.
Any person who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and sell or offer to sell or barter the same, shall be deemed peddlers, except wholesale dealers with established warehouses and selling only to merchants for resale, shall pay a license tax as follows:
Per annum.
a. Peddlers on foot…………….…….…..$10.00 b. Peddlers with horse or other animal, and with or without vehicle……………………..…..$15.00 c. Peddler, with vehicle propelled by motor or other power. For each Vehicle……….….$200.00 d. Peddler, with vehicle of one-half (1/2) ton capacity or less………………….………...$25.00 Item c. may be graduated according to size, weight, capacity, value of goods or other classification. This section is not applicable to the sale of books, periodicals, printed music, ice, wood for fuel, fish, beef, mutton, pork, bread, cakes, pies, dairy products, poultry eggs, livestock or articles produced by the vendor offering them for sale, but shall apply to medicines, drugs, or articles assembled. It is not applicable to Confederate soldiers, disabled veterans of Spanish-American War or World Wars, or blind persons, who are exempted from this tax by state law.)
(117) Phrenologist.
Every person engaged in the business or in the practice of phrenology for compensation. Per annum…………………………..…...$500.00 (118) Piano Repairers and Tuners (See Musical Instruments).
(119) Pistols.
Every person engaged in selling or offering for sale pistols.
Per annum……………..………………….$50.00 Blank cartridge pistols.
Per annum…………………..…………….$50.00 (120) Plastering Contractors (See Contractors). (121) Plumbers, Heating Contractors and
Electricians.
2-4019 Government and Administration 2-11.8
Every person, firm or corporation in business as a
plumber, steam or gas fitter or installing heating systems or installing electrical equipment. Per annum……………………...…………$12.50 (When an individual required to be licensed under this section employees only one (1) additional
person, the tax shall be one-half (1/2).
(122) Printing Establishments.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a printing establishment.
Per annum……………………...…………$10.00 (123) Radios (See Musical Instruments).
(124) Rags, Hides and Waste Paper (See also Junk Dealers).
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling hides, rags, and or waste paper.
Per annum……………...…………………$10.00 (125) Repair Shops (See also Automobiles, pianos, office Supplies, etc.).
Every person engaged in or operating a repair shop not otherwise taxed.
Per annum…………………...……………$10.00 (126) Retail Merchants.
Not otherwise taxed.
Per annum……………………...…………$10.00 (127) Roof Patchers, Painters or Repairers. Every person engaged in the business of patching, painting or repairing roofs.
Per annum…………………...……………$10.00 (128) Sandwiches, Wholesale Dealers.
Every person engaged in the business of preparing and selling sandwiches at wholesale.
Per annum………………………………...$10.00 (129) Secondhand Dealers.
Every person engaged in the business of selling or offering for sale or trading second hand goods, wares or merchandise of any description, except automobiles.
Per annum………………………...………$20.00 (130) Service Stations (See Automobiles). (131) Shoe Shine Parlors or Stands.
Every person who maintains or operates a shoe shine parlor or stand. Per chair or stool.
Per annum………………………...………..$0.50 (132) Shoe Shops.
Every person engaged in the business of making or repairing shoes.
Per annum………………………...………$10.00 (133) Shooting Galleries (See Merry-go-rounds). (134) Skating Rinks (See Merry-go-rounds).
(135) Slot Machines (See Merchandising
Machines).
(136) Soda Fountains and Soft Drink Stands.
Every person engaged in operating a soda fountain
or soft drink stand.
Per annum:
a. Soda Fountains: On each carbonated draft arm of each fountain…………….…………….…$5.00 b. Soft Drink Stands: On each stand at which
soft drinks are sold at retail……….….……..$2.50 (137) Soft Drink Bottlers and Distributors (See Bottlers).
(138) Sprinklers (See Elevators).
(139) Steam Fitters (See Plumbers). (140) Stock Yards and Pens.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a stock yard or stock pen.
Per annum……………………..………….$25.00 (141) Storage Warehouse (Except Cotton and
Tobacco).
Every person engaged in the business of operating a warehouse, storage or transfer warehouse wherein anything not belonging to the owner or operator is stored for compensation.
Per annum………………..……………….$50.00 (142) Swimming Pools (See Merry-go-rounds). (143) Tailors.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a tailor shop.
Per annum………………………..……….$15.00 (144) Taxicabs. Per Vehicle.
Per annum……………………………...…$15.00 (145) Telegraph Companies.
Every telegraph company engaged in business within the corporate limits.
Per annum………………………..……….$10.00 (146) Television (See Musical Instruments). (147) Theatres and Shows (See Amusements). (148) Tobacco Dealers (See Cigars and
Cigarettes).
(149) Tobacco Warehouse.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a warehouse for the sale of leaf tobacco upon commission.
Per annum……………………..………….$50.00 (150) Tombstones (See Monuments). (151) Tourist Houses.
Every person engaged in the business of operating a tourist home or tourist camp or similar place, advertising in any manner for transient patronage, or soliciting such patronage.
Per annum:
a. Homes or camps having five (5) rooms or less…………...…………………..…………$5.00 b. Homes or camps having more than five (5)
rooms.
2-4019 Government and Administration
Per room………………………..…..………$1.00
(Sitting rooms, dining rooms, kitchen, and rooms
occupied by operator and members of his family
or personal use not to be counted.)
(152) Trading Stamps.
Every person engaged in the business of trading or
selling or delivering trading stamps, checks,
receipts, certificates, or tokens to persons engaged
in trade or business with the understanding that the
same shall be presented by the latter to their
patrons as a discount, bonus or premium to secure
patronage and that the person delivering same will
give to the patron presenting the same money or
other thing of value or any preference on account
of presenting or possessing thereof.
Per annum……………………...………..$100.00
(Not applicable to manufacturers or merchants
who sell merchandise of such manufacturer
offering to present to purchaser a gift of value as
an inducement to purchase such merchandise).
(153) Undertakers and Coffin Retailers.
Every person engaged in the business of burying
the dead or in the retail sale of coffins.
Per annum…………………….…..………$25.00
(154) Upholstery Shops.
Every person engaged in operating an upholstery
shop.
Per annum……………….……..…………$25.00
(155) Utilities (See Appendix in clerk’s office).
(156) Vending Machines (See Merchandising
Machines).
(157) Weighing Machines (See Merchandising
Machines).
(158) Warehouses (See Cotton, Tobacco Storage).
(159) Watch Repairers (See Jewelry Stores).
(160) Wood Dealers.
Every person engaged in the business of selling
wood.
Per annum……………………...…………$10.00
(161) Wrestling and Boxing.
Every promoter or exhibitor of any wrestling or
boxing matches for which an admission charge is
made.
Per annum…………………….……..……$50.00
State Law Reference: Privilege license taxes, G.S. 160A-
211.
Cross Reference: Citizens and property within corporate
limits subject to taxation for fiscal year 1967-1968 and
ensuing years, Charter, section 7.5.
Sections 2-4020 through 2-4030 reserved.
2-11.9
ARTICLE C
Fiscal Procedures
(Reserved)
2-5001 Government and Administration 2-12
CHAPTER 5 CHAPTER 6
Social Security and Retirement Personnel Policy
(Reserved)
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Section 2-6001 Purpose of the Chapter.
Section 2-6002 At Will Employment.
Section 2-6003 Merit Principal.
Section 2-6004 Responsibilities of the Town Board of
Commissioners.
Section 2-6005 Responsibilities of the Town Manager.
Section 2-6006 Application of Policies, Plan, Rules, and
Regulations.
Section 2-6007 Departmental Rules and Regulations.
Section 2-6008 Definitions.
Sections 2-6009 through 2-6010 reserved.
ARTICLE II
Position Classification Plan
Section 2-6011 Purpose.
Section 2-6012 Composition of the Position Classification
Plan.
Section 2-6013 Use of the Position Classification Plan.
Section 2-6014 Administration of the Position
Classification Plan.
Section 2-6015 Adoption of the Position Classification
Plan.
Section 2-6016 Administration of the Position
Classification Plan.
Section 2-6017 Request for Reclassification.
Sections 2-6018 through 2-6020 reserved.
ARTICLE III
The Pay Plan
Section 2-6021 Definition.
Section 2-6022 Administration and Maintenance.
Section 2-6023 Starting Salaries.
Section 2-6024 Trainee Designation and Provisions.
Section 2-6025 Probationary Pay Increases.
Section 2-6026 Merit Pay.
Section 2-6027 Merit Pay Bonus.
Section 2-6028 Salary Effect of Promotions, Demotions,
Transfers, and Reclassifications.
Section 2-6029 Salary Effect of Salary Range Revisions.
Section 2-6030 Transition to a New Salary Plan.
Section 2-6031 Effective Date of Salary Changes.
Section 2-6032 Overtime Pay Provisions.
Section 2-6033 Call-back and Stand-by Pay.
Section 2-6034 Payroll Deduction.
Section 2-6035 Hourly Rate of Pay.
Section 2-6036 Longevity Pay.
Sections 2-6037 through 2-6040 reserved.
2-6001 Government and Administration 2-13
ARTICLE IV Section 2-6080 Vacation Leave: Payment Upon
Separation.
Recruitment and Employment Section 2-6081 Vacation Leave: Payment Upon Death.
Section 2-6082 Sick Leave.
Section 2-6041 Equal Employment Opportunity Policy.
Section 2-6042 Implementation of Equal Employment
Opportunity Policy.
Section 2-6043 Recruitment, Selection and Appointment.
Section 2-6044 Probationary Period.
Section 2-6045 Promotion.
Section 2-6046 Demotion.
Section 2-6047 Transfer.
Sections 2-6048 through 2-6050 reserved.
ARTICLE V
Conditions of Employment
Section 2-6051 Work Schedule.
Section 2-6052 Political Activity.
Section 2-6053 Outside Employment.
Section 2-6054 Dual Employment.
Section 2-6055 Employment of Relatives.
Section 2-6056 Sexual Harassment Prohibited.
Section 2-6057 Solicitation and Acceptance of Gifts and
Favors.
Section 2-6058 Performance Evaluation.
Section 2-6059 Safety.
Section 2-6060 Substance Abuse Policy.
ARTICLE VI
Employee Benefits
Section 2-6061 Eligibility.
Section 2-6062 Group Health and Hospitalization
Insurance.
Section 2-6063 Group Life Insurance.
Section 2-6064 Other Optional Group Insurance Plans.
Section 2-6065 Retirement.
Section 2-6066 Supplemental Retirement Benefits.
Section 2-6067 Social Security.
Section 2-6068 Workers’ Compensation.
Section 2-6069 Unemployment Compensation.
Section 2-6070 Tuition Assistance Program.
ARTICLE VII
Holidays and Leaves of Absence
Section 2-6071 Policy.
Section 2-6072 Holidays.
Section 2-6073 Holidays: Effect on Other Types of
Leave.
Section 2-6074 Holidays: Compensations When Work is
Required or Regularly Scheduled Off for
Shift Personnel.
Section 2-6075 Vacation Leave.
Section 2-6076 Vacation Leave: Use by Probationary
Employees.
Section 2-6077 Vacation Leave: Accrual Rate.
Section 2-6078 Vacation Leave: Maximum
Accumulation.
Section 2-6079 Vacation Leave: Manner of Taking.
Section 2-6083 Sick Leave: Accrual Rate and
Accumulation.
Section 2-6084 Transfer of Sick Leave From Previous
Employer.
Section 2-6085 Sick Leave: Medical Certification.
Section 2-6086 Leave Pro-rated.
Section 2-6087 Leave Without Pay.
Section 2-6088 Leave without Pay: Retention and
Continuation of Benefits.
Section 2-6089 Workers’ Compensation Leave.
Section 2-6090 Parental Leave.
Section 2-6091 Military Leave.
Section 2-6092 Reinstatement Following Military
Service.
Section 2-6093 Civil Leave.
Section 2-6094 Parental School Leave.
Sections 2-6095 through 2-6100 reserved.
ARTICLE VIII
Separation and Reinstatement
Section 2-6101 Types of Separation.
Section 2-6102 Resignation.
Section 2-6103 Reduction in Force.
Section 2-6104 Disability.
Section 2-6105 Voluntary Retirement.
Section 2-6106 Death.
Section 2-6107 Dismissal.
Section 2-6108 Reinstatement.
Section 2-6109 Rehiring.
Section 2-6110 reserved.
ARTICLE IX
Unsatisfactory Job Performance and Detrimental Personal
Conduct
Section 2-6111 Disciplinary Action for Unsatisfactory
Job Performance.
Section 2-6112 Unsatisfactory Job Performance Defined.
Section 2-6113 Communication and Warning Procedures
Preceding Disciplinary Action for
Unsatisfactory Job Performance.
Section 2-6114 Disciplinary Action for Detrimental
Personal Conduct.
Section 2-6115 Detrimental Personal Conduct Defined.
Section 2-6116 Pre-disciplinary Conference.
Section 2-6117 Non-disciplinary Suspension.
Sections 2-6118 through 2-6120 reserved.
ARTICLE X
Grievance Procedure and Adverse Action Appeal
Section 2-6121 Policy.
Section 2-6122 Grievance Defined.
Section 2-6123 Purposes of the Grievance Procedure.
Section 2-6124 Procedure.
Section 2-6125 Grievance and Adverse Action Appeal
Procedure for Discrimination.
2-6001
Sections 2-6126 through 2-6130 reserved.
ARTICLE XI
Records and Reports
Section 2-6131 Public Information.
Government and Administration 2-14
Section 2-6004 Responsibilities of the Town
Board of Commissioners.
The Town Board of Commissioners shall be
responsible for establishing and approving
Section 2-6132 Access to Confidential Records.
Section 2-6133 Personnel Actions.
Section 2-6134 Records of Former Employees.
Section 2-6135 Remedies of Employees Objecting to
Material in File.
Section 2-6136 Penalties for Permitting Access to
Confidential Records.
Section 2-6137 Examining and/or Copying Confidential
Material Without Authorization.
Section 2-6138 Destruction of Records Regulated.
Sections 2-6139 through 2-6140 reserved.
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 2-6001 Purpose of the Chapter.
It is the purpose of this policy and the rules and regulations set forth to establish a fair and uniform system of personnel administration for all employees of the Town under the supervision of the Town Manager. This policy is established under authority of Chapter 160A, Article 7, of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
Section 2-6002 At Will Employment.
The Town of Erwin is an "at will" employer. Nothing in this policy creates an employment contract or term between the Town and its employees. No person has the authority to grant any employee any contractual rights of employment.
Section 2-6003 Merit Principle.
All appointments and promotions shall be made solely on the basis of merit. All positions requiring the performance of the same duties and fulfillment of the same responsibilities shall be assigned to the same class and the same salary range. No applicant for employment or employee shall be deprived on employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affected as an employee because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex national origin, political affiliation,
non-disqualifying disability, or age.
personnel policies, the position classification and
pay plan, and may change the policies and benefits as necessary. They also shall make and confirm appointments when so specified by the general statutes.
Section 2-6005 Responsibilities of the Town Manager.
The Town Manager shall be responsible to the Town Board of Commissioners for the administration and technical direction of the personnel program. The Town Manager shall appoint, suspend, and remove all Town employees except those whose appointment is otherwise provided for by law. The Town Manager shall make appointments, dismissals and suspensions in accordance with the Town charter and other policies and procedures spelled out in other Articles in this Policy.
The Town Manager shall supervise or participate in:
a) Recommending rules and revisions to the personnel system to the Town Board of Commissioners for consideration;
b) Making changes as necessary to maintain an up to date and accurate position classification plan;
c) Preparing and recommend necessary revisions to the pay plan;
d) Determining which employees shall be subject to the overtime provisions of FLSA; e) Establishing and maintaining a roster of all persons and authorized positions in the municipal service, setting forth each position and employee, class title of position, salary, any changes in class title and status, and such data as may be desirable or useful;
f) Developing and administering such recruiting programs as may be necessary to obtain an adequate supply of competent applicants to meet the needs of the Town;
g) Developing and coordinating training and educational programs for Town employees; h) Investigating periodically the operation and effect of the personnel provisions of this chapter; and
2-6005 Government and Administration 2-15
i) Performing such other duties as may be successfully completed the designated
assigned by the Town Board of Commissioners probationary period.
not inconsistent with this Chapter. Temporary employee. An employee appointed to a
position for which either the average work week
Section 2-6006 Application of Policies, Plan,
Rules, and Regulations.
The personnel policy and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be binding on all Town employees. The Town Manager, Town Attorney, members of the Town Board of Commissioners and advisory boards and commissions will be exempted except in sections where specifically included. An employee violating any of the provisions of this policy shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, as well as prosecution under any civil or criminal laws which have been violated.
Section 2-6007 Departmental Rules and
Regulations.
Because of the particular personnel and operational requirements of the various
departments of the Town, each department is authorized to establish supplemental written rules and regulations applicable only to the personnel of that department. All such rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the Town Manager, and shall not in any way conflict with the provisions of this Policy, but shall be considered as a supplement to this Chapter.
Section 2-6008 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Full-time employee. An employee who is in a position for which an average work week equals at least 35 hours, and continuous employment of at least 12 months, are required by the Town.
Part-time employee. An employee who is in a position for which an average work week of at least 20 hours and less than 40 hours and
continuous employment of at least 12 months are required by the Town.
Regular employee. An employee appointed to a full or part-time position who has successfully completed the designated probationary period.
Probationary employee. An employee appointed to a full or part-time position who has not yet
required by the Town over the course of a year is
less than 20 hours, or continuous employment
required by the Town is less than 12 months. Trainee. An employee status when an applicant is hired (or employee promoted) who does not meet all of the requirements for the position. During the duration of a trainee appointment, the employee is on probationary status.
2-6011 Government and Administration 2-16
ARTICLE II class, and shall be responsible for the
administration of the position classification plan.
POSITION CLASSIFICATION PLAN The Town Manager shall periodically review
portions of the classification plan and recommend
appropriate changes to the Town Board of
Section 2-6011 Purpose.
The position classification plan provides a complete inventory of all authorized and permanent positions in the Town service, and an accurate description and specification for each class of employment. The plan standardizes job titles, each of which is indicative of a definite range of duties and responsibilities.
Section 6-1012 Composition of the
Position Classification Plan.
The classification plan shall consist of:
a) A grouping of positions in classes which are approximately equal in difficulty and
responsibility which call for the same general qualifications, and which can be equitably compensated within the same range of pay under similar working conditions;
b) Class titles descriptive of the work of the class;
c) Written specifications for each class of positions; and
d) An allocation list showing the class title of each position in the classified service.
Section 2-6013 Use of the Position
Classification Plan.
The classification plan is to be used:
a) As a guide in recruiting and examining applicants for employment;
b) In determining lines of promotion and in developing employee training programs;
c) In determining salary to be paid for various types of work;
d) In determining personnel service items in departmental budgets; and
e) In providing uniform job terminology.
Section 2-6014 Administration of the Position Classification Plan.
The Town Manager shall allocate each position covered by the classification plan to its appropriate
Commissioners.
Section 2-6015 Adoption of the Position Classification Plan.
The position classification plan shall be adopted by the Town Board of Commissioners and shall be on file with the Town Clerk. Copies will be available to all Town employees for review upon request. New positions shall be established upon recommendation of the Town Manager and approval of the Town Board of Commissioners after which the Town Manager shall either allocate the new position into the appropriate existing class, or revise the position classification plan to establish a new class to which the new position may be allocated.
Section 2-6016 Request for reclassification.
Any employee who considers the position in which classified to be improper shall submit a request in writing for reclassification to such employee's immediate supervisor, who shall immediately transmit the request through the department head to the Town Manager. Upon receipt of such request, the Town Manager shall study the request, determine the merit of the reclassification, and make a decision to revise the classification and pay plan where necessary.
2-6021 Government and Administration 2-17
ARTICLE III Section 2-6023 Starting Salaries.
THE PAY PLAN All persons employed in positions approved in the
position classification plan shall be employed at
Section 2-6021 Definition. the minimum salary for the classification in which
they are employed; however, exceptionally well
The pay plan includes the basic salary schedule qualified applicants may be employed above the
and the "Assignment of Classes to Grades and
Ranges" adopted by the Board of Commissioners. The salary schedule consists of steps for minimum or beginning, maximum, and intervening rates of pay for all classes of positions, and a designation of the standard hours in the work week for each position.
Section 2-6022 Administration and
Maintenance.
The Town Manager shall be responsible for the administration and maintenance of the pay plan. All employees covered by the pay plan shall be paid at a rate listed within the salary range established for the respective position
classification, except for employees in trainee status or employees whose existing salaries are above the established maximum rate following transition to a new pay plan.
The pay plan is intended to provide equitable compensation for all positions, reflecting differences in the duties and responsibilities, the comparable rates of pay for positions in private and public employment in the area, changes in the cost of living, the financial conditions of the Town, and other factors. To this end, each budget year the Town Manager shall make comparative studies of all factors affecting the level of salary ranges including the consumer price index, anticipated changes in surrounding employer plans, and other relevant factors, and will recommend to the Town Board of Commissioners such changes in salary ranges as appear to be pertinent. Such changes shall be made in the salary ranges such that the hiring rate, all intervening rates and the maximum change according to the market.
Periodically, the Town Manager shall recommend that individual salary ranges be studied and adjusted as necessary to maintain market competitiveness. Such adjustments will be made by increasing or decreasing the assigned salary grade for the class and adjusting the rate of pay for employees in the class when the action is approved by the Town Board of Commissioners.
minimum of the established salary range upon
approval of the Town Manager.
Section 2-6024 Trainee Designation
and Provisions.
Applicants being considered for employment or Town employees who do not meet all of the requirements for the position for which they are being considered may be hired, promoted, demoted, or transferred by the Town Manager to a "trainee" status. In such cases, a plan for training, including a time schedule, must be prepared by the department head. "Trainee" salaries may be no more than two grades below the minimum salary established for the position for which the person is being trained. A new employee designated as "trainee" shall be regarded as a probationary employee.
If the training is not successfully completed to the satisfaction of the Town Manager, the trainee shall be transferred, demoted, or dismissed. If the training is successfully completed, the employee shall be paid at least at the minimum rate established for the position for which the employee was trained.
Section 6-2025 Probationary Pay
Increases.
Employees hired, promoted, or reclassified into the minimum rate of the pay range shall receive a salary increase within the pay range of approximately 5% upon successful completion of the probationary period, upon completion of six months of satisfactory service if the employee is not on probation. Employees serving a twelve-month probationary period may be considered for this increase after six months of employment. Employees hired or promoted above step 3 of the pay table are not eligible for a
probationary increase.
2-6026 Government and Administration 2-18
Section 6-2026 Merit Pay. different class within the same salary range shall
not be changed by the reassignment.
Upward movement within the established salary Reclassifications. An employee whose position is
range for an employee is not automatic, but rather
based upon specific performance-related criteria. Procedures for determining performance levels and performance pay increases or other performance-related movement within the range shall be established in procedures approved by the Town Manager.
Section 6-2027 Merit Pay Bonus.
Employees who are at the top step of the salary range for their position classification are eligible to be considered for a Merit Bonus at their regular performance evaluation time. Merit bonuses shall be awarded based upon the performance of the employee as described in the performance evaluation and in the same amounts as employees who are within the salary range. Merit bonuses shall be awarded in lump sum payments and do not become part of base pay.
Section 2-6028 Salary Effect of
Promotions, Demotions, Transfers, and Reclassifications.
Promotions. When an employee is promoted, the employee's salary shall normally be advanced to the minimum level of the new position, or to a salary which provides an increase of at least approximately 5% over the employee's salary
before the promotion, provided, however, that the new salary may not exceed the maximum rate of the new salary range. The purpose of the promotion pay increase is to recognize and compensate the employee for taking on increased responsibility.
Demotions. When an employee is demoted to a position for which qualified, the salary shall be set at the rate in the lower pay range which provides a salary commensurate with the employees' qualifications to perform the job when the demotion is not the result of discipline. If the current salary is within the new range, the employee's salary may be retained at the previous rate if appropriate. If the demotion is the result of discipline, the salary shall be decreased at least approximately 5%, but may be no greater than the maximum of the new range.
Transfers. The salary of an employee reassigned to a position in the same class or to a position in a
reclassified to a class having a higher salary range
shall receive a pay increase of approximately 5% or an increase to the minimum of the new pay range, whichever is higher. If the employee has completed probation, the employee's salary shall be advanced to at least the probation completion amount in the new range.
If the position is reclassified to a lower pay range, the employee's salary shall remain the same. If the employee's salary is above the maximum established for the new range, the salary of that employee shall be maintained at the current level until the range is increased above the employee's salary.
Section 2-6029 Salary Effect of Salary
Range Revisions.
When a class of positions is assigned to a higher salary range, employees in that class shall receive a pay increase of at least approximately 5%, or to the minimum step of the new range, whichever is higher. If the employee has passed probation, the employee's salary shall be advanced at least to the probation completion amount in the new range. When a class of positions is assigned to a lower salary range, the salaries of employees in that class will remain unchanged. If this assignment to a lower salary range results in an employee being paid at a rate above the maximum step established for the new class, the salary of that employee shall be maintained at that level until such time as the employee's salary range is increased above the employee's current salary.
Section 2-6030 Transition to a New Salary Plan.
The following principles shall govern the transition to a new salary plan:
1) No employee shall receive a salary reduction as a result of the transition to a new salary plan. 2) All employees being paid at a rate lower than
the minimum rate established for their respective classes shall have their salaries raised to the new minimum for their classes.
3) All employees being paid at a rate below the maximum rate established for their respective classes shall be paid at a rate listed in the salary
2-6030 Government and Administration 2-19
schedule; all employees not at a listed rate shall
have their salaries raised to a listed rate.
4) All employees being paid at a rate above the maximum rate established for their respective classes shall be maintained at that salary level until such time as the employees' salary range is increased above the employees' current salary.
Section 2-6031 Effective Date of Salary Changes.
Salary changes approved after the first working day of a pay period shall become effective at the beginning of the next pay period, or at such specific date as may be provided by procedures approved by the Town Manager.
Section 2-6032 Overtime Pay Provisions.
Employees of the Town can be requested and may be required to work in excess of their regularly scheduled hours as necessitated by the needs of the Town and determined by the Department Head. To the extent that local government jurisdictions are so required, the Town will comply with the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). The Town
Manager shall determine which jobs are "non-exempt" and are therefore subject to the Act in areas such as hours of work and work periods, rates of overtime compensation, and other provisions.
Non-exempt employees will be paid at a straight time rate for hours up to the FLSA established limit for their position (usually 40 hours in a 7 day period; 171 hours for police
personnel in a 28 day cycle). Hours worked
beyond the FLSA established limit will be compensated in either time or pay at the appropriate overtime rate. In determining eligibility for overtime in a work period, only hours actually worked shall be considered; in no event will vacation, sick leave, or holidays be included in the computation of hours worked for FLSA purposes. Compensatory leave requires approval by the Town Manager when creating a balance that exceeds 100 hours.
Whenever practicable, departments will schedule time off on an hour-for-hour basis within the applicable work period for non-exempt employees, instead of paying overtime. When time off within the work period cannot be granted, overtime worked will be paid in accordance with the FLSA.
Employees in positions determined to be "exempt"
from the FLSA (as Executive, Administrative, or Professional staff) will not receive pay for hours worked in excess of their normal work periods. These employees may be granted compensatory leave by their supervisor on an hour for hour basis where the convenience of the department allows and in accordance with procedures established by the Town Manager. Such compensatory time is not guaranteed to be taken and ends without compensation upon separation from the organization.
Section 2-6033 Call-back and Stand-by
Pay.
The Town provides a continuous twenty-four hour a day, seven day a week service to its customers. Therefore, it is necessary for certain employees to respond to any reasonable request for duty at any hour of the day or night. One of the conditions of employment with the Town is the acceptance of a share of the responsibility for continuous service, in accordance with the nature of each job position. If an employee fails to respond to reasonable calls for emergency service, either special or routine, the employee shall be subject to disciplinary actions up to and including dismissal by the Town Manager.
Call-back. Non-exempt employees will be guaranteed a minimum payment of two hour's wages for being called back to work outside of normal working hours. "Call-back" provisions do not apply to previously scheduled overtime work. Stand-by. Non-exempt employees required to be on "stand-by" duty will be paid for five hours of work for each week (approximately 128 hours, excluding work time) of stand-by time they serve. Stand-by compensation for less than one full week shall be determined by the ratio of .04 hours of pay per one hour of stand-by time. Hours actually worked while on stand-by are calculated beginning when the employee reports to the work site and are added to the regular total of hours worked for the week. Stand-by time is defined as that time when an employee must remain near an established telephone or otherwise substantially restrict personal activities in order to be ready to respond when called.
2-6034 Government and Administration 2-20
Section 2-6034 Payroll Deduction. ARTICLE IV
Deductions shall be made from each employee's RECRUITMENT AND EMPLOYMENT
salary, as required by law. Additional deductions
may be made upon the request of the employee on
determination by the Town Manager as to capability of payroll equipment and
appropriateness of the deduction.
Section 2-6035 Hourly Rate of Pay.
Employees working in a part-time or temporary capacity with the same duties as full-time employees will work at a rate in the same salary range as the full-time employees. The hourly rate for employees working other than 40 hours per week, such as police officers working an average 42 hours per week, will be determined by dividing the average number of hours worked scheduled per year into the annual salary for the position.
Section 2-6036 Longevity Pay.
Full-time and part-time employees of the town are compensated for years of service by payment of a longevity supplement based on the following table:
Years of Service Longevity Amount
5-10 1.00%
10-15 1.25%
15-20 1.50%
20-25 1.75%
25 plus 2.00%
Years of service are calculated on a calendar year basis as of June 30 of each year.
Longevity pay will be issued on the last regular pay period in November or on a date in November designated by the City Manager.
Section 2-6041 Equal Employment
Opportunity Policy.
It is the policy of the Town to foster, maintain and promote equal employment opportunity. The Town shall select employees on the basis of the applicant's qualifications for the job and award them, with respect to compensation and opportunity for training and advancement, including upgrading and promotion, without regard to age, sex, race, color, religion, national origin, disability, political affiliation, or marital status. Applicants with physical disabilities shall be given equal consideration with other applicants for positions in which their disabilities do not represent an unreasonable barrier to satisfactory performance of duties with or without reasonable accommodation.
Section 2-6042 Implementation of Equal
Employment Opportunity Policy.
All personnel responsible for recruitment and employment will continue to review regularly the implementation of this personnel policy and relevant practices to assure that equal employment opportunity based on reasonable, job-related requirements is being actively observed to the end that no employee or applicant for employment shall suffer discrimination because of age, sex, race, color, religion, disability, national origin, political affiliation, or marital status. Notices with regard to equal employment matters shall be posted in conspicuous places on Town premises in places where notices are customarily posted.
Section 2-6043 Recruitment, Selection and Appointment.
Recruitment Sources. When position vacancies occur, Department Heads shall publicize these opportunities for employment, including
applicable salary information and employment qualifications. Information on job openings and hiring practices will be provided to recruitment sources, including organizations and news media available to minority applicants. In addition, notice of vacancies shall be posted at designated conspicuous sites within departments. Individuals
2-6043 Government and Administration 2-21
shall be recruited from a geographic area as wide
as necessary to ensure that well-qualified applicants are obtained for Town service. The North Carolina Employment Security Commission shall normally be used as a recruitment source. Job Advertisements. Jobs will be advertised in local newspapers, professional publications, and other relevant publications in order to establish a diverse and qualified applicant pool. Employment advertisements shall contain assurances of equal employment opportunity and shall comply with Federal and State statutes.
Application for Employment. All persons expressing interest in employment with the Town shall be given the opportunity to file an application for employment for positions which are vacant. Applicant Interest Card. Persons interested in employment with the Town may complete an applicant interest card concerning all of the positions for which they wish to apply. These cards will be maintained for a period of six months. When a vacancy occurs in positions of interest, the card will be sent, notifying the person and requesting that the person complete an application before the designated deadline. Application Reserve File. Applications shall be kept in an inactive reserve file for a period of two years, in accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Commission guidelines.
Selection. Department heads shall make such investigations and conduct such examinations as necessary to assess accurately the knowledge, skills, and experience qualifications required for the position, including criminal history where job-related using the DCI when needed. All selection devices administered by the Town shall be valid measures of job performance.
Appointment. Before any commitment is made to an applicant either internal or external, the Department Head shall make recommendations to the Town Manager with a recommendation of the position to be filled, the salary to be paid, and the reasons for selecting the candidate over other candidates. The Town Manager shall approve appointments and the starting salary for all applicants.
Section 2-6044 Probationary Period.
An employee appointed or promoted to a permanent position shall serve a probationary period. Employees shall serve a six month probationary period, except that emergency
personnel such as sworn police personnel, and
department heads shall serve a twelve month probationary period. During the probationary period, supervisors shall monitor an employee's performance and communicate with the employee concerning performance progress. Employees serving a twelve-month probation shall have a probationary review at the end of six months as well as before the end of twelve months.
Before the end of the probationary period, the supervisor shall conduct a performance evaluation conference with the employee and discuss accomplishments, strengths, and needed
improvements. A summary of this discussion should be documented in the employee's personnel file. The supervisor shall recommend in writing whether the probationary period should be completed, extended, or the employee transferred, demoted, or dismissed. Probationary periods may be extended for a maximum of six additional months.
Disciplinary action, including demotion and dismissal, may be taken at any time during the probationary period of a new hire without following the steps outlined in this policy. A promoted employee who does not successfully complete the probationary period may be transferred or demoted to a position in which the employee shows promise of success. If no such position is available, the employee shall be dismissed. Promoted and demoted employees who are on probation retain all other rights and benefits such as the right to use of the grievance procedures.
Section 2-6045 Promotion.
Promotion is the movement of an employee from one position to a vacant position in a class assigned to a higher salary range. It is the Town's policy to create career opportunities for its employees whenever possible. Therefore, when a current employee applying for a vacant position is best suited of all applicants, that applicant shall be appointed to that position. The Town will balance three goals in the employment process:
1) The benefits to employees and the organization of promotion from within; 2) Providing equal employment opportunity and a diversified workforce to the community; and 3) Obtaining the best possible employee who will provide the most productivity in that position.
2-6045 Government and Administration 2-22
Therefore, except in rare situations where previous ARTICLE V
Town experience is essential or exceptional
qualifications of an internal candidate so indicate, CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
the Town will consider external and internal
candidates for selection rather than automatically
promote from within. Candidates for promotion shall be chosen on the basis of their qualifications and their work records. Internal candidates shall apply for promotions using the same application process as external candidates.
Section 2-6046 Demotion.
Demotion is the movement of an employee from one position to a position in a class assigned to a lower salary range. Demotion may be voluntary or involuntary. An employee whose work or conduct in the current position is unsatisfactory may be demoted provided that the employee shows promise of becoming a satisfactory employee in the lower position. Such disciplinary demotion shall follow the disciplinary procedures outlined in this chapter.
An employee who wishes to accept a position with less complex duties and reduced responsibilities may request a voluntary demotion. A voluntary demotion is not a disciplinary action and is made without using the above-referenced disciplinary procedures.
Section 2-6047 Transfer.
Transfer is the movement of an employee from one position to a position in a class in the same salary range. If a vacancy occurs and an employee in another department is eligible for a transfer, the employee shall apply for the transfer using the usual application process. The Department Head wishing to transfer an employee to a different department or classification shall make a recommendation to the Town Manager with the consent of the receiving department head. Any employee transferred without requesting the action may appeal the action in accordance with the grievance procedure outlined in this chapter. An employee who has successfully completed a probationary period may be transferred into the same classification without serving another probationary period.
Section 2-6051 Work Schedule.
Department heads shall establish work schedules, with the approval of the Town Manager, which meet the operational needs of the department in the most cost effective manner possible.
Section 2-6052 Political Activity.
Each employee has a civic responsibility to support good government by every available means and in every appropriate manner. Each employee may join or affiliate with civic organizations of a partisan or political nature, may attend political meetings, may advocate and support the principles or policies of civic or political organizations in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the State of North Carolina and in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the United States. However, no employee shall:
a) Engage in any political or partisan activity while on duty;
b) Use official authority of influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of a nomination or an election for office; c) Be required as a duty of employment or as condition for employment, promotion or tenure of office to contribute funds for political or partisan purposes;
d) Coerce or compel contributions from another employee of the Town for political or partisan purposes;
e) Use any supplies or equipment of the Town for political or partisan purposes; or
f) Be a candidate for nomination or election to office under the Town Charter;
Any violation of this section shall subject the employee to disciplinary action including dismissal.
Section 2-6053 Outside Employment.
The work of the Town shall have precedence over other occupational interests of employees. All outside employment for salaries, wages, or commissions and all self-employment must be
2-6053 Government and Administration 2-23
reported in advance to the employee's supervisor,
who in turn will report it to the Department Head. The Department Head will review such employment for possible conflict of interest and then submit a record of the employment and review to the personnel file. Conflicting or unreported outside employment are grounds for disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. Documentation of the approval of outside employment will be placed in the employee's personnel file.
Examples of conflicts of interest in outside employment include but are not limited to: a) Employment with organizations or in capacities that are regulated by the employee or employee's department; or
b) Employment with organizations or in capacities that negatively impact the employee's perceived integrity, neutrality, or reputation related to performance of the employee's Town duties.
Section 2-6054 Dual Employment.
A full or part-time employee of the Town may simultaneously hold another position with the Town if the temporary position is in a different department and clearly different program area from that of the full or part-time position. However, the work of the full or part-time position shall take precedence over the temporary position, and such work will not count toward the calculation of overtime for pay or time off.
Section 2-6055 Employment of Relatives.
The Town prohibits the hiring and employment of immediate family in permanent positions within the same work unit. "Immediate Family" is defined in Article VII, Section 12. The Town also prohibits the employment of any person into a permanent position who is an immediate family member of individuals holding the following positions: Mayor, Mayor Pro Temp, Town Board of Commissioners Member, Town Manager, Town Clerk, or Town Attorney. Otherwise, the Town will consider employing family members or related persons in the service of the Town, provided that such employment does not:
1) Result in a relative supervising relatives;
2) Result in a relative auditing the work of a relative;
3) Create a conflict of interest with either
relative and the Town; or
4) Create the potential or perception of favoritism.
This provision shall not apply retroactively to anyone employed when the provision is adopted by the Town.
Section 2-6056 Sexual Harassment
Prohibited.
The Town prohibits sexual harassment by supervisors and co-workers in any form. Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when:
1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment;
2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment. Sexual
harassment includes repeated offensive sexual flirtations, continual or repeated commentaries about an individual's body, offensive sexual language, and the display in the workplace of sexually suggestive pictures of objects.
Any employee who believes that he or she may have a complaint of sexual harassment may follow the Grievance Procedure described in this Chapter or may file the complaint directly with the Town Manager, department head, or other Town official. The Town Manager will insure that an investigation is conducted into any allegation of sexual harassment and advise the employee and appropriate management officials of the outcome of the investigation.
Employees who are found to be engaged in sexual harassment are subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. Employees making complaints of sexual harassment are protected against retaliation alleged harassers or other employees.
2-6057 Government and Administration 2-24
Section 2-6057 Solicitation and ARTICLE VI
Acceptance of Gifts and Favors.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
No official or employee of the Town shall solicit
or accept any gift, favor, or thing of value that may
tend to influence such employee in the discharge of the employee's duties, or grant in the discharge of duty an improper favor, service, or thing of value.
Section 2-6058 Performance
Evaluation.
Supervisors and/or Department Heads shall conduct Performance Evaluation conferences with each employee at least once a year. These performance evaluations shall be documented in writing and placed in the employee's personnel file. Procedures for the performance evaluation program shall be published by the Town Manager.
Section 2-6059 Safety.
Safety is the responsibility of both the Town and employees. It is the policy of the Town to establish a safe work environment for employees. The Town shall establish a safety program including policies and procedures regarding safety practices and precautions and training in safety methods. Department Heads and supervisors are responsible for insuring the safe work procedures of all employees and providing necessary safety training programs. Employees shall follow the safety policies and procedures and attend safety training programs as a condition of employment. Employees who violate such policies and procedures shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal.
Section 2-6060 Substance Abuse Policy.
The Town may establish policies and procedures related to employee substance abuse in order to insure the safety and well-being of citizens and employees, and to comply with any state, federal, or other laws and regulations.
Section 2-6061 Eligibility.
All full-time and part-time employees of the Town are eligible for employee benefits as provided for in this Article which are subject to change at the Town's discretion. Temporary employees are eligible only for workers' compensation and FICA.
Section 2-6062 Group Health and
Hospitalization Insurance.
The Town provides group health and hospitalization insurance programs for full-time employees and their families, and part-time employees.
Employees who are scheduled to work 20 hours or more per week on a continuous year round basis may, if they so desire, purchase available group health through the Town for themselves or for themselves and qualified dependents. A pro-rated amount of the cost of coverage paid for a full-time employee shall be paid by the Town with the remainder of the cost being paid by the employee. This pro-rated amount shall be based on regularly scheduled hours.
Information concerning cost and benefits shall be available to all employees.
Section 2-6063 Group Life Insurance.
The Town may elect to provide group life insurance for each employee subject to the stipulations of the insurance contract. Employees may elect to purchase additional coverage and/or to insure other family members under this plan at their expense subject to the stipulations of the insurance contract.
Section 2-6064 Other Optional Group
Insurance Plans.
The Town may make other group insurance plans available to employees upon authorization of the Town Manager or Town Board of Commissioners.
Section 2-6065 Retirement.
Each employee who is expected to work for the Town more than 1,000 hours annually shall join
2-6065 Government and Administration 2-25
the North Carolina Local Governmental Security Commission office, where a
Employees' Retirement System when eligible as a determination of eligibility will be made.
condition of employment. New hires who are
current members of the NC local or State
Government Employees' Retirement Systems shall be covered under the retirement system by the Town on their first day of employment.
Section 2-6066 Supplemental
Retirement Benefits.
The Town may provide supplemental retirement benefits for its full and part-time employees. Each law enforcement officer shall receive 401-K
benefits as prescribed by North Carolina State Law. Each general employee may receive supplemental benefits as approved by the Town Board of Commissioners.
Section 2-6067 Social Security.
The Town, to the extent of its lawful authority and power, has extended Social Security benefits for its eligible employees and eligible groups and classes of such employees.
Section 2-6068 Workers'
Compensation.
All employees of the Town (full-time, part-time, and temporary) are covered by the North Carolina Workers' Compensation Act and are required to report all injuries arising out of and in the course of employment to their immediate supervisors at the time of the injury in order that appropriate action may be taken at once.
Responsibility for claiming compensation under the Workers' Compensation Act is on the injured employee, and such claims must be filed by the employee with the North Carolina Industrial Commission within two years from date of injury. The department head will assist the employee in filing the claim.
Section 2-6069 Unemployment Compensation.
In accordance with Public Law 94-566 and
subsequent amendments, local governments are covered by unemployment insurance. Town employees who are terminated due to a reduction in force or released from Town service may apply for benefits through the local Employment
Section 2-6070 Tuition Assistance Program.
Full-time employees who have completed initial probation may apply for tuition reimbursement for courses taken on their own time, which will improve their skills for their current job or prepare them for promotional opportunities within the Town service. Tuition, registration, fees, laboratory fees, and student fees are eligible expenses. Employees may be reimbursed eligible expenses up to a total of five hundred dollars ($500) per fiscal year. Satisfactory completion of the courses will be required for reimbursement. Requests for tuition assistance shall be submitted to the Department Head prior to course registration and are subject to the review and approval of Town Manager, subject to availability of funds.
2-6071 Government and Administration 2-26
ARTICLE VII approved leave to be eligible to receive pay for the
holiday(s).
HOLIDAYS AND LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Section 2-6071 Policy.
The policy of the Town is to provide annual leave, sick leave, and holiday leave to all full-time and part-time employees, and to provide
proportionately equivalent amounts to employees having average work weeks of different lengths. Employees shall accrue leave proportionately with each payroll.
Section 2-6072 Holidays.
The following days, and other such days as the Town Board of Commissioners may designate, are holidays with full pay for employees and officers of the Town:
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
Memorial Day
Good Friday
Independence Day
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Thursday & Friday
Christmas Day (three (3) days)
When any recognized holiday falls on Saturday or Sunday, the following Monday will be the designated holiday. In order to receive a paid holiday, an employee must have worked the day before and the day after the holiday(s), or have been given approved leave.
When Christmas The Town Observes:
Day falls on:
Sunday Friday, Monday, Tuesday
Monday Friday, Monday, Tuesday
Tuesday Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday
Wednesday Wednesday, Thursday,
Friday
Thursday Wednesday, Thursday,
Friday
Friday Thursday, Friday,
Monday
Saturday Thursday, Friday,
Monday
An employee must have worked the day before and the day after a holiday(s), or have been given
Section 2-6073 Holidays: Effect on
Other Types of Leave.
Regular holidays which occur during a vacation, sick or other leave period of any employee shall not be considered as vacation, sick, or other leave.
Section 2-6074 Holidays:
Compensations When Work is Required or Regularly Scheduled Off for Shift Personnel.
Employees required to perform work on regularly scheduled holidays may be granted compensatory time off or be paid at their hourly rate for hours actually worked in addition to any holiday pay to which they are entitled. Compensatory time shall be granted whenever feasible. If a holiday falls on a regularly scheduled off-duty day for shift personnel, the employee shall receive the hours for paid holiday leave.
An employee required to work on Christmas Day will be paid at 1.5 times the hourly rate in addition to normal time off received for the holiday.
Section 2-6075 Vacation Leave.
Vacation leave is intended to be used for rest and relaxation, and may be used for medical appointments.
Vacation leave may also be used by employees who wish to observe religious holidays other than those granted by the Town. Employees who wish to use leave for religious observances must request leave from their respective department heads. The department head will attempt to arrange the work schedule so that an employee may be granted vacation leave for the religious observance. Annual leave for religious observance may be denied only when granting the leave would create an undue hardship for the Town.
Section 2-6076 Vacation Leave: Use by
Probationary Employees.
Employees serving a probationary period following initial employment may accumulate vacation leave but shall not be permitted to take vacation leave during the probationary period. Employees shall be allowed to take accumulated vacation leave after six months of service.
2-6077 Government and Administration 2-27
Section 2-6077 Vacation Leave: effectiveness of service delivery. Vacation may be
Accrual Rate. taken in one hour (1 hour) increments.
Each full and part-time employee of the Town Section 2-6080 Vacation Leave:
shall earn annual leave at the following schedule,
prorated by the average number of hours in the workweek:
Years of Service Days Accrued Per Year
0-2 10
3-9 12
10-14 15
15-19 18
20 plus 21
Section 2-6078 Vacation Leave:
Maximum Accumulation.
Vacation leave may be accumulated without any applicable maximum until December 31 of each year. However, if the employee departs from service, payment for accumulated vacation leave shall not exceed 30 days. Effective the last payroll in the calendar year, any employee with more than 30 days of accumulated leave shall have the excess accumulation removed so that only 30 days are carried forward to January 1 of the next calendar year. Employees are not eligible to receive pay for vacation time not taken.
Employees may have excess vacation leave (over 30 days) converted to sick leave.
Employees are cautioned not to retain excess accumulated vacation leave until late in the year. Because of the necessity to keep all functions in operation, large numbers of employees cannot be granted vacation leave at any one time. If an employee has excess leave accumulation during the latter part of the year and is unable to take such leave because of staffing demands, the employee shall receive no special consideration either in having vacation leave scheduled or in receiving any exception to the maximum accumulation.
Section 2-6079 Vacation Leave:
Manner of Taking
Employees shall be granted the use of earned vacation leave upon request in advance at those times designated by the Department Head which will least obstruct normal operations of the Town. Department heads are responsible for insuring that approved vacation leave does not hinder the
Payment upon Separation.
An employee who has successfully completed six months of the probationary period will normally be paid for accumulated vacation leave upon separation not to exceed 30 days, provided notice is given to the supervisor at least two weeks in advance of the effective date of resignation. Any employee failing to give the notice required by this section shall forfeit payment for accumulated leave. The notice requirement may be waived by the Town Manager when deemed to be in the best interest of the Town. Employees who are involuntarily separated shall receive payment for accumulated annual leave subject to the 30 day maximum.
Section 2-6081 Vacation Leave:
Payment upon Death.
The estate of an employee who dies while employed by the Town shall be entitled to payment of all the accumulated vacation leave credited to the employee's account not to exceed the maximums established in Section 8 of this Article.
Section 2-6082 Sick Leave.
Sick leave may be granted to a probationary or regular employee absent from work for any of the following reasons: sickness, bodily injury, required physical or dental examinations or treatment, or exposure to a contagious disease, when continuing work might jeopardize the health of others.
Sick leave may be used when an employee must care for a member of his or her immediate family who is ill.
Sick leave may also be used for death in the employee's immediate family, but may not exceed three days for any single occurrence. Additional leave time required for such occurrence may be charged to vacation or other approved leave when approved by the department head and/or Town Manager.
2-6082 Government and Administration 2-28
Sick leave may also be used to supplement Section 2-6085 Sick Leave: Medical
Workers' Compensation Disability Leave both Certification.
during the waiting period before Workers'
compensation benefits begin, and afterward to The employee's supervisor or Department Head
supplement the remaining one-third of salary,
except that employee may not exceed the regular salary amount using this provision.
"Immediate family" shall be defined as spouse, child, parent or step-parent, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, son-in-law or
daughter-in-law, aunt, or uncle of the employee or spouse of the employee, or guardian.
Notification of the desire to take sick leave should be submitted to the employee's supervisor prior to the leave or according to departmental procedures.
Section 2-6083 Sick Leave: Accrual
Rate and Accumulation.
Sick leave shall accrue at a rate of one day per month of service or twelve days per year. Sick leave for full-time and part-time employees working other than the basic work schedule shall be pro-rated as described in this Article. Sick leave will be cumulative for an indefinite period of time and may be converted upon retirement for service credit consistent with the provisions of the North Carolina Local Government Employees'
Retirement System.
All sick leave accumulated by an employee shall end and terminate without compensation when the employee resigns or is separated from the Town, except as stated for employees retiring or terminated due to reduction in force.
Section 2-6084 Transfer of Sick Leave from Previous Employer.
The Town will accept the transfer of sick leave for employees from other employers who are participants of the Local or State Employees Retirement System. The sick leave will be treated as though it were earned with the Town of Erwin. The sick leave amount must be certified by the previous employer.
may require a physician's certificate stating the
nature of the employee's or family member's illness and the employee's capacity to resume duties, for each occasion on which an employee uses sick leave or whenever the supervisor observes a "pattern of absenteeism." The employee may be required to submit to such medical examination or inquiry as the Department Head deems desirable. The Department Head shall be responsible for the application of this provision to the end that:
1) Employees shall not be on duty when they might endanger their health or the health of other employees; and
2) There will be no abuse of leave privileges.
Claiming sick leave under false pretense to obtain a day off with pay shall subject the employee to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal.
Section 2-6086 Leave Pro-rated.
Holiday, annual, and sick leave earned by full-time and part-time employees with fewer or more hours than the basic work week shall be determined by the following formula:
1) The number of hours worked by such employees shall be divided by the number of hours in the basic work week (usually 40 hours).
2) The proportion obtained in step 1 shall be multiplied by the number of hours of leave earned annually by employees working the basic work week.
3) The number of hours in step 2 divided by 12 shall be the number of hours of leave earned monthly by the employees concerned.
Section 2-2087 Leave Without Pay.
A full or part-time employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay for a period of up to twelve months by the Town Manager. The leave shall be used for reasons of personal disability after both sick leave and desired amount of annual leave have been exhausted, sickness or disability of immediate family members, continuation of education, special work that will permit the Town
2-6087 Government and Administration 2-29
to benefit by the experience gained or the work
performed, or for other reasons deemed justified by the Town Manager.
The employee shall apply in writing to the supervisor for leave. The employee is obligated to return to duty within or at the end of the time determined appropriate by the Town Manager. Upon returning to duty after being on leave without pay, the employee shall be entitled to return to the same position held at the time leave was granted or to one of like classification, seniority, and pay. If the employee decides not to return to work, the supervisor shall be notified immediately. Failure to report at the expiration of a leave of absence, unless an extension has been requested, shall be considered a resignation.
Section 2-6088 Leave Without Pay:
Retention and Continuation of Benefits.
An employee shall retain all unused vacation and sick leave while on Leave Without Pay. An employee ceases to earn leave credits on the date leave without pay begins. An employee on Leave Without Pay may continue to be eligible for benefits under the Town's group insurance plans at his or her own expense, subject to any regulation adopted by the Town and the regulations of the Town's group insurance plans.
Section 2-6089 Workers' Compensation
Leave.
An employee absent from duty because of sickness or disability covered by the North Carolina Workers' Compensation Act may elect to use accrued sick leave or vacation during the first waiting period. The employee may also elect to supplement workers' compensation payments after they begin with sick leave, vacation, or compensatory time, provided that the combination of leave supplement and workers' compensation payments does not exceed normal compensation. An employee on workers' compensation leave may be permitted to continue to be eligible for benefits under the Town's group insurance plans.
When worker's compensation leave extends long enough for the waiting period to be reimbursed, the employee shall return the reimbursement check to the Town and have leave hours reinstated for all time covered by paid leave. In such cases, the
Town will pay the employee for any unpaid time
that is owed the employee.
Section 2-6090 Parental Leave.
Parental leave may be granted to an employee for a period of up to three months for pregnancy, miscarriage, abortion, childbirth, recovery, or adoption. Employees may be granted an extension by the Town Council when medically necessary. Parental Leave is leave without pay unless the employee uses sick or vacation leave as provided by this policy. A parental leave request, including the tentative duration of the leave requested, must be submitted to the Department Head in advance of the leave, preferably 30 days ahead of the leave unless the need is a sudden one.
Sick leave may be taken during the period of actual disability as certified by the attending physician of the mother, and when care of the disabled mother is required by an immediate family member. Vacation, compensatory time, or leave without pay may be used for other periods of the parental leave, consistent with the leave provisions of this policy.
Section 2-6091 Military Leave.
Permanent employees who are members of an Armed Forces Reserve organization or National Guard shall be granted ten workdays per year for military leave without pay. On rare occasions due to annual training being scheduled on a federal fiscal year basis, an employee may be required to attend two periods of training in one calendar year. For this purpose only, an employee shall be granted an additional ten days of military leave during the same calendar year. If such duty is required beyond this ten workdays, the employee shall be eligible to take accumulated vacation leave or be placed in a leave without pay status, and the provisions of that leave shall apply. While taking military leave, the employee's leave credits and other benefits shall continue to accrue as if the employee physically remained with the Town during this period. Employees who are eligible for military leave have all job rights specified by the Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Act.
2-6092 Government and Administration 2-30
Section 2-6092 Reinstatement 3) The Town may require written verification
Following Military Service. from the child's school that the employee was
involved at the school during the leave time.
An employee called to extended active duty with
the United States military forces, who does not
volunteer for service beyond the period for which called, shall be reinstated with full benefits provided the employee:
1) Applies for reinstatement within ninety days after the release form military service; and
2) Is able to perform the duties of the former position or similar position; or
3) Is unable to perform the duties of the former position or a similar position due to disability sustained as a result of the military service, but is able to perform the duties of another position in the service of the Town. In this case the employee shall be employed in such other position as will provide the nearest approximation of the seniority, status, and pay which the employee otherwise would have been provided, if available.
Section 2-6093 Civil Leave.
A Town employee called for jury duty or as a court witness for the federal or state governments, or a subdivision thereof, shall receive leave with pay for such duty during the required absence without charge to accumulated leave. The employee may keep fees and travel allowances received for jury or witness duty in addition to regular compensation; except, that employees must turn over to the Town any witness fees or travel allowance awarded by that court for court appearances in connection with official duties. While on civil leave, benefits and leave shall accrue as though on regular duty.
Section 2-6094 Parental School Leave.
A Town employee who is a parent, guardian, or person standing in loco parentis (in place of the parent) may take up to four hours of unpaid leave annually to involve him or herself in school activities of his or her child(ren). This leave is subject to the three following conditions:
1) The leave must be taken at a time mutually agreed upon by the employee and the Town;
2) The Town may require the employee to request the leave in writing at least 48 hours prior to the time of the desired leave; and
Paid leave (vacation time) taken by an employee
to attend to school activities of his or her child shall count toward the fulfillment of this provision by the Town.
2-6101 Government and Administration 2-31
ARTICLE VIII Section 2-6104 Disability.
SEPARATION AND REINSTATEMENT An employee who cannot perform the essential
duties of a position because of a physical or
Section 2-6101 Types of Separations.
All separations of employees from positions in the service of the Town shall be designated as one of the following types and shall be accomplished in the manner indicated: Resignation, reduction in force, disability, voluntary retirement, dismissal, or death.
Section 2-6102 Resignation.
An employee may resign by submitting the reasons for resignation and the effective date in writing to the immediate supervisor as far in advance as possible. In all instances, the minimum notice requirement is two weeks. Failure to provide minimum notice shall result in forfeit of payment for accumulated annual leave unless the notice is waived upon recommendation of the Department Head and approval by the Town Manager.
Three consecutive days of absence without contacting the immediate supervisor or
Department Head may be considered to be a voluntary resignation. Sick leave will only be approved during the final two weeks of a notice with a physician's certification or comparable documentation.
Section 2-6103 Reduction in Force.
In the event that a reduction in force becomes necessary, consideration shall be given to the quality of each employee's performance, organizational needs, and seniority in determining those employees to be retained. Employees who are separated because of a reduction in force shall be given at least two weeks notice of the anticipated action. No permanent employee shall be separated because of a reduction in force while there are temporary or probationary employees serving in the same class in the department, unless the permanent employee is not willing to transfer to the position held by the temporary or probationary employee.
mental impairment may be separated for disability.
Action may be initiated by the employee or the Town. In cases initiated by the employee, such action must be accompanied by medical evidence acceptable to the Town Manager. The Town may require an examination, at the Town's expense, performed by a physician of the Town's choice.
Section 2-6105 Voluntary Retirement.
An employee who meets the conditions set forth under the provision of the North Carolina Local Government Employee's Retirement System may elect to retire and receive all benefits earned under the retirement plan.
Section 2-6106 Death.
Separation shall be effective as of the date of death. All compensation due shall be paid to the estate of the employee.
Section 2-6107 Dismissal.
An employee may be dismissed in accordance with the provisions and procedures of Article IX.
Section 2-6108 Reinstatement.
An employee who is separated because of reduction in force may be reinstated within one year of the date of separation, upon recommendation of the Department Head, and upon approval of the Town Manager. An employee who is reinstated in this manner shall be re-credited with his or her previously accrued sick leave.
Section 2-6109 Rehiring.
An employee who resigns while in good standing may be rehired with the approval of the Town Manager, and may be regarded as a new employee, subject to all of the provisions of rules and regulations of this Chapter. An employee in good standing who is separated due to a reduction in force shall be given the first opportunity to be rehired in the same or a similar position.
2-6111 Government and Administration 2-32
ARTICLE IX actions warrant, the supervisor shall meet with the
employee as soon as possible in one or more
UNSATISFACTORY JOB PERFORMANCE counseling sessions to discuss specific
AND DETRIMENTAL
PERSONAL CONDUCT
Section 2-6111 Disciplinary Action for
Unsatisfactory Job Performance.
A permanent employee may be placed on disciplinary suspension, demoted, or dismissed for unsatisfactory job performance, if after following the procedure outlined below, the employee's job performance is still deemed to be unsatisfactory. All cases of disciplinary suspension, demotion, or dismissal must be approved by the Town Manager prior to giving final notice to the employee.
Section 2-6112 Unsatisfactory Job
Performance Defined.
Unsatisfactory job performance includes any aspects of the employee's job which are not performed as required to meet the standards set by the Department Head or Town Manager. Examples of unsatisfactory job performance include, but are not limited to, the following:
1) Demonstrated inefficiency, negligence, or incompetence in the performance of duties; 2) Careless, negligent or improper use of Town property or equipment;
3) Physical or mental incapacity to perform duties;
4) Discourteous treatment of the public or other employees;
5) Absence without approved leave;
6) Improper use of leave privileges;
7) Failure to report for duty at the assigned time and place;
8) Failure to complete work within time frames established in work plan or work standards; 9) Failure to meet work standards over a period of time; or
10) Failure to follow the chain of command to address work-related issues.
Section 2-6113 Communication and
Warning Procedures Preceding Disciplinary Action for Unsatisfactory Job Performance.
When an employee's job performance is unsatisfactory, or when incidents or inappropriate
performance problems. A brief summary of these
counseling sessions shall be noted in the employee's file by the supervisor.
An employee whose job performance is unsatisfactory over a period of time should normally receive at least two warnings from the supervisor before disciplinary action resulting in dismissal is taken by the Town Manager. In each case, the supervisor should record the dates of discussions with the employee, the performance deficiencies discussed, the corrective actions recommended, and the time limits set. If the employee's performance continues to be unsatisfactory, then the supervisor should use the following steps:
1) A final written warning from the supervisor serving notice upon the employee that corrected performance must take place immediately in order to avoid suspension, demotion, or dismissal.
2) If performance does not improve, a written recommendation should be sent to the
Town Manager for disciplinary action such as suspension, demotion, or dismissal.
Disciplinary suspensions should not generally exceed three days (24 hours).
Section 2-6114 Disciplinary Action for
Detrimental Personal Conduct.
With the approval of the Town Manager, an employee may be placed on disciplinary suspension, demoted, or dismissed without prior warning for causes relating to personal conduct detrimental to Town service in order to:
1) Avoid undue disruption of work;
2) To protect the safety of persons or property; or
3) For other serious reasons.
Section 2-6115 Detrimental Personal
Conduct Defined.
Detrimental personal conduct includes behavior of such a serious detrimental nature that the functioning of the Town may be or has been impaired; the safety of persons or property may be or have been threatened; or the laws of any government may be or have been violated.
2-6115 Government and Administration 2-33
Examples of detrimental personal conduct include,
but are not limited to, the following:
1) Fraud or theft;
2) Conviction of a felony or the entry of a plea of nolo contendere thereto;
3) Falsification of records for personal profit, to grant special privileges, or to obtain employment; 4) Willful misuse of gross negligence in the
handling of Town funds;
5) Willful or wanton damage or destruction to property;
6) Willful or wanton acts that endanger the lives and property of others;
7) Possession of unauthorized firearms or other lethal weapons on the job;
8) Brutality in the performance of duties;
9) Reporting to work under the influence of alcohol or drugs or partaking of such while on duty. Prescribed medication may be taken within the limits set by a physician as long as medically necessary;
10) Engaging in incompatible employment or serving a conflicting interest;
11) Request or acceptance of gifts in exchange for favors or influence;
12) Engaging in political activity prohibited by this chapter;
13) Harassment of an employee(s) and/or the public on the basis of sex or any other protected class status; or
14) Stated refusal to perform assigned duties or flagrant violation of work rules and
regulations.
Section 2-6116 Pre-disciplinary Conference.
Before suspension, demotion, or dismissal action is taken, whether for failure in personal conduct or failure in performance of duties, the Town Manager or a Department head will conduct a pre-disciplinary conference. At this conference, the employee may present any response to the proposed disciplinary action to the Town Manager or Department Head. The Town Manager or Department Head will consider the employee's response, if any, to the proposed disciplinary action, and will, within three working days following the pre-disciplinary conference, notify the employee in writing of the final decision to take disciplinary action. The notice of the final disciplinary action shall contain a statement of the
reasons for the action and the employee's appeal
rights.
Section 2-6117 Non-Disciplinary
Suspension.
During the investigation, hearing, or trial of an employee on any criminal charge, or during an investigation related to alleged detrimental personal conduct, or during the course of any civil action involving an employee, when suspension would, in the opinion of the Department Head or Town Manager, be in the best interest of the Town, the Department Head or Town Manager may suspend the employee for part or all of the proceedings as a non-disciplinary action. In such cases, the Town Manager may:
1) Temporarily relieve the employee of all duties and responsibilities and place the employee on paid or unpaid leave for the duration of the suspension, or
2) Assign the employee new duties and responsibilities and allow the employee to receive such compensation as is in keeping with the new duties and responsibilities.
If the employee is reinstated following the suspension such employee shall not lose any benefits to which otherwise the employee would have been entitled had the suspension not occurred. If the employee is terminated following suspension, the employee shall not be eligible for any pay from the date of suspension; provided, however, all other benefits with the exception of accrued annual leave and sick leave shall be maintained during the period of suspension.
2-6121 Government and Administration 2-34
ARTICLE X 6) Encouraging conflicts to be resolved between
employees and supervisors who must
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE AND ADVERSE maintain an effective future working relationship,
ACTION APPEAL
Section 2-6121 Policy.
It is the policy of the Town to provide a just procedure for the presentation, consideration, and disposition of employee grievances. The purpose of this article is to outline the procedure and to assure all employees that a response to their complaints and grievances will be prompt and fair.
Employees utilizing the grievance procedures shall not be subjected to retaliation or any form of harassment from supervisors or employees for exercising their rights under this policy. Supervisors or other employees who violate this policy shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal from Town service.
Section 2-6122 Grievance Defined.
A grievance is a claim or complaint by a current or a former employee based upon an event or condition, which affects the circumstances under which an employee works, allegedly caused by misinterpretation, unfair application, or lack of established policy pertaining to employment conditions.
Section 2-6123 Purposes of the Grievance Procedure.
The purposes of the grievance procedure include, but are not limited to:
1) Providing employees with a procedure by which their complaints can be considered
promptly, fairly, and without reprisal;
2) Encouraging employees to express themselves about the conditions of work which affect them as employees;
3) Promoting better understanding of policies, practices, and procedures which affect employees; 4) Increasing employees' confidence that
personnel actions taken are in accordance with established, fair, and uniform policies and procedures; and
5) Increasing the sense of responsibility exercised by supervisors in dealing with their employees.
and therefore, encouraging conflicts to be resolved
at the lowest level possible in the chain of command; and
7) Creating a work environment free of continuing conflicts, disagreements, and negative feelings about the Town or its leaders, thus freeing up employee motivation,
productivity, and creativity.
Section 2-6124 Procedure.
When an employee has a grievance, the following successive steps are to be taken unless otherwise provided. The number of calendar days indicated for each step should be considered the maximum, unless otherwise provided, and every effort should be made to expedite the process. However, the time limits set forth may be extended by mutual consent. The last step initiated by an employee shall be considered to be the step at which the grievance is resolved. A decision to rescind a disciplinary suspension, demotion or dismissal must be approved by the Town Manager before the decision becomes effective.
Informal Resolution. Prior to the submission of a formal grievance, the employee and supervisor should meet to discuss the problem and seek to resolve it informally. Either the employee or the supervisor may involve the respective Department Head as a resource to help resolve the grievance. In addition, the employee or supervisor may request mediation from local mediation services or other qualified parties to resolve the conflict. Mediation may be used at any step in the process when mutually agreed upon by the employee and relevant Town supervisor or Manager. Mediation is the process where a neutral party
assists the parties in conflict with identifying mutually agreeable solutions or understandings.
Step 1. If no resolution to the grievance is reached informally, the employee who wishes to pursue a grievance shall present the grievance to the appropriate supervisor in writing. The grievance must be presented within fifteen calendar days of the event or within fifteen calendar days of learning of the event or condition. The supervisor shall respond to the grievance within ten calendar days after receipt of the grievance. The supervisor
2-6124 Government and Administration 2-35
should, and is encouraged to, consult with any
employee of the Town in order to reach a correct, impartial, fair and equitable determination or decision concerning the grievance. Any employee consulted by the supervisor is required to cooperate to the fullest extent possible.
The response from the supervisor for each step in the formal grievance process shall be in writing and signed by the supervisor. In addition, the employee shall sign a copy to acknowledge receipt thereof. The responder at each step shall send copies of the grievance and response to the Town Manager.
Step 2. If the grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the employee by the supervisor, the employee may appeal, in writing, to the appropriate Department Head within ten calendar days after receipt of the response from Step 1. The Department Head shall respond to the appeal, stating the determination of decision within ten calendar days after receipt of the appeal.
Step 3. If the grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the employee at the end of Step 2, the employee may appeal, in writing, to the Town Manager within ten calendar days after receipt of the response from Step 3. The Town Manager shall respond to the appeal, stating the determination of decision within ten calendar days after receipt of the appeal. The Town Manager's decision shall be the final decision. The Town Manager would notify the Town Board of Commissioners of any impending legal action.
Department Heads. In the case of department heads or other employees where the Town Manager has been significantly involved in determining disciplinary action, including
dismissal, the Town may wish to obtain a neutral outside party to either:
1) Provide mediation between the grieving department head and the Town Manager (see
definition of mediation in "informal resolution" above); or
2) Consider an appeal and make
recommendations back to the Town Manager concerning the appeal. Such parties might consist of human resource professionals,
attorneys, mediators, or other parties appropriate to the situation.
The Town Manager's decision shall be the final
decision. The Town Manager would notify the Town Board of Commissioners of any impending legal action.
Section 2-6125 Grievance and Adverse Action Appeal Procedure for Discrimination.
When an employee, former employee, or applicant, believes that any employment action discriminates illegally (ie. is based on age, sex, race, color, national origin, religion, creed, political affiliation, or non-job related handicap), he or she has the right to appeal such action using the grievance procedure outlined in this Article (Section 4 above). While such persons are
encouraged to use the grievance procedure, they shall also have the right to appeal directly to the Town Manager. Employment actions subject to appeal because of discrimination include promotion, training, classification, pay,
disciplinary action, transfer, layoff, failure to hire, or termination of employment. An employee or applicant should appeal an alleged act of discrimination within thirty calendar days of the alleged discriminatory action, but may appeal for up to six months following the action.
2-6131 Government and Administration 2-36
ARTICLE XI of the employee, or for the purpose of assisting in
an investigation of the employee's tax liability.
RECORDS AND REPORTS However, the official having custody of the
personnel records may release the name, address,
Section 2-6131 Public Information.
In compliance with G.S. 160A-168, the following information with respect to each Town employee is a matter of public record: name; age; date of original employment or appointment to the service; current position title; current salary; date and amount of the most recent increase or decrease in salary; date of the most recent promotion, demotion, transfer, suspension, separation, or other change in position classification; and the office to which the employee is currently assigned. Any person may have access to this information for the purpose of inspection, examination, and copying, during regular business hours, subject only to such rules and regulations for the safekeeping of public records as the Town may adopt.
Section 2-6132 Access to Confidential Records.
All information contained in a Town employee's personnel file, other than the information mentioned above is confidential and shall be open to inspection only in the following instances:
1) The employee or his/her duly authorized agent may examine all portions of his/her personnel file except letters of reference solicited prior to employment, and information concerning a medical disability, mental or physical, that a prudent physician would not divulge to the patient. 2) A licensed physician designated in writing by the employee may examine the employee's medical record.
3) A Town employee having supervisory authority over the employee may examine all material in the employee's personnel file.
4) By order of a court of competent jurisdiction, any person may examine all material in the employee's personnel file.
5) An official of an agency of the State or Federal Government, or any political subdivision of the State, may inspect any portion of a personnel file when such inspection is deemed by the Town Manager to be necessary and essential to the pursuit of a proper function of the inspecting agency, but no information shall be divulged for the purpose of assisting in a criminal prosecution
and telephone number from a personnel file for the
purpose of assisting in a criminal investigation. 6) An employee may sign a written release to be placed in his/her personnel file that permits the record custodian to provide, either in person, by telephone, or by mail, information specified in the release to prospective employers, educational institutions, or other persons specified in the release.
7) The Town Manager, with the concurrence of the Town Board of Commissioners, may inform any person of the employment, non-employment, promotion, demotion, suspension or other disciplinary action, reinstatement, transfer, or termination of a Town employee, and the reasons for that action. Before releasing that information, the Town Manager shall determine in writing that the release is essential to maintaining the level and quality of Town services. The written determination shall be retained in the Town Manager's office, is a record for public inspection, and shall become a part of the employee's personnel file.
The Town Board of Commissioners shall establish procedures for all personnel files containing information other than the public information mentioned above whereby an employee who objects to material may seek to have the material removed from the file or may place in the file a statement relating to the material.
Section 2-6133 Personnel Actions.
The Town Manager, will prescribe necessary forms and reports for all personnel actions and will retain records necessary for the proper administration of the personnel system. There shall be one set of official personnel files, centrally located as designated by the Town Manager. Any document not located there is not an official part of that employee's personnel record.
Section 2-6134 Records of Former Employees.
The provisions for access to records apply to former employees as they apply to present employees.
2-6135 Government and Administration 2-37
Section 2-6135 Remedies of Employees CHAPTER 7
Objecting to Material in File.
Boards and Commissions
An employee who objects to material in his/her
file may place a statement in the file relating to the ARTICLE A
material considered to be inaccurate or misleading.
Creation of Advisory Boards and Commissions
The employee may seek removal of such material
in accordance with established grievance
procedures.
Section 2-6136 Penalties for Permitting
Access to Confidential Records.
Section 160A-168 of the General Statues provides that any public official or employee who knowingly and willfully permits any person to have access to any confidential information contained in an employee personnel file, except as expressly authorized by the designated custodian, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount consistent with the General Statutes.
Section 2-6137 Examining and/or
Copying Confidential Material without Authorization.
Section 160A-168 of the General Statutes of North Carolina provides that any person, not specifically authorized to have access to a personnel file designated as confidential, who shall knowingly and willfully examine in its official filing place, remove or copy any portion of a confidential personnel file shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined consistent with the General Statutes.
Section 2-6138 Destruction of Records
Regulated.
No public official may destroy, sell, loan, or otherwise dispose of any public record, except in accordance with G.S. 121.5, without the consent of the State Department of Cultural Resources. Whoever unlawfully removes a public record from the office where it is usually kept, or whoever, alters, defaces, mutilates or destroys it will be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction will be fined in an amount provided in Chapter 132.3 of the General Statutes.
Section 2-7001 Authority.
Section 2-7002 Purpose.
Section 2-7003 Enactment.
Section 2-7004 Conflicting ordinances.
Section 2-7005 Separability.
Section 2-7006 Repealed.
Section 2-7007 Planning Board.
Section 2-7008 Coverage.
Section 2-7009 Creation, name, number of members.
Section 2-7010 Number of members.
Section 2-7011 Powers and duties.
Section 2-7012 Appointment of members.
Section 2-7013 Composition.
Section 2-7014 Length of term.
Section 2-7015 Terms begin.
Section 2-7016 Meetings.
Section 2-7017 Attendance of members.
Section 2-7018 Compensation.
Section 2-7019 Officers.
Section 2-7020 Officers' duties.
Section 2-7021 Reappointment
Section 2-7022 Bylaws.
Sections 2-7023 through 2-7030 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Planning Board
Section 2-7031 Creation.
Section 2-7032 Composition; vacancies; terms of office.
Section 2-7033 Organization; rules, meetings; records.
Section 2-7034 Removal of members.
Section 2-7035 Compensation.
Section 2-7036 Expenditures; incurring indebtedness;
donations.
Section 2-7037 Powers and duties.
Section 2-7038 Other powers and duties.
ARTICLE A
Creation of Advisory Boards and Commissions Section 2-7001 Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to authority granted in Part 2, Chapter 1, Section 2-1002 of the Code of Ordinances for the Town. (Ord. of
3/25/86)
Section 2-7002 Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to develop a standard set of guidelines for the establishment and conduct
2-7002 Government and Administration 2-38
of such boards and commissions as so deemed Library Board
necessary by the Mayor and/or Board of
Commissioners of the Town. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7003 Enactment.
For the purposes cited above, the Board of Commissioners for the Town does hereby ordain, adopt and enact this article in its entirety, all of which shall be known as the Ordnance for Creation of Boards and Commissions. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7004 Conflicting ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinance in conflict with this article or inconsistent with its provisions, specifically including previous ordinances of the Town or amendments thereto, are hereby repealed or superceded to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect, excepting those ordinances concerning the Board of
Commissioners, Board of Adjustment and Planning Board. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7005 Separability.
Should any provision of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect this ordinance as a whole or any part hereof except that specific provision which was the subject of the declaration. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7006 Repealed.
This article should repeal and replace Part 2,
Chapter 7, Articles B and C of the Code of
Ordinances for the Town. (ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7007 Planning Board.
Part 2, Chapter 7, Article A of the Code of
Ordinances for the Town, shall be renumbered Part 2, Chapter 7, Article B, and begin as to form with Section "2-7031 Creation." (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7008 Coverage.
This article shall cover the following boards and commissions, and future additions that may be deemed necessary by the Mayor and/or Board of Commissioners:
Community Center Board of Trustees
Recreation Advisory Commission
Erwin Tree Board
(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7009 Creation, name, number of members.
Creation of a board or commission shall be done by ordinance approved by the Board of Commissioners. Included with this ordinance shall be the official name of the board or commission, number of members of which the board or commission will be composed, and purpose of the board or commission. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7010 Number of members.
All board or commissions covered under this chapter shall consist of an odd number of members. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7011 Powers and duties.
The board or commission shall serve as the advisory body for the Board of Commissioners and the Town. The commission shall suggest policies to the department, the manager and the governing body, within its powers and responsibilities as stated in its bylaws. The board or commission shall serve as a liaison between the department, the manager, the governing body of the unit and citizens of the community. The board or commission shall consult with and advise the department, the manager and the governing body in matters affecting policies, programs, personnel, finances, and the acquisition and disposal of lands and properties related to the total community program, and to the Town's long-range, projected programs. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7012 Appointment of members.
Each member of the board or commission shall be appointed by the governing body of the unit. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7013 Composition.
Members of the board or commission shall be residents of the Town, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town, or shall have such special
2-7013 Government and Administration 2-39
skills so as to uniquely qualify him/her for duty on Section 2-7018 Compensation.
the board or commission. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Members shall serve without monetary
Section 2-7014 Length of term.
Each member shall be appointed for a three (3) year term, arranged so that approximately one third (1/3) of the terms will expire each year. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7015 Terms begin.
The term of office for each appointed member shall last from the date of appointment until June 30 of the remaining term. New members normally take office as of the July meeting of the Board of Commissioners. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7016 Meetings.
Meetings shall beheld on a monthly basis unless determined otherwise by the board or commission. The chairman of the board or commission or, in his absence, the vice-chairman, may call a special meeting of the board or commission at any time by giving each member forty-eight (48) hours notice. Special meetings will be scheduled upon request by four (4) or more commission members. A
quorum of the commission shall be in attendance before action of an official nature can be taken. A quorum is at least one (1) more than the number absent, of the appointed members. All boards or commissions shall meet quarterly at minimum. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7017 Attendance of members.
An appointed member who fails to attend more than one scheduled meeting and a minimum of 80% of all scheduled meetings in any given calendar year automatically loses his/her status as a member of the board or commission provided that these absences are unexcused. Absences due to sickness, death, or other emergencies of like nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall not affect the member's status on the commission or board, except that in the event of a long illness or other cause for prolonged absence, the member may be replaced. (Ord. of 3/25/86) (Ord. of 1/6/94)
compensation. Members may be reimbursed for
travel and subsistence to professional organization meetings, conferences and workshops, with such reimbursement being made in compliance with the general policies of the unit. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7019 Officers.
There shall be a chairman and vice-chairman of each board or commission. An annual election of the chairman and vice-chairman shall be held by the board or commission members and shall occur at a regular monthly meeting in July. Officers shall serve for one (1) year from election with eligibility for re-election. New officers shall take office at the subsequent regular meeting in August. In the event an officer's appointment to the board or commission is terminated, a replacement to this office shall be elected by the remaining members, from its membership, at the meeting following the termination. The Town manager or his assign shall serve as secretary of the board or commission or shall appoint a member of the Advisory Commission to do this work for him. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7020 Officers' duties.
(a) The chairman shall preside at all meetings and sign all documents relative to action taken by the board or commission. The chairman shall appoint all subcommittees including a nominating committee composed of two (2) board or
commission members. A nominating commission shall be appointed at least thirty (30) days prior to the July meeting.
(b) When the chairman is absent the vice- chairman shall perform the duties of the chairman. When both the chairman and vice-chairman are absent a temporary chairman shall be selected by those members who are present. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7021 Reappointment.
A member of a board or commission may be re- appointed by the governing board to one subsequent term. However, after serving a second term, the member may not be re-appointed to the board until a period of one year elapses, after which the member may again serve up to two
2-7021 Government and Administration 2-40
terms. This process may continue until such time ARTICLE B
as the member resigns from the board or
commission or is not re-appointed by the Planning Board
governing board. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 2-7031 Creation
Section 2-7022 Bylaws.
A Town Planning Board for the Town of Erwin is
Operational policies and procedures may be
incorporated into a set of bylaws as developed and approved by the board or commission in line with this ordinance and the policies of the unit. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Sections 2-7023 through 2-7030 reserved.
hereby created under the authority of the General
Statutes of North Carolina; Chapter 160A, Article 19.
Section 2-7032 Compensation; vacancies; terms of office.
The Planning Board shall consist of eight (8)
members who shall be citizens and residents of the Town and shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners for staggered terms, with a full term to be three (3) years. Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled as they occur for the period of the unexpired term.
Section 2-7033 Organization; rules; meetings; records. Within thirty (30) days after appointment, the Planning Board shall meet and elect a chairman and create and fill such offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman and other officers shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection. The Planning Board shall adopt rules for. transaction of business and shall keep a record of its members' attendance, and of its resolutions, discussions, findings, and recommendations, which record shall be a public record. The Planning Board shall hold at least one (1) meeting monthly, and all of its meetings shall be open to the public. The outside representatives/Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Members of the Planning Board shall share equal rights, privileges, and duties with the other members of the Planning Board regardless of whether the matters at issue arise within the corporate limits of the Town or within the Town’s extraterritorial jurisdiction. (Amended June 7, 2012)
Section 2-7034 Removal of members.
Members of the Planning Board may, after a public hearing, be removed by the Board of Commissioners for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office.
Section 2-7035 Compensation. All members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation.
2-7036 Government and Administration 2-41
Section 2-7036 Expenditures; incurring plan, a plan for economic development, a
indebtedness; donations. recreation plan, a community facilities plan, and
school plan.
The expenditures of the Planning Board, exclusive
of gifts or grants, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Board of Commissioners and no indebtedness for which the Town shall be liable shall be contracted or incurred by the Planning Board unless an appropriation is made by the Commissioner for such purpose, as authorized by law, and then only to the extent of such appropriation. The Board shall have the right to accept gifts and donations for the exercise of its functions and may expend the money received from such gifts and donations in a manner, which in the judgment of the Board, is consistent with the best interest of the planning program.
Section 2-7037 Powers and duties.
(a) The Planning Board shall make careful studies of present conditions and the probable future development of the Town and its environs. Such studies may include but not be limited to: land-use surveys; population studies; economic base studies; school, park, and recreation studies; traffic and parking studies; and urban renewal studies.
(b) Plans. The Board shall prepare and from time to time amend and revise a comprehensive plan of the Town and its environs for the purpose of achieving a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the municipality which would promote, in accordance with present and future needs, the safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of its citizens; efficiency and economy in the process of development, convenience of traffic; safety from fire and other dangers; adequate light and air; healthful and convenient distribution of
population; provision of adequate open spaces; good civic design and arrangement; wise and efficient expenditures of public funds; adequate provision for public utilities; and for other matters pertaining to the public requirements. The Board shall prepare and recommend to the
Commissioners ordinances promoting orderly development along the lines indicated in the comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan shall consist of a number of parts which may include but not be limited to the following: a land use plan, a major thoroughfare plan, a utilities
(c) Powers of Review. The Board shall review
and make recommendations to the Commissioners upon the extent, location and design of all public structures and facilities, on the acquisition and disposal of public properties, on. the opening, abandonment, widening, extension, narrowing or other change to streets and other public ways, on the construction, extension, expansion or abandonment of utilities whether publicly or privately owned. However, in the absence of a recommendation from the Planning Board after the expiration of 30 days from the date on which the question has been submitted in writing to the Planning Board, the Board of Commissioners may, if it deems wise, take final action.
(d) Annual Report. The Board shall, not later than May 15th of each year, submit in writing to the Board
of Commissioners a written report of its activities, an analysis of the expenditures to date for the current year, proposed planning program for the next fiscal year, for review and approval, and a proposed budget for the next fiscal year.
(e) Miscellaneous Powers and Duties. The Planning Board may conduct such public hearings as may be required to gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment, and maintenance of the comprehensive plan. Before adopting any such plan it shall hold one (1) public hearing therein.
Members or employees of the Board, when duly authorized by the Planning Board may attend planning conferences or meetings of planning institutes or hearings upon pending planning legislation, and the Planning Board may, by formal and -affirmative vote, pay, within the
Board's budget, the reasonable traveling expense incident to such attendance.
Section 2-7038 Other powers and duties.
The Planning Board created by this article shall have, in addition to those herein provided, the powers and duties conferred upon planning agencies by Section 361 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina, and said duties shall be performed and said powers shall be exercised in conformity with the provisions of
2-7036 Government and Administration 2-41
Chapter 160A, Article 19, of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
3-1001 Public Safety
PART 3
Public Safety
Chapter 1 Law Enforcement
Chapter 2 Fire Prevention and Protection
Chapter 3 Emergency and Rescue
CHAPTER 1
Law Enforcement
ARTICLE A
Police Department
Section 3-1001 Executive control of department.
Section 3-1002 General supervision of department.
Section 3-1003 Chief of police to have charge of
department.
Section 3-1004 Basic requirements for policemen.
Section 3-1005 duties of police officers.
Section 3-1006 Appearance of uniforms; grooming.
Section 3-1007 Compensation of officers.
Section 3-1008 Right of entry.
Section 3-1009 Special policemen.
Section 3-1010 Summoning aid; duty of citizens.
Section 3-1011 Interfering with policemen.
Section 3-1012 Abusing officers.
Section 3-1013 Intergovernmental agreements for public
assistance.
Sections 3-1014 through 3-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Auxiliary Police
Section 3-1021 Auxiliary police division established. Section 3-1022 Chief of police to control; appointments
and removals.
Section 3-1023 Duties.
Section 3-1024 Identification.
Section 3-1025 Carrying and custody of firearms. Section 3-1026 Law enforcement powers.
ARTICLE A
Police Department
Section 3-1001 Executive control of
department.
The Town manager shall be the executive head of the police department and, together with the chief of police and such other employees as the Council
may deem necessary, shall constitute the police department.
3-1
Section 3-1002 General department.
The manager shall have general control of the police department and may at any time, for cause, suspend from duty any member of the police force.
Section 3-1003 Chief of police to have charge of department.
The chief of police, subject to the direction of the manager, shall have charge of the police force. He shall assign such duties to the policemen as he thinks best for the good order of the Town and he shall be responsible to the manager in seeing to it that the policemen faithfully perform their duties.
Section 3-1004 Basic requirements for
policemen.
Applicants for employment as police officers shall meet the minimum standards established by the North Carolina Criminal Justice Training and Standards Council.
State Law Reference: Standards to be set by Training and Standards Council G.C. 17A-6, 17A-7.
Section 3-1005 Duties of police officers.
The police department shall carry out all orders of the Board, enforce the laws and ordinances of the Town and the State of North Carolina, and shall at all times preserve the peace, protect the property and the safety of the citizens of Erwin. (Code 1967, Ch. B, Sec. 4)
Section 3-1006 Appearance of uniforms;
grooming.
The chief of police and other police officers shall, when on duty, wear such uniforms as shall be prescribed by the Council and shall keep the same in a neat condition. Upon discharge, or resignation, or dismissal, such uniforms shall be surrendered if the same shall have been purchased by the City for their use. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see to it that the force presents a neat and respectable appearance.
Section 3-1007 Compensation of officers.
The police officers shall receive as compensation such sums as shall be fixed by the Board.
3-1008 Public Safety
Section 3-1008 Right of entry.
The police shall have power to enter the enclosure and house of any person, without warrant, when they have good reason to believe that a felony, or
other infamous crime has been, or is about to be, committed, and to apprehend such person so offending, and, if necessary, to summon' a posse to
aid them. All persons summoned shall have like authority to enter and arrest.
Section 3-1009 Special policemen.
The manager shall have power to employ, when he deems it necessary, as many special policemen as are necessary to preserve peace.
Cross Reference: Auxiliary police force established, section 3-1021 et seq.
Section 3-1010 Summoning aid; duty of citizens.
The chief of police, or any policemen of the Town shall have authority, if resisted in the execution of their lawful duties, to summons a sufficient
number of men to aid them in enforcing the law; and it shall be unlawful for any person, so summoned, to refuse to assist the chief of police or
other officers.
Section 3-1011 Interfering with policemen.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hamper, molest, resist, or hinder a police officer in the lawful discharge of his duty.
Section 3-1012 Abusing officers.
No person shall curse, or apply any vile or obscene epithet to, any officer of the Town or members of the police force, while such officers are
discharging their duties.
State Law Reference: Powers and duties of policemen, G.S. 160A-285.
Section 3-1013 Intergovernmental agreement for police assistance.
(a) The authority to enter an Agreement for intergovernmental police assistance is pursuant to
G.S. 160A-288.
3-2
(b) It is recognized that in certain situations the use of police officers to perform police duties outside of the territorial limits of the municipality where such officers are legally employed may be desirable and necessary in order to preserve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. (c) The Town does hereby, in this ordinance, authorize and direct its police chief or the officer commanding in his absence to render and request mutual police aid to and from other municipalities to the extent of available personnel and equipment not required for adequate protection of the municipality rendering aid. The judgment of the police chief, or officer commanding in his absence, of each municipality rendering aid, as to the amount of personnel and equipment available, shall be final. (Ord. of 10/1/87)
Sections 3-1014 through 3-1020 reserved.
3-1021
ARTICLE B
Auxiliary Police
Section 3-1021 Auxiliary police
established.
Public Safety 3-3
The chief may prescribe other duties than those
mentioned herein to be performed by the auxiliary
police division, with approval of the Board.
division Section 3-1024 Identification.
An identification card and such other insignia or
There is hereby established an auxiliary police
department to be known as the auxiliary police division of the Town police department. The auxiliary police division shall be a volunteer organization, composed of as many members as may from time to time be determined by the Board.
Section 3-1022 Chief of police to control; appointments and removals.
The auxiliary police division shall be under the direct control of the chief of police, acting under the general supervision of the Board. All appointments and removals of members of the auxiliary police division shall be made in the same manner and under the same policies and procedures as may from time to time be established for appointment and removal of regular police officers.
The auxiliary police division shall have no commanding officer, nor any officers, and all members shall bear the rank of patrolman. Each member of the auxiliary police division shall take the oath of office of a regular policeman. The chief of police shall provide for adequate training of members of the auxiliary police division and of candidates for membership.
Section 3-1023 Duties.
The duties of the auxiliary police division subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of police, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of law and the maintenance of peace and order when called to active duty by the chief of police. The chief shall by order establish rules and regulations to govern the auxiliary police division, to fix the specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. Members of the auxiliary police division shall obey the instructions of regular police officers in carrying out their duties.
evidence of identity as the chief may prescribe
shall be issued to each member of the auxiliary police division, who must carry the card and other identification at all times while on duty, and who must surrender them upon the termination of his membership.
Section 3-1025 Carrying and custody of firearms.
No member of the auxiliary police division shall, while on duty, carry or use any firearm except upon the express order of the chief of police, and all official firearms shall be kept in custody of the police department except when issued to a member of the auxiliary division for sue on active duty while accompanied by and under the supervision of one (1) or more regular police
officers.
Section 3-1026 Law enforcement powers.
No member or members of the auxiliary police division shall enforce, nor attempt to enforce, any law except when called to active duty, and except when immediately accompanied by one (1) or more regular police officers.
State Law Reference: Powers, privileges and immunities of auxiliary policemen. G.S. 160A-282.
3-2001
CHAPTER 2
Fire Prevention and Protection
ARTICLE A
Fire Department
Section 3-2001 Organization, powers.
Section 3-2002 Following fire equipment.
Public Safety 3-4
Section 3-2003 Interfering with firemen or fire
apparatus.
No person shall interfere with a fireman in the
discharge of his duty, or hinder him in the
performance of a said duty; nor shall any person
other than members of the fire department loiter
about any fire station, or change, handle, or
meddle in any manner with any fire engine or any
Section 3-2003 Interfering with firemen or fire apparatus.
Section 3-2004 Only firemen and policemen may ride on
trucks without permission.
Section 3-2005 Interfering with fire alarm apparatus.
Section 3-2006 Giving false alarm of fire forbidden.
Sections 3-2007 through 3-2010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Fire Prevention and Hazards
Section 3-2011 Open Burning
Section 3-2012 through 3-2020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Fire Limits
Section 3-2021 Fire limits established.
Section 3-2022 Regulations within corporate limits.
ARTICLE A
Fire Department
Section 3-2001 Organization, powers.
The Town fire department shall be the Erwin Fire Department and Rescue Squad, Inc. The district fire department shall leave all of the jurisdiction, authority, rights and privileges which would accrue to it as a department of the Town.
Editorial Note: Fire department protection is accorded the Town by a contract with the district fire department.
Section 3-2002 Following fire equipment.
It shall be unlawful to follow any fire apparatus which is responding to a call, by automobile or any other vehicle, unless such is used for transporting firemen to the scene of fire, at a distance closer than one (1) city block, or to pass such apparatus or to park within the same block in which fire is in progress.
(Code 1967, Ch. C, Art. I, Sec. 4)
other fire apparatus. (Code 1967, Ch. C, Art. 1,
Sec: 5)
Section 3-2004 Only firemen and policemen may ride on trucks without permission.
No person other than a bona fide member of the fire department shall mount any fire engine, wagon or apparatus before it leaves the station or while on its way to or from a fire, or at any other time, unless by permission of the driver or officer in command of such engine, wagon or other apparatus. (Code 1967, Ch. C, Art. I, Sec. 6)
Section 3-2005 Interfering with fire alarm apparatus.
No person shall interfere carelessly or willfully with the fire alarm system or injure the poles, wires, boxes, or other apparatus connected therewith.
Section 3-2006 Giving false alarm of fire forbidden.
No person shall give or cause to be given any false alarm of fire by means of the fire alarm system or otherwise.
Section 3-2007 through 3-2010 reserved.
3-2011
ARTICLE B
Fire Prevention and Hazards
Section 3-2011 Open Burning
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or other combustible materials, including for illustrative purposes only, to include but not limited to; garbage, leaves, tree branches, yard trimmings, construction materials or scrap materials within the corporate limits of the Town of Erwin.
The prohibition in this section does not include outdoor cooking on commercially obtained or other such apparatus designed for cooking food such as barbeque grills, open cooking pits and does not include commercially obtained outdoor lighting devises such as “tiki torches”.
The prohibition contained in this section does not include open burning allowed by open burning permits issued by the Fire Chief for bonfires and open burning permits issued by the Fire Chief, with the coordination and consent of the U.S. Forestry Service, for open burning in conjunction with land development. Any such permit is subject to revocation when the permit holder fails to comply with the conditions stated in the permit, the reasons for the permit have changed or the conditions, including weather, have changed.
Section 3-2012 through 3-2020 reserved.
Public Safety 3-5
ARTICLE C
Fire Limits
Section 3-2021 Fire limits established.
The fire limits of the Town of Erwin shall be and
are hereby established as follows:
Beginning at the intersection West "F" and 14th
Street; running thence with 14th Street to the
intersection with "G" Street; thence with "G"
Street to its intersection with 13th Street; thence
northerly along 13th Street for a distance of
approximately eight hundred (800) feet to the
northern boundary of lot number 315 as shown on
a map entitled Section No. I of a subdivision for
Erwin Mills, Inc.; thence in an easterly direction
along the northern boundary of lots 315, 305, and
299 for a distance of approximately seven hundred
and five (705) feet; thence southerly along the
eastern boundary of lots, 299, 300, 41, and 42 for a
distance of approximately six hundred and
forty-two (642) feet; thence southerly along the
eastern boundary of lots 74, 73, and 71 for a
distance of approximately three hundred and
eighty-three (383) feet to the center of East "F"
Street; thence in a westerly direction to the point
of beginning at the intersection of West "F" and
14th Streets. (Ord. of 3/72)
Section 3-2022 Regulations within corporate
limits.
No construction or alterations of any kind or
description shall be made in either of the above set
out corporate limits without a building permit, and
full compliance with ordinances governing
construction in the Town. (Code 1967, Ch. C, Art.
III, Sec. 2)
3-3001
CHAPTER 3
Emergency and Rescue
ARTICLE A
Emergencies
Public Safety 3-6
enforcement officers, firemen and other public
employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals
and other medical facilities; on-duty military
personnel whether State or Federal; on duty
employees of public utilities, public transportation
companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio
broadcasting, and television broadcasting
Section 3-3001 State of emergency; curfew authorized.
Section 3-3002 Form and content of proclamations.
Section 3-3003 Penalty for violation.
Sections 3-3004 through 3-3010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Civil Defense Department
Sections 3-3011 through 3-3020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Emergency Medical Service
(Reserved)
ARTICLE A
Emergencies
Section 3-3001 State of emergency; curfew authorized.
(a) A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar public emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property.
(b) In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the Town, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the Town, to place in effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter authorized.
(c) The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the proclamation the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area specifically designated or described within the corporate limits of the Town and to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law
corporations operated for profit; and such other
classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health, and welfare needs of the people within the Town.
(d) The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the Board. (e) During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:
(1) Prohibit or regulate the possession off one's own premises of explosives, firearms, ammunition, or dangerous weapons of any kind, and prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof;
(2) Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine, or intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off one's own premises;
(3) Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil, or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any public property;
(4) Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, or any other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances;
(5) Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley, or roadway or upon any other public property, except by those in search of medical assistance, food, or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves or their families or some member thereof;
(6) Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of business, places of entertainment, and any other places of public assembly.
(f) Any proclamation may be extended, altered, or repealed in any particular during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent
proclamation.
3-3001 Public Safety 3-7
(g) During the existence of a proclaimed state of
emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by this article. (Code 1967, Ch. L, Art. 1, Sec. 1)
Section 3-3002 Form and content of
proclamations.
The proclamation for the declaration of a state of emergency and the imposition of specific prohibitions and restrictions shall take
substantially the following form.
"WHEREAS, The governing body of the Town of Erwin, has duly adopted an ordinance authorizing the Mayor to determine and proclaim the existence of a state of emergency and to impose various restrictions after he determines that such restrictions are necessary as a response to an emergency.
"NOW THEREFORE, I, , Mayor of
the Town of Erwin proclaim that:
I.
"An emergency exists, and restrictions set forth in this proclamation are necessary in order to maintain an acceptable level of public order, services, and protection of lives, safety, and property during this emergency.
II.
Editorial Note: The proclamation should specify any one or more of the following restrictions which are presented herein as options.
"I proclaim the following restrictions:
A. No person shall be a part of any assembly of three (3) or more persons in the area bounded by the Corporate limits of the Town of Erwin.
B. Possession, consumption, and transfer of intoxicating liquor.
1. No person shall possess or consume any intoxicating liquor, including beer and wine, other than on his premises.
2. No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any intoxicating liquor, including beer and wine. C. Curfew.
1. No person not exempted by this
proclamation shall appear in public in the geographic area described in this proclamation between the hours of P.M. and midnight or
between the hours of midnight and
__________A.M. of any day until I remove this
curfew by proclamation.
2. This curfew shall apply to the area bounded by _____________________________________. 3. I find it necessary to the preservation of the
public health, safety, and welfare to exempt from these curfew restrictions the following classes of people in the circumstances indicated:
(a) (Those whose appearance is essential in
order to obtain or furnish a service or commodity which is immediately necessary to sustain the health or well-being of themselves or of someone within curfew area.)
(b) (Those whose appearance necessarily
occurs in the process of leaving a place at which they were temporarily engaged and from which they could not reasonably have planned their departure so as to avoid appearing during the period during which the curfew was applicable.) (c) (Other)
D. Possession and transfer of dangerous weapons or substances.
1. No person shall possess any dangerous weapons or substances unless they remain in a place of storage on his premises, or, if they cannot be readily stored on his premises, unless they remain in a customary place of storage not readily available to the possessor. No person may transport or sell or otherwise transfer any dangerous weapons or substances.
2. I find it necessary to the prevention of the public health, safety, and welfare to exempt from these restrictions the following classes of people in the circumstances indicated:
Police officers may possess any weapon necessary to carry out their duties when on active duty. Anyone may possess gasoline when the gasoline is in the tank of a car in his possession.
______________________may transfer when ________________________________________. E. Access for restricted areas.
1. I direct the chief of police and his subordinates to restrict or deny access to any area, location, or street where such a restriction is necessary in order to help overcome this emergency or to prevent the emergency from worsening. These restrictions on access shall be indicated by means of barricades, posted notices, or orders to anyone in the area.
2. No person shall obtain access or attempt to obtain access to any area, location, or street to which the chief of police and his subordinates
3-3002 Public Safety
have restricted access according to the directions I have just given to them.
III.
"Anyone violating any restriction imposed by this proclamation or under its authority violates Town ordinance and is guilty of a misdemeanor.
IV.
"This proclamation shall take effect immediately.
____________________
Hour and Date
Mayor
SEAL OF THE TOWN"
Section 3-3003 Penalty for violation.
The violation of any provision of this article, or of any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by this article, shall
constitute a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50) or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30)
days, as provided by G.S. 14-4.
Sections 3-3004 through 3-3010 reserved.
3-8
ARTICLE B
Civil Defense Department
Sections 3-3011 through 3-3020 reserved.
3-3002 Public Safety 3-8
ARTICLE C
Emergency Medical Department (Reserved)
4-1001
PART 4
Public Works
Chapter 1 Streets and Sidewalks
Chapter 2 Garbage and Refuse Collection and
Disposal
Chapter 3 Municipally Owned Cemeteries
Chapter 4 Parks and Recreation
CHAPTER 1
Streets and Sidewalks
ARTICLE A
Acceptance and Improvement of Public Streets Section 4-1001 Police established.
Public Works 4-1
years only when a petition is presented to the
Board by the abutting property owners requesting
such improvement. No petition for curb and gutter,
street, and sidewalk improvements will be
considered unless such petition is signed by no
less than fifty-one (51%) percent of the property
owners who represent at least fifty-one (51)
percent of the lineal footage.
(Ord. of 6/2/77, Sec. 21)(Ord. of 3/3/94)
Section 4-1002 Requirements for petition; costs
to be paid by property owners.
In order to receive consideration, a petition
submitted to the Board shall specify that. the
property owners requesting the improvement, will
pay fifty (50) percent of the total costs of
Section 4-1002 Requirements for petition; costs to be paid
by property owners.
Section 4-1003 Costs to be borne by Town.
Section 4-1004 Assessment procedure.
Section 4-1005 Penalties and interest for failure to pay
assessment.
Section 4-1006 Required length of street improvement.
Section 4-1007 Standard and specifications of
improvements.
Sections 4-1008 through 4-1010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Excavation and Repair
Section 4-1011 Permit to dig in streets.
Section 4-1012 Sidewalk construction.
Section 4-1013 Street repair.
Section 4-1014 Excavations; leaving unprotected.
Section 4-1015 Streets not to be damaged.
Section 4-1016 House moving.
Section 4-1017 Damage to bridges and culverts.
Section 4-1018 Damage to lights, signs.
Section 4-1019 Removal of railroad tracks.
Section 4-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Street Naming
(Reserved)
ARTICLE A
Acceptance and Improvement of Public Streets Section 4-1001 Police established.
The Board will consider the construction of curb and gutter, street, and sidewalk improvements along any public street that has been a part of the municipal street system for a period of at least ten
curb/gutter and sidewalks.
The cost of the improvement as specified above will be paid by each benefited property owner on each side of the street. (Ord. of 6/3/77, See. 2, Ord. of 9/3/87)
Section 4-1003 Costs to be borne by Town.
The Town will bear the remaining total cost of any curb and gutter, street, and sidewalk project and the total cost of constructing such improvement at street intersections. (Ord. of 6/2/77, Sec. 3)
Section 4-1004 Assessment procedure.
When a curb and gutter, street or sidewalk improvement petition is approved and when funds are available, the Board may undertake such curb and gutter, street, and sidewalk improvement, and they shall assess the abutting property owners for their proportionate share of such improvements in accordance with the assessment procedure as specified in G.S. 160A through 160A-238, at an equal rate per front foot. (Ord. of 6/2/77, Sec. 4)
Section 4-1005 Penalties and interest for failure to pay assessment.
Property owners who fail or refuse to pay their assessment for curb and gutter, street or sidewalk improvements at the time the assessment becomes due shall pay their assessment in five (5) equal annual installments and shall be charged interest thereon at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum as required by G.S. 160A 232, 233. (Ord. of
6/2/77, Sec. 5)
4-1006 Public Works 4-2
Section 4-1006 Required length improvement. ARTICLE B
No petition for curb and gutter, street, and Excavation and Repair
sidewalk improvements will be considered by the
Board unless the improvement extends for a Section 4-1011 Permit to dig in streets.
distance of not less than one (1) normal residential
block and includes both sides of a street. (Ord. of
6/2/77, Sec. 6)
Section 4-1007 Standards and specifications of improvements.
Construction of curb and gutters, street, and sidewalk improvements and the construction or reconstruction of culverts, ditches, other drainage structures and driveway entrances shall be constructed in accordance with the written standards and specifications that may now or hereafter be adopted by the Town, and all work shall be done under the supervision of the Town official appointed for this purpose by the Board. (Ord. of 6/2/77, Sec. 7)
Sections 4-1008 through 4-1010 reserved.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to dig any hole, ditch or excavation of any kind whatsoever, on any street in the Town without first securing a permit therefor in writing from the Town clerk. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. I, Sec. 1)
Section 4-1012 Sidewalk construction.
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or corporation, of any brick, wood, or other material without a written permit from the Town. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. I, Sec. 2)
Section 4-1013 Street repair.
It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation, who shall open or dig a ditch, trench or hole in any street, public alley or sidewalk of the Town, to put the said street, public alley or sidewalk in as good condition in all respects as it was before, and every person, firm or corporation violating or failing to observe the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. I, Sec. 3)
Section 4-1014 Excavations; leaving
unprotected.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation making any excavation for any purpose whatsoever in any of the streets or sidewalks to fail to securely cover such excavations with plank or place ropes around the same three (3) feet from the ground or to fail to place a sufficient number of red lights around such excavation before dark and to keep such lights burning all night every night such excavation shall be open. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. I, Sec. 4)
Section 4-1015 Streets not to be damaged.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drag, or run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, bithultic, warrenite, or other permanently paved street of the
4-1015 Public Works 4-3
Town which shall be liable, in any way, to injure (2) The materials used for the maintenance and
or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful
to injure any dirt street in the same manner. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. I, Sec. 5)
Section 4-1016 House moving.
No person shall move any house or building upon or across the public streets or sidewalks without the written consent of the Board and the deposit of a good and sufficient bond in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500) to cover damage done to such street or sidewalk or to any property of any person. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. I, Sec. 6)
Section 4-1017 Damage to bridges and culverts.
No person shall injure or misplace any part of any bridge, culvert, ditch and drain or other property belonging to or used by the Town, or shall place any obstruction in any culvert, ditch or drain, to prevent the free flow of water on or over the streets of the Town. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. I, Sec. 7)
Section 4-1018 Damage to lights, signs.
No person shall injure, tamper with, remove or paint upon or deface any sign, sign post, street light, traffic signal or bulletin board or other municipal property upon the streets and sidewalks except employees of the Town in performance of their duties. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. 1, Sec. 8)
Section 4-1019 Removal of railroad tracks.
(a) (1) All persons, firms, or corporations
operating street and other railroads in the Town, and all persons, firms, or corporations owning street or other railroads whose tracks cross or are laid in any public street of the Town, whether or not any railway operations are conducted over and along said tracks, shall keep in repair that part of the street between the rails of such tracks and that part of the street lying on each side of such rails for a width of 18 inches, using for the maintenance and repair of such tracks materials suitable for the maintenance thereof, and using for the maintenance and repair of any such street materials suitable for maintaining the traveled surface of the roadway in a manner conforming to the grade of the street in which said tracks are laid, all in a condition safe for use by the public.
repair of the streets herein required shall be of an
equal or better grade than the material used in surfacing the street or streets over which said tracks pass. The Town manager shall have the authority to prescribe and/or approve the materials to be used for the construction of any new placement or crossing of any such tracks, and it shall be unlawful for any street or other railway company to construct any new tracks at- grade within or crossing any public street of the Town, except upon approval by the Commissioners, and according to plans approved by the Town manager.
(b) At any time any street or other railroad company abandons any portion of its track with the Town and removes the rail and other rail facilities and appurtenances from the right-of-way of said railroad company within the Town, it shall be the duty of said street or other railroad company to remove, within a reasonable time after said abandonments, all tracks and other appurtenances in connection with said railway from the streets of the Town in accordance with plans approved by the Town manager, and to restore the street to a condition consistent with the maintenance of said street without the burden of said tracks, and so that said street, without the burden of the tracks, is made safe for public travel. Any such removal with respect to any railway-street crossing shall include not only the rails, ties, and other appurtenances, but shall also include the restoration of all approaches to said crossing which are necessary to make said crossing with the grade of the street within the vicinity of such crossing.
(c) In addition to the duties prescribed by division (b) above in the event any street or any other railroad company abandons any portion of its track within the Town and removes the rails and other rail facilities and other appurtenances from the right-of-way of any said railroad company within the Town, it shall be the duty of said street or other railroad company to remove and eliminate any unsafe or unsightly conditions remaining or created as a result of said abandonment and track removal.
(d) (1) Prior to the removal of any rail or any other track materials subsequent to abandonment, the said street or other railroad company must file an application for approval of the proposed change with, and receive approval from, the Town
manager. The application shall contain, at a
4-1019 Public Works 4-4
minimum, for each grade crossing, engineering c) Drainage pipe must not exceed 2,500 pounds
drawings showing the present plan of the street
and crossing, proposed plan of the street following removal of the crossing, profile of the centerline of road as it exists, profile of the centerline of the road as it will exist after reconstruction of the crossing, the date on which the work is to commence, the estimated completion date, a summary of material quantities to be used in reconstruction of the grade crossing, and a statement of how and by whom the work will be performed.
(2) A separate application shall be filed for each grade crossing to be removed following abandonment. The filing fee for each such application shall be five hundred dollars ($500). This fee shall also cover the inspection fee for ascertaining that the work was properly performed in accordance with representations contained in the
application.
(3) To ascertain that no unsafe or unsightly conditions remain after track removal, an inspection shall be made by the Town manager, for which there will be an inspection fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750). The Town manager shall immediately notify the abandoning railroad company of his findings following completion of his inspection, and shall submit therewith his bill for the inspection fee aforesaid, along with his report of any needed work.
Section 4-1020 Storm drainage tile
installation policy.
The Public Works Department shall install drainage tile up to 36” in diameter at driveway entrances and exits adjoining public streets of residences, businesses, industrial, and commercial establishments, provided that all of the following criteria can be met:
a) The owner of the residence, business, industry, or commercial establishment shall be entirely responsible for the purchase of the pipe to be installed as well as stone, dirt, etc. necessary for cover and installation.
b) The pipe must be in a first rate condition that is acceptable to the Public Works Director or his designee, i.e. free of cracks, sufficient strength, etc. Examples of acceptable drainage pipe types include reinforced concrete and double walled plastic.
in weight per section.
d) Drainage pipe meeting these criteria as set forth will be installed by the Town for a distance not to exceed twenty feet along driveway entrances and exits adjoining public streets.
(Ord. of 4/6/95)
4-1021 Public Works 4-5
ARTICLE C CHAPTER 2
Street Naming Garbage and Refuse Collection and Disposal
(Reserved) Section 4-2001 Dumping on Town property prohibited
Section 4-2002 Definitions
Section 4-2003 Approved containers, additional containers,
spilled materials
Section 4-2004 Containers for businesses
Section 4-2005 Containers for construction, renovation or demolition activities
Section 4-2006 Location of Containers
Section 4-2007 No garbage, refuse, etc., to be deposited in streets, etc
Section 4-2008 Interference with receptacles
Section 4-2009 Inspection of receptacles
Section 4-2010 Town employees not to discharge duty of tenants, storekeepers, etc
Section 4-2011 Collectors to use reasonable care
Section 4-2012 Dumping on lots prohibited
Section 4-2013 Collection of Yard Waste Regulations
Section 4-2014 Collection of Brown and White Bulky Waste Regulations
Section 4-2015 Stable, kennel, pet and farm animal manure
Section 4-2016 Solid waste the Town will not collect
Section 4-2017 Refuse collection
Section 4-2018 Charges and fees
Section 4-2019 Penalties and remedies
Section 4-2001 Dumping on Town property
prohibited.
(a) No person shall unload or dump any trash, garbage, refuse, waste or any other substance on any property owned by the Town, except as explicitly authorized in this Chapter. (Amended 11/04/2010)
(b) This section shall not apply to regular employees of the Town working under orders and directions of the Town Manager and Town Commissioners and to persons having permits from the Town. (Ord. of 11/1/84)
Section 4-2002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
(1) Ashes. The refuse from fires -in houses,
schools, stores, etc., and includes at times small quantities of glass, crockery, sweepings, dust, brick, metal and other inorganic materials.
(2) Garbage. The organic waste matter, both animal and vegetable, from houses, kitchens, restaurants, hotels, hospitals, etc., comprised chiefly of waste food and does not include liquids that may be drained.
(3) Refuse. Construction material, limbs, leaves, stumps, and other types of vegetation.
(4) Waste. Includes tin cans, dirty rags, paper,
glass, clothes, waste and other materials not otherwise designated herein. (Ord. of 11/l/84)
4-2003 Public Works 4-6
Section 4-2003 Approved containers, additional containers, spilled materials. (Amended 11/04/2010)
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any garbage or refuse of any kind on any public or private property unless in approved containers or as otherwise provided herein. The occupant of every building or premises where garbage and refuse does or may accumulate is required to have a container for such garbage and refuse to be deposited in. The only approved container are those provided by the Town or the Town’s solid waste contractor or for business (retail, institutional, commercial and industrial) buildings a private waste hauler. No other container are acceptable.
(2) Additional rollout containers may be issued to the owner or occupant of residential properties in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the Board of Commissioners. All rollout containers (non-recycling containers) issued by the Town are property of the Town. (3) Rollout containers (non-recycling containers) used in the residential garbage collection program are property of the town and the town provides general maintenance for them at no cost to the resident. A replacement fee will be charged for rollout containers that are damaged, defaced, or removed from the premises.
(4) Spilled materials or overflow caused by the property owner or occupant shall be cleaned up immediately after such spillage or overflow occurs by such owner of occupant.
(5) Spilled solid waste materials caused by the town collection crew of the town’s authorized collection agent shall be cleaned up immediately after such spillage occurs by said crew.
Section 4-2004 Containers for businesses (Amended 11/04/2010)
Businesses shall use four (4), six (6), and/or eight (8) cubic yard rear loading containers of a type to be specified by the Public Works Director unless the daily amount of refuse, garbage, and waste is insufficient to warrant this type of container as determined by the Public Works Director. Otherwise receptacles outline in Section 4-2003 (1) shall be used.(Amended 11/04/2010)
Section 4-2005 Containers for construction, renovation or demolition activities. (Amended 11/04/2010).
(1) Every person engaged in the construction, repair, remodeling, or demolition of any building or structure, or part thereof, shall be responsible for the removal and disposal of, in an authorized manner, from any street, alley, gutter, park, sidewalk, curbing, curb space, public way or premises all waste matter or refuse deposited thereon.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person undertaking any construction, repair, remodeling, or demolition of any building or structure, or part thereof, to fail to provide on-site receptacles for containerizing all debris and waste material produced by those working on site which is capable of being windblown or scattered from the site. Examples of appropriate receptacles shall include but not limited to dump trucks, trailers, bulk containers, and containers made of fencing material. All waste shall be containerized and secured so as to prevent being windblown by the end of each day, and the site shall be kept in a reasonably clean condition. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of the construction or demolition shall be immediately removed by the contractor. Construction sites shall be kept clean and orderly at all times.
(3) Such refuse shall be cleaned up, removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner within seven (7) days of the final cessation of work on such building or structure, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Public Works Director.
Section 4-2006 Location of Containers (Amended 11/04/2010).
Containers shall not be placed adjacent to the street or sidewalk except on the days when garbage is to be collected. A schedule of collection routes shall be kept on file at the office of the Town Manager and Public Works Director. When collection schedules are altered from time to time, notice of such change shall be given by publishing the new schedule in a newspaper of general circulation or by providing notice by way of information pamphlets placed at the front door or on the rollout cart for each of the affected properties. Garbage containers shall be removed from their positions adjacent to the street or sidewalk after the contents have been emptied on that same day. At all other times garbage container shall be located in the rear yard of the property for which the container serves.
4-2010 Public Works 4-7
Section 4-2007 No garbage, refuse, etc., to be deposited in streets, etc.
No person shall deposit in or sweep into any street, sidewalk or gutter any trash, rubbish, broken glass, tin cans, fruit peelings, refuse, ashes, waste, loose paper or leaves. No person shall throw upon the sidewalk, street or in any catch-basin any paper, rags, waste oils, old shoes, tin cans, bottles, fruit or vegetables, dead animals or any other refuse or garbage. Nor shall any householder or storekeeper sweep or cause to be swept from any house, yard, store or elsewhere any dirt or refuse of any kind upon the sidewalk or pubic streets. (Ord. of 11/l/84)
Section 4-2008 Interference with receptacles.
No person shall molest or interfere with the contents of any garbage receptacles set out for removal by the Town Public Works Department or Town’s Solid Waste Contractor. (Ord. of 11/l/84) (Amended 1104/2010)
Section 4-2009 Inspection of Receptacles.
All garbage receptacles shall be inspected as to their sanitary condition and if and when found in an unsanitary condition the department of public works shall furnish the owner of such cans a notice to correct the condition as to the container and its unsanitary condition if such should prevail. If the owner does not correct this condition in a reasonable length of time, the director of pubic works shall take the necessary steps to have the owners comply with the State and Town sanitary requirements. (Ord. of 11/01/84)
Section 4-2010 Town employees not to discharge duty of tenants, storekeepers, etc.
No employee of the Town shall assist in any way in the performance of what has been set forth as the duty of the landlord, tenant or storekeeper with the reference to the enforcement of this article. (Ord. 0f 11/1/84)
Section 4-2011 Collectors to use reasonable care.
Collectors shall exercise reasonable care in the handling of garbage receptacles and shall not willfully break, deface or injure the same. (Ord. of 11/1/84)
Section 4-2012 Dumping on lots prohibited.
No garbage, refuse, or offensive or disease producing materials shall be dumped for any purpose on any lot or space within the Town limits, except as provided herein. (Ord. of 11/1/84)
Section 4-2013 Collection of Yard Waste Regulations (Ord. of 11/04/2010)
(1) Yard waste collection shall be provided only to residential units within the Erwin town limits. Yard waste collection (not including leaves)shall be limited to one uncompacted pile measuring no greater six (6) foot by six (6) foot by six (6) foot(two hundred sixteen 216 cubic feet) per residential unit per week on a day designated by the Public Works Director. Yard waste that exceeds this amount must contact Town Hall to request additional service at a rate established by the Board of Commissioners in the Erwin Fee Schedule.
(2) There may be occasions when the amount of yard waste in a designated area exceeds the time allotted for pick up. When this occurs, the yard waste will be picked up at the earliest convenience or next scheduled pick up, whichever is sooner according to the availability of manpower and equipment.
(3) Yard waste shall be separated from curbside trash containers, white goods, and brown goods waste and shall be placed together in accordance with subsection (d) of this section to constitute a single, separate collection in order for the town to carry out its collection program.
(4) Yard waste shall be separated by type. Grass trimmings and leaves shall be placed in a single pile. Tree trimmings, limbs, dead plants and other tree debris shall be placed in a single pile separate from grass trimmings and leaves.
(5) Limbs collected by collection forces shall be no larger than six (6) inches in diameter and no longer than six (6) feet in length.
(6) Town collection forces will not collect tree trunks larger than six (6) inches in diameter. Town collection forces or its authorized agent will not collect tree stumps.
4-2010 Public
(7) Loose leaves pile may be placed, pending collection by the town, adjacent to and behind the curb or in front of ditch (not in street, gutter or roadside ditch) for collection by town collection forces. Loose piles of leaves will not be collected unless they are free of trash such as broken glass, rocks, twigs, cans, or other debris that might damage collection equipment.
(8) All other yard waste may be placed, pending collection by the town, adjacent to and behind the curb or in front of ditch (not in street, gutter or roadside ditch) for collection by town collection forces.
(9) Yard waste shall be placed upon only the property in which the yard waste is produced.
(10) The Town may decline to collect any yard waste that is not prepared or placed for collection in accordance with these regulations or exceeds the maximum amount.
(11) The Town shall not collect any tree or tree limbs when the service has been performed for a fee or results from land clearing work by a commercial yard service.
Section 4-2014 Collection of Brown and White Bulky Waste Regulations. (Ord. of 11/04/2010)
(1) Brown and white bulky waste collection shall be provided only to residential units within the Erwin town limits. Bulky waste collection shall be limited to a single pile of brown and a single pile of white waste each measuring no greater than six (6) foot by six (6) foot by six (6) foot (two hundred sixteen (216) cubic feet) per residential unit per week on a day designated by the Public Works Director. Bulk waste that exceeds this amount must contact Town Hall to request additional service at a rate established by the Board of Commissioners in the Erwin Fee Schedule.
(2) The Town will collect and dispose of the following properly prepared items.
(a) White Goods: stoves, refrigerators, freezers, water heaters, window unit air conditioners and similar items.
(b) Brown Goods: couches, chairs, tables and similar items.
(3) Items not collected by the Town include, but not limited to, furnaces, central air conditioning units, roofing materials, tires, hazardous materials, batteries, construction material, demolition material, and similar items.
(4) Collection services for bulky waste shall not be provided for the following.
Works 4-8
(a)Appliance and equipment changes that are related to the operation of a business. Such business-related activities are the responsibility of the rental agent and/or owner of the property.
(b)Items from businesses operated from a residential unit.
(c)Items that are the consequence of a fire at a business or residential structure. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to provide special services collection when, as a result of fire, there is only a single bulky item or what would otherwise be a normal collection amount as opposed to clearing the premises of burned or scrap material items.
(d)Oxygen tanks and other medical equipment; propane tanks; large oil tanks used for household purposes; parts of campers, boats, camper shells, trailer; automotive parts, including but not limited to motors, doors, tires, fenders, car seats or batteries, etc.
(e)Clothing, packaging or cardboard boxes, or any household waste that is eligible for other solid waste services including household curbside or recycling services.
(5) The Public Works Director shall have the authority to determine whether bulky items or scrap material are subject to town pickup and shall have the discretion to determine whether a request for service is consistent with the eligibility standards as herein described. Bulky waste collection service requirements are as follow:
(a) No bulky item or scrap materials shall be collected if it is too large to be placed on the solid waste service collection vehicle.
(b)Any appliance accepted for collection must be empty of its contents.
(c)Large furniture items shall be dismantled prior to collection such that a reasonable person can expect two individuals to easily load them onto or off of the collection vehicle. The only exception to this policy is for pianos, which do not have to be dismantled for such collection.
(d) Tires must be removed from all bicycles prior to collection.
(e) All glass in windows, doors, mirrors and other items with large expanses of glass must have the glass taped with an “X” mark so that it will not shatter in the collection process. Any bulky item or scrap material collected shall be of such weight or size that a person would reasonably expect two individuals to easily pick each item up for disposal.
(f) Bulky waste may be placed, pending collection by the town, adjacent to and behind the curb or in front of ditch (not in street, gutter or roadside ditch) for collection by
town collection forces.
4-2010 Public
Bulky waste shall be placed upon only the property in which the bulky waste is produced.
(h)Bulky waste shall be separated by item where each item is readily accessible and loadable. Bulky waste shall not be piled.
(i) The Public Works Director shall have the authority to require items to be prepared for ease of collection and to ensure the safety of the employees performing the collection task. An item not prepared properly may be refuse for collection the director’s discretion.
(j)It shall be unlawful to place junk appliances at curbside for collection except as stated under this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator or container without its being strapped or locked so that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to it.
Section 4-02015 Stable, kennel, pet and farm animal manure.
Stable, kennel, pet and farm animal manure shall be removed by persons who maintain stables, kennels, homes or farms and not by Town employees. (Ord. of 11./01/84
Section 4-2016 Solid waste the Town will not collect. (Amended of 11/04/2010)
The town will not collect the following types of solid wastes, and no person may place any of the following in any container or receptacle intended for collection by the town.
(1.)Hazardous refuse and industrial waste. All such hazardous refuse and industrial waste shall be stored in suitable leak proof containers sufficient to ensure that no such refuse or waste leaks or spills onto any public or private property. It shall be the responsibility of the person in possession on the premises where hazardous refuse or industrial waste is generated to see that it is disposed of properly.
(2.)Contagious diseases refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have occurred shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health department.
(3.)Building materials: Such materials shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. No new certificate of compliance or occupancy shall be issued
until the owner or contractor has removed such material.
(4)Human and animal tissues or waste from
Works 4-9
operation, autopsy or obstetrical procedures
or any other material of similar nature.
(5)Material of any kind or nature, including ashes, that contains any hot or live coals or fire.
(6)Hypodermic instruments. No person may dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringes, needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections in the waste stream of the town before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering such instrument or device inoperable and in capable of refuse and without further safeguarding the disposal thereof by placing in either a milk jug, coffee can with a lid or such similar containers. Medical or other biohazard materials shall be removed and disposed of under the supervision and direction of the county health department.
Section 4-2017 Refuse Collection
(1) The Public Works Director shall supervise the collection, removal, disposition, processing and sale of all refuse, bulky items, yard waste, and recyclables.
(2) The Public Works Director, with the approval of the Town Manager, may prepare and publish rules for the effective administration and enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations. (Ord. of 11/04/2010)
(3) The Public Works Director or the contracted agent of the Town shall establish collection routes and schedules and may alter these routes and schedules from time to time with the approval of the Town Manager (Ord. of 11/04/2010)
(4) The Town Manager and Public Works Director shall have all authority to vary the level of refuse collection service for experimental purposes and on a temporary basis at the direction of the Board of Commissioners. Service elements that may be altered include, but are not limited to, frequency of collection, container type, and allowable volume per customer per pickup. (Ord. of 11/04/2010)
Section 4-2018 charges and Fees. (Ord. of 11/04/2010)
(1.) For the service of collecting and disposing of refuse, garbage, and waste including yard waste, white goods, and brown goods,; the owner or occupant of all premises from which the same is collected by the town or town’s contractor shall be charged such rates as may be established,
from time to time, by the Board of Commissioners on recommendation of the Town Manager. Such
4-2010 Public
charges shall be considered a debt owing to the Town form the owner or occupant of the premises and other persons using the disposal area.
(2.)No owner or occupants of premises within the town limits receiving water, sewer or both services shall be exempt from the collection and disposal service and such fees associated with the same provided by the town or town’s contractor except as provided in subsection © of this section.
(3.)All premises within the town limits receiving water, sewer or both services are considered “active residents:. Those premises within the town limits receiving neither water nor sewer services may be considered “inactive residents:. Inactive residents may make application to the town to have portions of the solid waste service charges and fees removed from the monthly solid waste bill for such premises considered to be inactive. Only those charges associated with curbside household waste services and curbside recycling services may be removed from the solid waste bill for such premises. Charges associated with the collection of yard waste, white good, and brown goods shall not be eligible for removal from the solid waste bill for such premises. It shall be the responsibility of the owners of inactive residents to make application for this consideration. The Public Works Director shall be authorized to make determination on all applications for inactive residents statue. Once inactive status is approved, the associated charges and fees for such service shall be removed from the associated solid waste bill and all containers at such premises shall be removed from such premises.
(4.)In the event the volume of waste is greater than the maximum prescribed volume as herein defines, the resident may elect to request the Town for additional waste removal services in accordance with the following:
(a)An additional charge will apply for Town pickup of large quantities of yard waste and bulky waste items. This charge only applies to loads exceeding the maximum limits as set forth in Section 4-2013 (a) and Section 4-2014 (a). No additional fee will be charged for lesser amounts of yard waste or other bulky waste items.
(b) There are three levels of charges based on the size of the waste load.
(i)Level 1: Above maximum allowed amount up to a single pile measuring no greater than eight (8) foot by eighth (8) foot by eight(8) foot (five hundred twelve (512) cubic feet) or multiple piles with an aggregate total of the same.
Works 4-10
(ii)Level II: Above measurements of Level I up to a single pile measuring ten (10) foot by ten (10) foot by ten (10) foot (one thousand (1,000) cubic feet) or multiple piles with an aggregate total of the same.
(iii) Level III: Above measurements of Level II up to a single pile measuring twelve (12) foot by twelve (12) foot by twelve (12) foot (one thousand seven hundred twenty-eight (1,728) cubic feet) or multiple piles with an aggregate total of the same.
(a) Any resident who has large quantities of yard waste or large quantities of bulky waste items should call the Town Hall after placing the trash at the edge of the front yard. The Public Works Department will give the resident as estimate of the amount that will be charged for a pickup, and the resident will then prepay for the collection at Town Hall. After payment is made, the Town will make its best efforts to collect the trash within 48 hours.
(b) If a large quantity of yard waste or bulky waste items are placed on a curb and the resident does not contact the Town Hall or prepay for the trash pickup, a Public Works employee will place a notification on the resident’s front door, alerting the resident of the Town’s trash pickup policy and prepayment requirement. If the resident still does not call Town Hall or make payment within five business days, the Town shall seek equitable penalties and remedies as defined herein.
.
Section 4-2019 Penalties and Remedies. (Ord of 11/04/2010)
(1) A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. Section 14-4 in addition to any other penalties and remedies as found in this section.
(2) A violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall also subject the offender to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). If a person fails to pay this civil penalty within ten (10) days after being cited for a violation, the town may seek to recover the penalty by filing a civil action in the nature of debt.
(3) A second offense at the same location shall warrant a civil penalty of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
(4) A third offense at the same location shall warrant a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(5) The town may seek to enforce this ordinance through the appropriate equitable action. The Public Works Director or
designee shall have authority to issue notices of violation and/or
4-2010 Public
Civil citations to any person if there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has violated any of the provisions of this ordinance.
(6)Any notice of violation or citation shall be delivered personally to the violator, posted on the door of the building or residence of the location of such violation, or shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the violator.
(7)Each day that a violation continues after the offender has been notified of the violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(8) The town may seek to enforce this ordinance by using any one or combination of the forgoing remedies.
(9) All refuse not prepared in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, which is located within the public right-of-way, causing a potential public health or public safety hazard will be picked up by the Town after seventy-two (72) hours notice and a charge prescribed by the adopted fee schedule will be made to the property owner. Notice will be given either personally to the occupant or by placing a written notice on the door of the building or residence.
Works 4-11
4-2010
CHAPTER 3
Municipally Owned Cemeteries
(Reserved)
Parks and Recreation
Section 4-4001
Section 4-4002
Section 4-4003
Section 4-4004
4-12
CHAPTER 4
Parks and Recreation
ARTICLE A
City Park
Motor vehicles excluded from park; exception.
Other mean of conveyance excluded from park.
Disturbances within the park.
Hazardous Recreational Activities.
Sections 4-4005 through 4-4010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Department of Recreation (Reserved)
ARTICLE A City Park
Section 4-4001 Motor vehicles excluded from park, exception.
No vehicles of any type except fire trucks, rescue squads, police and service vehicles shall be allowed in the park at any time. Personal vehicles of firemen, rescue squad members, policemen and police reserves are to be parked in the regular parking area. Violation of this section will be termed a misdemeanor. (Ord. of 8/1/74, Sec. 1)
Section 4-4002 Other means of conveyance excluded from park.
No minibikes, motorcycles, golf carts, horses or any other two or three wheel gasoline or battery powered vehicle shall be allowed in the park. (Ord. of 8/l/74, Sec. 4)
Section 4-4003 Disturbances within the park.
Any person creating a disturbance within the boundaries of the city park, including but not limited to fighting, profanity, or drunkenness, shall be denied park privileges for a term of not less than one (1) month nor more than one (1) year depending upon the severity of the charge, length of denial to be determined by the recreation commission. (Ord. of 8/1/74, See. 2)
4-2010 Parks and Recreation 4-13
Section 4-4004 Hazardous Recreational Activities
(a) Purpose.
The purpose of this Section is to promote the health, safety and welfare of those persons desiring to engage in hazardous recreational activities within designated areas of the Town of Erwin. This Section is intended to comply with and supplement the Hazardous Recreation Parks Safety and Liability Act, Chapter 99E, Article 3 of the North Carolina General Statutes, and shall be interpreted in accordance therewith
(b) Authority and enactment.
This Section is adopted under the authority and provision of the General Statutes of the State of North Carolina, Chapter 160A, Article 6, Section 160A-174.
(c) Jurisdiction
This Section shall apply to the Al Woodall Municipal Park located at 810 South 16th Street and any other Designated Areas as defined by the Town Council.
(d) Definition of terms.
(1.) “Protective Equipment” shall mean properly fitted helmets with a fastened chin strap, elbow pads and kneepads.
(2.) “Helmet” shall mean protective headgear that meets or exceeds standards established by the American National Safety Institute.
(3.) “Hazardous Recreational Activities” shall mean skateboarding, inline skating or freestyle bicycling.
(4.) “Designated Areas” shall mean those areas within the Town of Erwin specifically set aside for those engaging in Hazardous Recreational Activities, including the Al Woodall Municipal Park. A list of Designated Areas shall be maintained by the Town Clerk, and each Designated Area shall include a sign clearly identifying such areas for Hazardous Recreational Activities use.
(5.) “Participant” shall mean a person, regardless of age, who engages in a Hazardous Recreational Activity within any Designated Area.
4-2010 Parks and Recreation 4-14
(e) Rules and Regulations.
The Town Manager, or his designee, shall establish rules and regulations governing the use of all Designated Areas. The rules and regulations shall be posted prominently near the entrances to all Designated Areas. Any person may request, at no charge, a written copy of the current rules and regulations.
(f) Duties of participants.
All Participants shall wear Protective Equipment while engaging in any Hazardous Recreational Activity within a Designated Area. All Participants shall comply with all rules and regulations applicable to Designated Areas. Specifically, and without limitation, any person riding a skateboard, inline skates, bicycle or similar devices within the Designated Area shall wear elbow pads, knee pads and a helmet that is properly fitted with chin strap fastened.
(g) Violations.
Any person violating this Article shall be subject to penalties established in Chapter 1 of the Town Code. (Amended May 6, 2010)
5-1001
PART 5
Municipal Utilities
Chapter 1. Water Supply and Distribution
Municipal Utilities 5-1
Section 5-1003 Separate connections required.
Each individual business or residential building or
structure shall install a separate water connection.
Chapter 2. Sewage Collection and Disposal
Chapter 3. General Utility Regulations
CHAPTER 1
Water Supply and Distribution
Section 5-1001 Board to regulate water system.
Section 5-1002 Permit for connection required.
Section 5-1003 Separate connections require.
Section 5-1004 Water required.
Section 5-1005 Use of Town water.
Section 5-1006 Utility rates; cutting off water.
Section 5-1007 Repealed.
Section 5-1008 Private water supply regulated.
Section 5-1009 Water superintendent.
Section 5-1010 Work on water system.
Section 5-1011 Owners of more than one house.
Section 5-1012 Nonpayment of bills.
Section 5-1013 Resale of water.
Section 5-1014 Access to property.
Section 5-1015 Fire hydrants.
Section 5-1016 Adjustment of bills for meter error.
Section 5-1017 Meter accuracy and test rates.
Section 5-1001 Board to regulate water system.
The water system of the Town shall be under the control of, and the duty of prescribing and enforcing a full compliance with all rules and regulations governing all connections with the water system shall be vested in, the Board or its authorized agent.
Section 5-1002 Permit for connection required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall connect with the water system of the Town until they shall have made application for permission to so connect in writing to the clerk, and this application shall be made before any part of the drainage system of the house or other connection shall have been laid or constructed. Such application shall be
accompanied with a plan or drawing showing the location of the building and the entire proposed connection from the public sewerage line through the building to its terminus, showing the location of all the fixtures, traps, ventilating pipes, etc., and shall state the name of the street and the name of the person, firm or corporation.
Section 5-1004 Water required.
All owners of improved property located within the corporate limits and upon or within a reasonable distance of any water line owned and operated by the Town shall connect their premises with the Town water system.
Section 5-1005 Use of Town water.
No person shall take or carry away water from any watering trough, public fountain, or other public place.
Section 5-1006 Utility rates; cutting off water.
(a) Water rates, deposits, connection and reconnection charges shall be determined from time to time by the Board and shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person other than a person authorized by the Town officials to cut off the Town supply of water.
Section 5-1007 Repealed.
Cross Reference: For utility tampering provisions, see chapter 3 of this part.
Section 5-1008 Private water supply regulated.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to furnish, supply, or provide, for gain or profit, any water from a private well or pump in or to any dwelling house, boarding house, inn, hotel, cafe or other commercial establishment, or any room or rooms of the same, when said dwelling house or any room or rooms therein are rented, or offered for rent to the public, or when said boarding house, inn, hotel, cafe, or other commercial establishment is open to or used by, the public, unless and until an analysis of the water from such private well or pump shall have first been submitted to and approved by the clerk. (b) The water analysis referred to in subsection (a) hereof shall be made by or under the direction of the County Board of Health or the Department of Public Health of the State.
5-1008 Municipal Utilities 5-2
(c) If such water analysis bears the approval of
either of the authorities referred to in subsection (b) hereof, the clerk shall approve the same by endorsing thereon the word "approved" and affixing thereto his signature as clerk. If, however, such analysis shows that such water is contaminated and unfit for human consumption, the clerk shall not approve such analysis, but shall deliver such analysis to the Board, which may disapprove such analysis and return the same to its owner.
Section 5-1009 Water superintendent.
The Board may select some competent person to supervise under its general control the entire water system of the Town. The Board may from time to time prescribe the duties and responsibilities of the superintendent.
Section 5-1010 Work on water system.
All work on the water system and all connections or disconnections thereto shall be performed by the authorized employees of the Town or their representatives or plumbers approved by the Town. All work shall be performed in accordance with-the plumbing code of the State and the Town and such amendments thereto that the Board may from time to time adopt.
Section 5-1011 Owners of more than one house.
Any property owner having more than one (1) house using water from the same watertap shall be responsible for water bills for all the houses.
Section 5-1012 Nonpayment of bills.
When the water that is being used by any person, firm or corporation has been cut off because of the nonpayment of the water account, such person, firm or corporation shall pay a fee fixed by the Board and kept on file in the office of the clerk before such water shall be turned back on.
State Law Reference: Discontinuance of service for delinquency. G. S. 160A-314.
Section 5-1013 Resale of water.
No residence, or firm or corporation shall furnish water for any other residence, firm or corporation through any one (1) meter, by way of piping or
tubing. Each additional residence, firm or
corporation must have its own separate water meter, if it is to be served by the Town.
Section 5-1014 Access to property.
The superintendent or his assistant shall at all reasonable hours have free access to all premises for the purpose of examining hydrants, fixtures or connections on which Town water pressure is maintained.
Section 5-1015 Fire hydrants.
No person, except employees of the Town, or other persons authorized by the Mayor, shall take water from any public hydrant, plug, street washer, draw cock, hose pipe or fountain, except for fire purposes, nor shall anyone in any Way use or take water for private use unless such person shall pay for the privilege and receive a permit from the Mayor.
Section 5-1016 Adjustment of bills for meter error.
The superintendent may, with the approval of the Mayor, adjust and settle inequitable and abnormal water bills due to meter error.
Section 5-1017 Meter accuracy and test rates.
The Town shall test or cause to be tested and make a thorough examination of water meters and all fixtures where so desired by the consumer under the following conditions:
(1) Should the test of meter and inspection prove the excessive bill to be caused by negligence of the Town, or inaccuracy of the meter, then the expense of said investigation shall be borne by the Town.
(2) Should the test and inspection prove to be the fault of the consumer or any person not connected with or in the employ of the Town, then the actual cost of said investigation is to be borne by the consumer making the protest and asking for the inspection, said actual cost to be fixed by the Board.
5-2001 Municipal Utilities 5-3
CHAPTER 2 (f) Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which
carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
Sewage Collection and Disposal ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
(g) Storm sewer or storm drain shall mean a
Section 5-2001 Definitions. sewer which carries storm and surface waters and
Section 5-2002 Use of public sewers required.
drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted
Section 5-2003 Unlawful to construct or maintain privies.
Section 5-2004 Owners required to connect to system.
Section 5-2005 Private sewage disposal.
Section 5-2006 Same; permit required.
Section 5-2007 Permit effective upon completion of
work.
Section 5-2008 Specifications of private system.
Section 5-2009 When direct connections required.
Section 5-2010 Facilities to be operated in sanitary
manner.
Section 5-2011 Additional requirements by health officer.
Section 5-2012 Alteration of system in any way requires
permit.
Section 5-2013 Classes of sewer permits.
Section 5-2014 Costs to be borne by owner.
Section 5-2015 Independent sewer for each building;
exception.
Section 5-2016 Old building sewers.
Section 5-2017 Minimum standards of sewers.
Section 5-2018 Size and slope of sewer.
Section 5-2019 Grades for sewers.
Section 5-2020 Building drains.
Section 5-2021 Excavation and backfill.
Section 5-2022 Joints.
Section 5-2023 Angle of connection.
Section 5-2024 Notice to superintendent.
Section 5-2025 Requirements regarding excavation.
Section 5-2026 Certain substances not to be discharged.
Section 5-2001 Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
(a) Sewerage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
(b) Superintendent shall mean the superintendent or manager of the sewerage works of the Town of Erwin, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
(c) Sewage shall mean a combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
(d) Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
(e) Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.
industrial wastes.
(h) Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by the Town.
(i) Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
(j) Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
(k) Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2-inch in any dimension.
(1) Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
(m) Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
(n) B.O.D. (denoting biochemical oxygen
demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
(o) pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter.
(p) Suspended solids shall mean solids that -ither float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
(q) Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
(r) Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
5-2001 Municipal Utilities 5-4
(s) Person shall mean any individual, firm,
company, association, corporation or group. (t) Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. (u) Improved Property shall mean any property upon which is located a dwelling house, mobile home, apartment house, any building or structure used for human habitation, any commercial or industrial building or structure required by Federal, State or local law to contain restroom facilities or which does contain restroom facilities and any other building, structure, or facility which discharges or has discharged by its operation conducted therein, waste water and/or sewage. (Ord. of 12/1/94)
Section 5-2002 Use of public sewers required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the Town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
Section 5-2003 Unlawful to construct or maintain privies.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other receptacle intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
Section 5-2004 Owners required to connect to system.
a) Sewer Connection Required: Payment of Charge in Lieu of Connection: Each owner of improved property located upon or within a distance of 250 feet of any Town sewer line shall connect the plumbing system of his premises with the Town sewer system; provided, that any such owner who already has in use a septic tank approved by the Harnett County Department of Health may, in lieu of connecting his premises to the Town sewer system, pay the minimum monthly charge established for sewer service, and may continue the use of the septic tank for domestic household sewer service for so long as such charge is duly paid and for so long as said septic tank remains suitable for such use as
determined by the Harnett County Department of
Health.
b) In the event that an owner fails to pay the minimum monthly charges established for sewer service, the Town may disconnect the water service provided to that owner’s property from which the minimum monthly sewer charge arises. This remedy is not exclusive and shall be in addition to other available remedies in accordance with the Town’s then existing disconnection procedure.
c) Partial payment for outstanding water and/or sewer charges shall be applied as follows: Partial payment by user who is receiving water service but paying the minimum monthly charge established for sewer services as a result of not being connected to the Town’s municipal sewer system, shall first be applied to the outstanding minimum monthly sewer charge as shown on the monthly consolidated bill received by the user. d) Disconnection: In the event that an owner and/or user fails to pay all outstanding sewer charges, the Town may disconnect the water service provided to that owner and/or user’s property from which the sewer charges arise. The above stated remedies are not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies available through law and/or equity.
(Ord. of 12/1/94)
Section 5-2005 Private sewage disposal.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 5-2004, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
Section 5-2006 Same; permit required.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Town, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit fee and the inspection fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid to the Town at the time the application is filed.
5-2007 Municipal Utilities 5-5
Section 5-2007 Permit effective upon requirements that may be imposed by the health
completion of work. officer.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system Section 5-2012 Alteration of system in any way
shall not become effective until the installation is
completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent.
Section 5-2008 Specifications of private system.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of Public Health of the State of North Carolina. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
Section 5-2009 When direct connections
required.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 5-2004, direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
Section 5-2010 Facilities to be operated insanitary manner.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Town.
Section 5-2011 Additional requirements by health officer.
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requires permit.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent.
Section 5-2013 Classes of sewer permits.
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits; (1) for residential and commercial
service, and (2) for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit application fee of five dollars ($5.00) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and fifteen dollars ($ 15.00) for an industrial
building sewer permit shall be paid to the Town at the time the application is filed.
Section 5-2014 Costs to be borne by owner.
All cost and expense incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the Town property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection into the public sewer shall be made by the Town, for which the owner shall pay the Town a standard sewer tap fee as set by the Board, copy of said schedule to be kept on file in office of clerk.
Section 5-2015 Independent sewer for
each building; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be
5-2015 Municipal Utilities 5-6
extended to the rear building and the whole Section 5-2021 Excavation and backfill.
considered as one building sewer.
All excavations required for the installation of a
Section 5-2016 Old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this ordinance.
Section 5-2017 Minimum standards of sewers.
The building sewer shall, in all cases, meet the minimum standards of the State of North Carolina Plumbing and Building Codes. Joints shall be watertight. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten (10) feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent.
Section 5-2018 Size and slope of sewer.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such four (4) inch pipe shall be less than one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot.
Section 5-2019 Grades for sewers.
Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any load
bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings.
Section 5-2020 Building drains.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
building sewer shall be open trench work unless
otherwise approved by the superintendent. Backfill shall not be performed until the work has been inspected by the superintendent.
Section 5-2022 Joints.
(a) All joints and connections shall be made watertight. Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or filled with molten lead, not less than one (1) inch deep. Lead shall be run in one (1) pouring and caulked tight. No paint,
varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the joint material until after the joint has been tested and approved. Rubber joint cast iron pipe or plastic pipe of sufficient strength may be used as an alternate.
(b) All joints in vitrified clay or concrete pipe or between sewer pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot-pouring jointing material, by using rubber gaskets or preformed, factor-applied couplings having resilient properties.
(c) Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of one hundred sixty (160) degrees Fahrenheit, nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp, or similar approved material.
(d) Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the superintendent.
Section 5-2023 Angle of connection.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at an angle of about forty-five (45) degrees. A forty-five (45) degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent.
5-2024 Municipal Utilities 5-7
Section 5-2024 Notice to superintendent.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
Section 5-2025 Requirements regarding
excavation.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
Section 5-2026 Certain substances not to be discharged.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
CHAPTER 3
General Utility Regulations
Section 5-3001 Purpose.
Section 5-3002 Deletions.
Section 5-3003 Tampering with hydrant, pipe, or meter.
Section 5-3004 Interfering with pipes and meters.
Section 5-3005 Tampering generally.
Section 5-3006 Unapproved cut-ons.
Section 5-3007 Illegal taps.
Section 5-3008 Enforcement.
Section 5-3009 Penalties -tampering.
Section 6-3010 Penalty - illegal, unapproved, or
unmetered taps.
Section 5-3011 Penalty - unapproved cut-ons.
Section 5-3012 Separability.
Section 5-3001 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is the prevention of illegal uses of municipal utilities, which includes, but is not limited to: tampering with hydrants, tampering with pipes, tampering with meters, citizen cut-ons of water after a cutoff by Town staff for non-payment of bills, unapproved or unmetered taps to the system. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
Section 5-3002 Deletions.
This chapter supercedes section 5-1007 of the
Code of Ordinances for the Town. (Ord. of
1/16/86)
Section 5-3003 Tampering with hydrant, pipe, or meter.
No person shall maliciously open, close, adjust, or interfere with a fire hydrant, valve, regulator, gauge, gate, disc, curb cock, stopcock, meter, or other regulator, operating or measuring device, or appliance in or attached to the wells, tanks, reservoirs, conduits, pipes, mains, service pipes, house pipes, or other pipes or apparatus of a water company or furnisher of water, with intent to cause the escape of water or to injure or destroy such property. No person shall tap, sever, open, or make unauthorized connections with a main or pipe used or intended for the transmission of water. This section doe not apply to the agent or employee for that purpose of the owner or operator of the appliances referred to in this section, and doe not apply to anything done by or under authority of any regularly constituted fire department. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
5-3004 Municipal Utilities 5-8
Section 5-3004 Interfering with pipes and
meters.
No person shall willfully or maliciously injure or destroy, or intentionally permit to be injured or destroyed, cut, break, adjust, or interfere with any pipe, valve, regulator, gauge, gate, stopcock, manhole, pump, trap, meter, or other regulating or measuring device or appliance used in the construction or operation of any plant or collection system for raw or treated sewage. No person shall willfully or maliciously prevent any meter or other measuring device or appliance used in any such plant or collection lines from duly registering the quantity of water or sewage transported. No person shall, without the consent of the owner of such plant, willfully or maliciously divert any water or sewage from any pipe or other part of such plant or collection line or otherwise willfully or maliciously use or cause to be used, without the consent of the owner of such plant, water or sewage derived from or being transported to any such plant. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
Section 5-3005 Tampering generally.
No person shall tamper with or harm, in any manner whatsoever, any water or sewer line, main or any appurtenance thereto. No person shall throw or deposit any material or substance in any water or sewer line that will in any manner obstruct or harm such line. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
Section 5-3006 Unapproved cut-ons.
No person shall touch, tamper with or in any manner manipulate or turn the cutoffs on the water mains forming a part of the water system of the Town. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
Section 5-3007 Illegal taps.
No person shall make, or allow to have made, a top to the utility system that is not first approved by the Town manager for the town and for which proper fees have been paid, nor shall any person allow an unmetered water tap on the Town system to remain in service. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
Section 5-3008 Enforcement.
If tampering in accordance with this chapter is suspected, the Town manager or his assigns will
investigate. If the investigation bears out the
suspicion that tampering has occurred, the chief of police will be notified, and proper collection of evidence will be made. The Town is hereby authorized to then correct the matter and charge all costs incurred to the property owner, tenant or violator. The bill for costs incurred shall be mailed by the Town clerk, and which shall be paid within thirty (30) days from receipt thereof. If not paid, the charge shall be certified by the Town clerk to the Town attorney and shall constitute a lien on the premises. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
Section 5-3009 Penalties -- tampering.
Persons found guilty of sections 5-3003 through 5-3005 of this chapter, shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and if found guilty of said misdemeanor, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50) or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, for each offense. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
Section 5-3010 Penalty - illegal, unapproved or unmetered taps.
Persons found in violation of section 5-3007 of this chapter shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and if found guilty of said misdemeanor, shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500) or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, for each violation. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
Section 5-3011 Penalty -- unapproved cut-ons.
If water is cut on by a water user after the water has been cut off by Town forces, an additional locking charge of rive dollars ($5) shall be made. In unusual cases where locking of the meter is not effective in stopping illegal water use, a charge for actual cost of meter removal and reinstallation shall be made, plus fifteen percent (15%) for
administrative overhead. In addition, the person in whom's name the water account is in, shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and if found guilty of said misdemeanor, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50) or by
imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, for each offense. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
5-3004 Municipal Utilities 5-8
Section 5-3012 Separability.
Should any provision of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect this chapter as a whole or any part hereof except that specific provision which was the subject of the declaration. (Ord. of 1/16/86)
6-1001
PART 6
Licensing and Regulation
Chapter 1 Businesses and Trades
Licensing and Regulation 6-1
ARTICLE E
Beer and Wine Sales
Sections 6-1051 through 6-1060 reserved.
Chapter 2 Street and Sidewalk Use and Regulation
CHAPTER 1
Business and Trades
Article A
Taxicabs
Section 6-1001 Definitions.
Section 6-1002 Unlawful to operate without certificate.
Section 6-1003 Application required.
Section 6-1004 Board issues certificates.
Section 6-1005 Duration of certificate.
Section 6-1006 Determination of convenience and
necessity.
Section 6-1007 Hearing, notices.
Section 6-1008 Burden of proof.
Section 6-1009 Failure to begin operations.
Section 6-1010 Transfer.
Section 6-1011 Revocation of certificate.
Section 6-1012 Substitution of vehicles.
Section 6-1013 No person to hold more than one
certificate.
Section 6-1014 No parking of taxicabs on streets.
Sections 6-1015 through 6-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Sections 6-1021 through 6-1030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Pool Rooms and Bowling Alleys
Section 6-1031 License required.
Section 6-1032 Application for license.
Section 6-1033 When license refused.
Section 6-1034 Form and content of license.
Section 6-1035 Certain prohibitions to be observed by
licensee and employees.
Section 6-1036 Rules for operation.
Section 6-1037 Licensee responsible.
Section 6-1038 Revocation of licenses.
Sections 6-1039 through 6-1040 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Peddling and Soliciting
Section 6-1041 Definitions.
Section 6-1042 Registration.
Section 6-1043 Badge.
Sections 6-1044 through 6-1050 reserved.
ARTICLE F
Amusements
Section 6-1061 License required to operate circus,
carnival or similar public entertainment,
or mechanical ride.
Section 6-1062 Application for license; consideration
thereof; issuance of license.
Section 6-1063 Information given on application.
Section 6-1064 Grounds for denial of license.
Section 6-1065 License issued without payment of fee.
Section 6-1066 Inspections by mayor and police;
suspension of license for unsanitary,
dangerous or hazardous conditions;
nonliability of mayor or police.
Section 6-1067 Disorderly or immoral conduct; sale of
obscene material; indecent, immoral or
lewd performances prohibited.
Section 6-1068 Suspension or revocation of licenses.
Section 6-1069 Certificate of public liability insurance to
be filed in advance.
ARTICLE A
Taxicabs
Section 6-1001 Definitions.
(a) Persons. When used in this Article shall mean and include both singular and plural, and shall also mean and include persons, individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and associations. (b) Taxicab. When used in this Article shall be defined as any motor vehicle seating nine (9) or fewer passengers, operated upon any street or highway on call or on demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for hire between such points along streets or highways as may be directed by the passenger or passengers so being transported, and shall not include motor vehicles or motor vehicle carriers as defined in Sub-Section (k) of Section 62-103 of the
General Statutes of North Carolina.
(Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 1)
Section 6-1002 Unlawful to operate without certificate.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab upon and over the streets of the Town without first having applied for and secured from
6-1002 Licensing and Regulation 6-2
the Board a certificate of convenience and
necessity as hereinafter set forth. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec.2)
Section 6-1003 Application required.
Every person desiring to operate a taxicab upon and over the streets of Erwin shall file on forms supplied by the Town clerk an application for certificate of convenience and necessity. (Code
1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 3)
Section 6-1004 Board issues certificates.
The Board shall have power and it will be its duty to order certain certificates issued, or [to] refuse to issue certain certificates, or to issue certificates for partial exercise of the rights granted. Only [sic] such [certificates shall be granted under] such
terms and conditions as in its judgment the public convenience and necessity may require. (Code
1967, Ch. H. Art. II, Sec. 4)
Section 6-1005 Duration of certificate.
A certificate shall constitute a franchise from the Town for the operation of taxicabs within the Town subject to the provisions of this article for one year, unless a shorter period of time is specified in the certificate. Applications for renewal shall be filed annually and hearing conducted as herein provided. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 5)
Section 6-1006 Determination of convenience and necessity.
(a) In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require franchising of such taxicabs or taxicab, the Board shall, among other things, take into consideration the following factors:
(1) Whether or not the public convenience and necessity require such proposed or additional taxicab service within the Town.
(2) The financial responsibility of the applicant and the likelihood of the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory.
(3) The number and condition of equipment.
(4) The schedule of proposed rates, if required by the Board to be charged.
(5) The number of taxicabs now operated and the demand for increased service, if any, and
whether or not the safe use of the streets by the
public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved, and whether or not adequate provision has been made for off-street parking of said taxicabs.
(6) The experience of applicant in the taxicab business.
(7) Such other relative facts as may be deemed necessary and advisable.
(b) Before making any decision with respect to the issuance of a certificate of convenience and necessity, the Board, or a committee thereof, shall make a full and complete investigation of all facts, if it so desires, subpoena witnesses and utilize the services of the chief of police or any other officer or employee of the Town. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 6)
Section 6-1007 Hearing, notices.
Each application for certificate of convenience and necessity shall be scheduled for a hearing not later than thirty (30) days after the same is filed, and the applicant shall be notified by the clerk by mail to the business address set forth in the application of the date and time of such hearing, such notification to be sent at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing. The clerk shall also, within the same time, notify all persons who at the time hold certificates of convenience and necessity for the operation of taxicabs within the municipality of the date and time for such hearing and the name of the applicant. In addition, the Board shall have the power to have published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days before the hearing, a notice
setting forth the name of the applicant and the date and time of hearing. The cost of such publication to be paid by the applicant. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 7)
Section 6-1008 Burden of proof.
The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the taxicab or taxicabs specified in his application, and all other facts required for the granting of a certificate. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art, II, Sec. 8)
6-1009 Licensing and Regulation 6-3
Section 6-1009 Failure to begin operations.
If a certificate is granted to an applicant, and said applicant shall fail, in accordance with the provisions of the certificate, to begin operations within sixty (60) days after the date of said
certificate, then said certificate shall become null and void, and no refund of any amount paid by the applicant will be made by said Town. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 9)
Section 6-1010 Transfer.
A certificate is not transferable without the consent and approval of the Board. Applications for a permit to transfer shall be filed in the same manner as an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity. The proceedings upon such application for a transfer shall be the same as those prescribed for the issuance of a certificate, except that the question of public convenience and necessity need not be proved. No certificate will be issued to any applicant unless such applicant be the holder in due course and for value of the title to such taxicab, and the holder of such certificate only shall be permitted to operate such taxicab, and such applicant shall not be allowed to engage the services of any person to operate his taxicab for him or in his stead at any time. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 10)
Section 6-1011 Revocation of certificate.
(a) The Board at any time may after a public hearing revoke any certificate issued by authority of this article for any one, or more, of the following causes:
(1) Failure to operate the taxicab specified in the certificate in such manner as to serve the public adequately and efficiently.
(2) Failure to maintain motor equipment in good repair.
(3) Failure to carry liability insurance or bond as required by law.
(4) Failure to pay to the Town taxes or license fees of fifteen dollars ($15) imposed upon such taxicabs.
(5) Repeated and persistent violation by the taxicab drivers of traffic and safety ordinances, or state laws relating to alcoholic beverages or prostitution.
(6) Failure to report accidents.
(7) Willful failure to comply with any provision
of this ordinance or other ordinances or state laws relating to the operation of taxicabs, whether such ordinances and laws be now in force or hereafter enacted into ordinances and into laws.
(b) No certificate shall be revoked until the owner has had at least five (5) days of notice by personal service or registered mail of the charges against him, and of the time and place of the hearing. If, after the hearing, it is found that the owner is guilty of one or more of the offenses listed herein, the Board shall have the power to revoke the certificate, or to condition a revocation upon compliance of its order within any time fixed by it. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 11)
Section 6-1012 Substitution of vehicles.
The person to whom a certificate has been issued may, by proper endorsement thereon by the Clerk, substitute another vehicle, or other vehicles, for the vehicle or vehicles for which certificate was granted. In such instance, the liability insurance or bonds shall also be transferred to such substitute vehicle or vehicles. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 12)
Section 6-1013 No person to hold more than one certificate.
The Board reserves the right to issue only one such certificate to any one person, and the person holding such certificate shall be required to operate his taxicab himself and shall have no power or authority by virtue of his certificate to delegate the operation of such taxicab to any person. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 13)
Section 6-1014 No parking of taxicabs on streets.
Parking of taxicabs on the public streets for the solicitation of fares or passengers will not be permitted. (Code 1967, Ch. H, Art. II, Sec. 14)
Sections 6-1015 through 6-1020 reserved.
6-1021 Licensing and Regulation 6-4
ARTICLE B ARTICLE C
Sections 6-1021 through 6-1030 reserved. Pool Rooms and Bowling Alleys
Section 6-1031 License required.
No person shall maintain or operate any pool or billiard table, bowling alley, or other table or alley for any game or play for which a charge is made, either directly or indirectly, unless he shall first have secured a license from the Council to do so. Such license shall expire on June 30 each year, and shall not be transferable.
Section 6-1032 Application for license.
Applications for such license shall be made upon forms provided by the Town Clerk, and shall contain all information necessary for the Council to act intelligently upon such applications.
Section 6-1033 When license refused.
The Council shall not issue such license to any person:
(1) Who has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; or
(2) Who is not a citizen and resident of North Carolina; or
(3) Who is of immoral character; or
(4) Who is a habitual user of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs.
Section 6-1034 Form and content of license.
Ever license issued pursuant to this article shall specify the premises for which it is issued, the number of table or alleys to be operated thereunder, the name of the owner or operator, and the dates upon which the license begins and shall expire. Such license shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises at all times.
Section 6-1035 Certain prohibitions to be observed by licensee and employees.
Licensee under this article shall not, and neither shall his employees:
(1) Suffer or permit any gambling on the licensed premises at any time; nor the sale or use of any racing, football, or other parlay cards or gambling boards.
6-1035 Licensing and Regulation 6-5
(2) Suffer or permit the licensed premises to Section 6-1037 Licensee responsible.
become disorderly; or permit any profane,
obscene, or indecent language thereon.
(3) Suffer or permit any intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs to be sold or kept or consumed on the licensed premises.
(4) Suffer or permit any person under age of sixteen (16) years to enter or remain on the
licensed premises, unless such person be accompanied by his parent or guardian.
(5) Employ in carrying on the business any person who has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs.
(6) Suffer or permit any keeley board, keno board, or any other such board or device to be attached to or placed upon any tables.
Section 6-1036 Rules for operation.
The following rules shall be observed by all operators of pool rooms within the Town.
(1) All pool rooms shall close at I o'clock A.M. each morning, Monday through Friday and 12 o'clock midnight on Saturdays and no person other than the owner, operator or employees shall be permitted on the premises from that hour until 7 o'clock A.M. the following morning.
(2) No play on any table shall be allowed during the times when pool rooms are required by this article to remain closed.
(3) Pool rooms shall remain closed on Sundays.
(4) All pool rooms shall be operated only on the ground floor of a building, and plate glass window shall be in those parts of the building facing any street, so that a clear view inside may be had from the street.
(5) No screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or other obstructions shall be placed between the entrance to the room where pool is played and the rear wall of such room. A clear view of the interior from the entrance to the rear of the room must be maintained at all times.
(6) No partitions forming rooms, stalls, or other enclosures where the public congregates shall be permitted. Provided, this shall. not be construed so as to prohibit the maintenance of closets used exclusively for storage purposes, or of toilets.
(7) There shall not be permitted or maintained any open or secret connections through
doors, windows, trap doors, hidden doors, panels, stairways, or other devices with any place where gambling is conducted or where persons meet or congregate for immoral purposes.
The acts and conduct of the agents and employees
of the licensee in the conduct of the business shall be deemed to be the acts and conduct of the licensee.
Section 6-1038 Revocation of licenses.
A second conviction of a licensee, or his agent or employee, for any violation of any provision of this article shall by operation of law constitute an automatic revocation of the license of such licensee. In addition, the Council may at any time, for cause, and after a hearing, of which such licensee shall be given such reasonable notice as the Council may direct, revoke any license issued pursuant to this article.
Sections 6-1039 through 6-1040 reserved.
6-1041
ARTICLE D
Peddling and Soliciting
Section 6-1041 Definitions.
Licensing and Regulation 6-6
For the purpose of this article the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:
(1)Charitable solicitation – approaching strangers requesting monies or contributions, whether or not it involves the exchange of other goods or services, for any charity or non-profit organization.
(2)Charity or non-profit organization – means any enterprise entered into with the primary purpose to pursue social, charitable, or other benevolent activities and that is classified as a tax-exempt organization under applicable provisions of the United States Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder.
(3)Panhandler – means a person who approaches or solicits strangers for money or other thing of value.
(4)Panhandling – means any solicitation made in person upon any street, sidewalk, public way, or public place, or upon the premises of any business establishment or other private property that is routinely or customarily frequented by the general public, requesting an immediate donation of money or other thing of value. (5) Peddler - Any person who transports goods from place to place and sells or offers for sale such goods, or who, without travelling from place to place, sells or offers for sale any goods from any vehicle or device; provided, that any person who separates the acts of sale and delivery for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler.
(6) Solicitor - Any person who travels from
place to place taking or offering to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for personal services to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is collected in advance, and any person who uses or occupies any building or premises for the sole purpose of taking or offering to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for personal services to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is collected in advance.
(7) Transient Vendor - Any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods and who, for this purpose uses or occupies any building or premises; provided, that no person shall be relieved from complying with the provisions of this section merely by conducting a transient business in association with any permanently established merchant.
Section 6-1042 Permit Required.
No person shall engage in peddling, soliciting or transient vending in the Town of Erwin without first obtaining a permit issued by the Town of Erwin Police Department.
Any person wanting to engage in peddling, soliciting or transient vending in the Town of Erwin shall submit to the Town of Erwin Police Department (the "department") a permit application on a form to be furnished by the department, which shall provide the following information and documentation:
(1)The name, the permanent address and the temporary address in the vicinity of Erwin, of the applicant;
(2)Proof of date of birth, address and identification of the applicant, to be provided through a driver's license or other legally recognized form of photo identification and proof of Social Security Number;
(3)A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted including a description of the goods, wares, merchandise, food, periodicals, items or services to be sold or offered for sale;
(4)The proposed dates, hours and location for the proposed peddling, soliciting or transient vending;
(5)A description of any vehicle to be used in connection with the proposed peddling, soliciting or transient vending, including the year, make, model, body style, color and license number;
(6)The age, height, weight and other identifying information of the person proposing to engage in peddling, soliciting or transient vending;
(7)Written permission to use the proposed location signed by the property owner if the application is for transient vending on property not owned by the applicant;
(8) If employed in connection with the proposed peddling, soliciting or transient vending, the name, address and telephone number of the employer, or if acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the principal on whose behalf the applicant is acting, with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of
the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be;
(9) A list of any and all crimes of which the applicant has been convicted or has pleaded no contest to in the ten years preceding submittal of the application, describing the nature of the offense or violation, the penalty or punishment imposed, the date and place of the crime, the official file number of the criminal case, excluding minor traffic offenses not punishable by incarceration; the applicant shall provide a certified copy of his criminal record for the county of his permanent residence and for each county in which he has a conviction or plea of no contest in the ten years preceding the application, excluding minor traffic offenses not punishable by incarceration; the applicant shall list all registrations of the applicant as a registered sex offender with the State of North Carolina, any other state or a federal agency;
(10) Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local laws or regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or which, under any such law or regulation, would exempt the applicant for the licensing requirements of this article;
(11) Two photographs of the applicant which shall have been taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application and show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
(12)A description of all other licenses or permits, such as a privilege license, obtained by the applicant in connection with the proposed peddling, soliciting or transient vending;
(13) The department shall make copies of all IDs or other credentials relied upon by the applicant;
(14) If the applicant is an employer or principal, a separate application shall be submitted for each person who will be peddling, soliciting or transient vending and a separate permit will be processed for each; and
(15)The signature of and sworn verification of the application's contents by, each applicant and person who will be peddling, soliciting or transient vending.
Section 6-1043 Fees.
For each application, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee to cover the cost of the town's processing the application and investigating the facts stated therein. The fee shall be payable to the Town of Erwin and shall be paid at Erwin Town Hall at the time of submittal of the application. The application fee shall be the amount specified in the annual budget ordinance each year for each proposed peddler, solicitor or transient vendor. The fee for a renewal application shall be one-half the amount for an initial application.
(Ord. No. 09-0721-05, § 1, 7-21-09)
Section 6-1044 Application review and permit issuance.
(1) Upon receipt of an application, the police chief or designee (hereinafter "police chief") shall review the application and conduct an investigation to determine whether the standards of Section 6-1045 are met.
(2) If the police chief finds the application meets the standards of Section 6-1045, the police chief shall endorse his approval on the application and shall, upon payment by applicant of the prescribed fee, deliver the permit to the applicant. The police chief shall make his determination within five days of submission of the application.
(3) The permit shall show the name, address and photograph of the permittee, the class of permit issued, the kind of goods and services to be sold or delivered, the date of issuance, and the length of time that the permit shall be in effect. The permit shall also show the permit number and identifying description of any vehicle to be used in carrying on the business for which the permit is issued.
Section 6-1045 Standards for issuance or denial of permit.
If the application meets all of the following standards, it shall be approved and a permit shall be issued, if not the application shall be denied:
(1)The application is complete and does not contain false information;
(2)The persons proposing to engage in the peddling, soliciting or transient vending may lawfully do so;
(3)The location and time of the proposed peddling, soliciting or transient vending would not endanger the safety and welfare of the peddlers, solicitors or transient vendors or their customers;
(4)Neither the applicant for a peddler or solicitor permit shall have been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving a sex offense, a controlled substance trafficking or sales offense or any violent acts against persons or property, such conviction being entered within the five years preceding the date of application; nor shall they have been released from incarceration for such offense within one year preceding the date of application.
(5)Neither the applicant, the peddler, the solicitor, nor the transient vendor shall be a person against whom a judgment based upon, or a criminal
conviction for, fraud, forging, theft, uttering, deceit or misrepresentation or other actions or crimes of like nature involving moral turpitude has been entered within the five years preceding the date of application; nor shall they have been released from incarceration for such offense within one year preceding the date of application.
(6) Neither the applicant for a peddler or solicitor permit, the peddler, nor the solicitor shall have been convicted of a felony violation involving murder, rape, manslaughter, robbery or assault, such conviction being entered within the ten years preceding the date of application; nor shall they have been released from incarceration for such offense within one year preceding the date of application.
(7) Neither the applicant, nor the peddler, solicitor or transient vendor shall be a person registered as a sex offender with the State of North Carolina, any other state or a federal agency;
(8) There is proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as an agent to the principal; and
(9) The applicant shall not have been denied a permit under this article within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the police chief that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist.
(10) In the case of denial, the police chief's denial and the reasons for denial shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his application is denied and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form, or at the applicant's last known address.
Section 6-1045 Permit expiration and renewal.
Unless renewed, all permits issued under this article shall expire 30 days from the date of issuance, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the permit. A permit may be renewed for an unlimited number of 30-day periods provided an application for renewal is made on a form provided by the department prior to the expiration of a current valid permit. The police chief shall review a renewal application for continuing compliance with the provisions of this article III, and if the applicant is in compliance, the renewal permit shall be issued. Applications for renewal received after expiration of the relevant permit shall be treated as new applications.
Section 6-1046 Badge and permit exhibition.
A badge shall be issued to every person authorized by a permit to engage in peddling, soliciting or transient vending. All persons engaging in peddling, soliciting or transient vending shall display the badge on the front of his or her person in a manner that is easily observable. Additionally, every person engaging in peddling, soliciting or transient vending shall keep on their person the permit obtained under the provisions of this article and shall exhibit the permit when requested to do so by any prospective customer or Town of Erwin employee. The badge shall appear substantially as follows:
Peddler/Solicitor/Transient Vendor Badge
TABLE INSET:
20_______ Town of Erwin, N.C. No. _______
(Name) has registered with the Town of Erwin as required by O
(Date)
(Date)
Issuance Date
Expiration D
________________ Police Chief or Designee
Section 6-1047 Transfer prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permit tee to use or wear any badge or permit issued under the provisions of this article.
Section 6-1048 Permit revocation.
Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the police chief for any of the following reasons:
(1)Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the permit application;
(2)Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permit tee in the course of peddling, soliciting or transient vending;
(3)Peddling, soliciting or transient vending contrary to the provisions contained in the permit;
(4)Conviction for any crime that would have prevented issuance of the permit in the first place;
(5)Conducting peddling, soliciting or transient vending in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the public; or
(6)The existence of any circumstance that would have been grounds for denial of the application in the first place.
(7)A permit that has been revoked and any badges associated therewith shall be immediately surrendered to the department.
Section 6-1049 Appeals.
An applicant may appeal the denial or revocation of a permit by submitting a written notice of appeal to the Erwin Town Manager, specifying with particularity the grounds upon which the appeal is based. An appeal shall be submitted no later than ten days from the date of the denial or revocation of the permit in question. The town manager or designee shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, shall give due notice to all parties, and shall render a decision within a reasonable time. The town manager's decision shall be the town's final decision.
Section 6-1050 Prohibited acts.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any privately-owned premises or business, without permission or invitation of the owner or occupant of such premises or business, for the purpose of soliciting orders for immediate or future delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, or services, including the taking of subscriptions for magazines and the procuring of applications and contracts without first receiving a permit issued by the department of public safety.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit to fail to display the permit and state-issued photo identification, upon demand of a police officer, while engaged in soliciting in the town.
(3) It is unlawful for permit holder or persons authorized to work for a permit holder to fail to display a certified copy of the permit and recognized state identification, upon demand of a police officer, while engaged in soliciting in the town. A person working for a permit holder shall be listed as an authorized person on the face of the permit.
(4) Even if a permit has been issued, it shall be unlawful to conduct any business, as listed in subsection (a), during the hours between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday nor at any time on Sunday.
(5) No person shall engage in peddling or soliciting at residences between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(6) No person shall engage in transient vending on property owned by another without the written permission of the property owner, which written permission shall be displayed upon demand of a police officer.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit to be aggressive, threatening or intimidating to person.
Section 6-1051 Exceptions to provisions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to actions undertaken at the prior request or invitation of the resident or occupant of the premises visited.
Section 6-1052 Bond required.
(1) Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant shall furnish a bond in the penal amount of $5,000.00 to the town signed by the applicant and as surety by some surety company authorized to do business in this state, conditioned upon the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines, and newspapers in accordance with the terms of any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material and workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal on such bond, at
the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery. Such bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on such bond, or to any agent or employee of the principal. The principal shall be in effect for 180 days from expiration of this permit.
(2)Only one bond shall be required of each applicant, even though such applicant shall have one or more agents or employees; provided such bond shall be made to cover the activities of all such agents or employees.
(3) Applicants soliciting for recognized charitable organizations, churches, schools, civic organizations, and similar neighborhood associations performing fundraising activities for their organization are exempt from such bond.
Section 6-1053 Transfer of permit.
A permit issued under this article is not transferable.
Section 6-1054 Residential “no soliciting” notices.
(1)Any occupant of a residence or occupants of a multi-family dwelling who desire(s) not to have solicitors call on said residence(s) shall give notice of the desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a clearly visible weatherproof placard no smaller than six (6) square inches and no larger than sixteen (16) square inches stating "No Soliciting" which shall be posted on or near the main entrance of the private property and not within the public right-of-way.
(2)Residents of a residential subdivision may indicate their desire not to have solicitors call on any residences in that subdivision by giving notice of the desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a clearly visible weatherproof placard no smaller than sixteen (16) square inches and no larger than ninety-four (94) square inches stating "No Soliciting" which shall be posted on or near the main entrance of the subdivision on private property and not within the public right-of-way.
(3)The display of said placard shall be deemed to constitute notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to invite solicitors.
(4) Every solicitor shall, upon entering premises on which a residence is located, examine the main entrance to the premises for any "no soliciting" placard, and if one is
posted, desist in any efforts to solicit or to leave any literature concerning the solicitation at that residence. Possession of a certificate of registration does not relieve any solicitor of this duty.
(5) It is unlawful for any person to appear at any private residence and canvass or solicit whereon a placard bearing the words "no soliciting" or words of similar import is posted for public view. Possession of a certificate of registration does not relieve any solicitor of this duty.
Section 6-1055 Penalty.
This article may be enforced by any or both of the following ways as provided by law.
(1) Anyone violating this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 Misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than 20 days.
(2) A violation of this article shall subject the violator to issuance of a citation in the amount of $100.00 for each such citation. A citation remaining unpaid to the town after 15 days shall subject the violator to a civil penalty, which may be recovered by the town in a civil action. A violation, which is a continuing violation, shall subject the violator to a separate citation for each day the violation continues.
Section 6-1056 Severability.
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, and they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this article shall remain in effect notwithstanding the validity of any part.
Section 6-1057 Criminal histories obtained by the Erwin Police Department and the use thereof.
(1) The Erwin Police Department is authorized to obtain criminal histories from the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation and the Division of Criminal Information Network ("SBI/DCI") for the purpose of determining whether to grant or deny an application submitted pursuant to article III of chapter 13 of the Erwin Town Code. The Erwin Police Department will utilize the information obtained from the DCI Network to, and only to, process background checks to determine whether to grant or deny a permit.
(2) Prior to denial or termination of employment based upon CHRI received from the Erwin Police Department, the Town of Erwin shall verify the existence of a record by either
obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a fingerprint card of the individual to the CIIS for verification that the CHRI record belongs to the individual.
Section 6-1058 Panhandling.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in panhandling unless such activity complies with the stipulations in this section.
(1) This section shall not constitute a prohibition on charitable solicitation.
(2) Panhandling may be permitted if the property owner or other authoritative body has authorized such activity upon their property and has provided this authorization in writing, having identified the person(s) by full name and passport style photograph, to the Erwin Police Department.
6-1059 Licensing and Regulation 6-7
ARTICLE E ARTICLE F
Beer and Wine Sales Amusements
Sections 6-1059 through 6-1060 reserved. Section 6-1061 License required to operate
circus, carnival or similar public
entertainment, or mechanical ride.
No person shall exhibit, show, conduct or operate at any place in the Town, or cause or permit to be exhibited, shown, conducted or operated in any place within the Town or on any property owned, leased or controlled by him, any circus, carnival or outdoor show, or other similar public entertainment, or any merry-go-round, ferris wheel, airplane ride, or any other type of mechanical ride or any type of mechanical amusement, unless the same shall have been licensed according to the provisions of this article.
Section 6-1062 Application for license;
consideration thereof; issuance of license.
Any and all persons desiring to operate a circus, carnival, outdoor show, or any other similar public entertainment, or a merry-go-round, ferris wheel, or other mechanical ride, shall first make application to the Board of Commissioners, upon a form or forms prescribed by the Board at least thirty (30) days prior to the opening date thereof. The Board shall consider said application or applications and direct that the same be granted or refused, and if granted a license shall be duly issued, which license shall be signed by the Mayor.
Section 6-1063 Information given on application.
The application shall contain the name and residence of the person to whom the license shall be issued and shall contain a complete description of the type of show, rides, and other amusements to be offered, as well as the place upon which the same shall be held.
Section 6-1064 Grounds for denial of license.
The Board may refuse the issuance of such license on account of the existence of any unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous condition or because the location is deemed to be unsuitable, or on account of the creation of a traffic hazard, or for the lack of
6-1064 Licensing and Regulation 6-8
accommodations for the number of persons or
vehicles likely to be attracted thereto.
Section 6-1065 License issued without payment of fee.
No fee shall be charged for the license.
Section 6-1066 Inspections by mayor
and police; suspension of license for unsanitary, dangerous or hazardous conditions; nonliability of mayor or police.
After a license shall be granted under this article, officials of the Town shall inspect the premises and installations made thereon in order to determine the existence of an unsanitary, dangerous or hazardous condition, and if the same shall exist the Board shall have the authority to suspend the license and prohibit said circus, carnival or other outdoor show to continue, or may suspend the operation of any mechanical ride or rides, or mechanical amusements, if the same shall be deemed unsanitary, dangerous or hazardous per se, which suspension shall continue in effect until said unsanitary, dangerous or hazardous condition shall be eliminated.
Section 6-1067 Disorderly or immoral conduct; sale of obscene material; indecent, immoral or lewd performances prohibited.
No person granted a license under this article shall permit any disorderly or immoral conduct upon the premises for which such license shall have been granted, or the sale of any obscene literature or pictures, or any indecent, immoral or lewd act or performance upon the premises.
Section 6-1068 Suspension or revocation of licenses.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any license granted under this article in case of failure to maintain proper standards of safety and sanitation, and in case the licensee
shall permit the sale of any obscene literature or pictures or any indecent, immoral or lewd act or performance.
Section 6-1069 Certificate of public liability
insurance to be filed in advance.
The sponsor of any circus, carnival or outdoor show or other similar public entertainment, or the owner or operator thereof, or the operator of any mechanical ride of any type, shall file with the Mayor at least ten (10) days prior to the opening of said circus, carnival or outdoor show, or the operation of any merry-go-round, ferris wheel, airplane ride or any other type of mechanical ride, or any type of mechanical amusement, a certificate of public liability insurance in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) to one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000). The filing of said
certificate of public liability insurance shall be a condition precedent to the opening of the circus, carnival or outdoor show, or other similar public entertainment, or the operation of any merry-go-- round, ferris wheel, airplane ride, or any other type of mechanical ride or mechanical amusement. No circus, carnival or outdoor show, or any mechanical ride or mechanical amusement shall be permitted to perform or operate unless said certificate of insurance is first provided as set forth herein.
6-2001
CHAPTER 2
Street and Sidewalk Use
and Regulation
ARTICLE A
Obstructing
Section 6-2001 Assembly on sidewalk.
Section 6-2002 Display of goods prohibited.
Licensing and Regulation 6-9
Section 6-2002 Display of goods prohibited.
No person shall place for display or sale any
goods, wares or merchandise of any kind upon any
of the sidewalks of said Town, which shall extend
out on the sidewalks and disrupt and endanger
traffic thereon. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. 11, Sec. 2)
Section 6-2003 Placing objects on streets
and sidewalks.
Section 6-2003 Placing objects on streets and sidewalks.
Section 6-2004 Construction near sidewalk.
Section 6-2005 Structures and appurtenances over
sidewalk.
Sections 6-2006 through 6-2010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Use and Cleanliness
Section 6-2011 Littering prohibited.
Section 6-2012 Same; from vehicles.
Section 6-2013 Same; violation.
Section 6-2014 Maintenance of public areas.
Section 6-2015 Same; receptacles.
Section 6-2016 Snow and ice removal.
Section 6-2017 Penalty for violation.
Sections 6-2018 through 6-2020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Parades and Demonstrations
Section 6-2021 Definitions.
Section 6-2022 Permit required.
Section 6-2023 Standards.
Section 6-2024 Requirements and issuance of permits.
Section 6-2025 Certain activities prohibited.
Section 6-2026 Revocation of permit.
Section 6-2027 Interference prohibited.
Section 6-2028 Additional regulations applicable to
picketing.
Section 6-2029 Exceptions.
ARTICLE A
Obstructing
Section 6-2001 Assembly on sidewalk.
All persons are forbidden from assembling or collecting and standing so as to obstruct any sidewalk or street, and all persons so collecting and standing shall disperse and move upon the demand of any police officer. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. II, Sec. 1)
No brick, stone or wood or other substance
obstructing the free passage of persons and vehicles shall be placed or suffered to lie in any of the alley ways, streets or other routes of the Town, nor shall any person place on or in any of the streets, sidewalks or alley ways of the Town any boxes, crates, casks, or barrels of any description, or any other obstruction of any kind. Provided that any person erecting a building, may with permission place building material for immediate use on the streets in such a way as to not interfere with the usual traffic. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. II, Sec. 3)
Section 6-2004 Construction near sidewalk.
Before building or remodeling at any place where the same is in close proximity to the sidewalk an overhead covered passage way shall be constructed so as to leave the sidewalk unobstructed and provide safe and easy passage. (Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. II, Sec. 4)
Section 6-2005 Structures and appurtenances over sidewalk.
No person shall erect over any sidewalk or street any part of a building except marquees and signs, which are approved by the Building Inspector. Awnings may be attached to buildings provided they are supported upon metallic frames and at least seven (7) feet above the level of the
sidewalk.
Sections 6-2006 through 6-2010 reserved.
6-2011
ARTICLE B
Use and Cleanliness
Section 6-2011 Littering prohibited.
Licensing and Regulation 6-10
Section 6-2016 Snow and ice removal.
Every occupant of a store building in front of
which the sidewalk is paved with stone, brick,
asphalt or cement, shall remove snow, ice or other
obstruction from such sidewalk at the earliest
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
organization or private corporation to throw or deposit upon any street or sidewalk, or upon any private property, except with written permission of the owner or occupant of such private property, any trash, refuse, garbage, building material, cans, bottles, broken glass, paper, tree trimmings, shrubbery, or any type of litter.
Section 6-2012 Same; from vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person while a driver or a passenger in a vehicle to throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the Town or upon private property.
Section 6-2013 Same; violation.
Any person found guilty of violating sections 6- 2011 and 6-2012 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days.
Section 6-2014 Maintenance of public areas.
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, or person in charge of any commercial establishment or premises which maintains any paved or unpaved areas for the use of the public, either for parking or as access area and incident to the carrying on of the principal business of any such commercial establishment or premises and which parking or access areas abut or lie within ten (10) feet of any public street or other public way, shall keep and maintain such areas clean and free from trash, litter, rubbish and any materials liable to be blown, deposited or cast upon such street or other public way.
Section 6-2015 Same; receptacles.
Suitable receptacles shall be provided in all parking or access areas within the meaning of section 6-2014 hereof. Such receptacles shall be plainly marked and constructed to prevent scattering of any trash, litter, rubbish or other material deposited therein.
possible time and as soon as the weather permits.
(Code 1967, Ch. D, Art. III, Sec. 3)
Section 6-2017 Penalty for violation.
Any owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any commercial establishment or premises who fails to abide by the provisions of section 6-2014, 6-2015 and 6-2016 shall be subject to a penalty of fifty dollars ($50) in addition to the penal provisions of State law for violations of municipal ordinances.
Cross Reference: Bicycles prohibited on sidewalks in business district, section 7-1130. Authority to establish play streets, section 7-1039.
Sections 6-2018 through 6-2020 reserved.
6-2021
ARTICLE C
Parades and Demonstrations Section 6-2021 Definitions.
Licensing and Regulation 6-11
application previously received by the chief of
police or his designee; or,
(3) The conduct of the parade will substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other
traffic contiguous to its route; or,
(4) The conduct of the parade will require the
For the purpose of section 6-2021 through 6-2029
the following terms shall have the definitions ascribed:
(1) "Block" is that portion of any street lying between its intersections with other streets. (2) "Parade" is any assemblage of two (2) or more persons participating in or operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or other public grounds or places.
(3) "Person" is any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other organization, whether formal or informal.
(4) "Picket line" is any two (2) or more persons formed together for the purpose of making known any position or promotion of such persons, or on behalf of any organization or class of persons. (5) "Group demonstration " is any assembly together or concert of action between or among two (2) or more persons for the purpose of
protesting any matter or of making known any position or promotion of such persons, or of or on behalf of any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting attention to such assembly.
Section 6-2022 Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate in any parade, picket line, or group demonstration in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place within the Town unless a permit therefor has been issued by the Town in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Section 6-2023 Standards.
The chief of police shall issue a permit for the proposed parade unless he finds that:
(1) Such parades, picket lines or group demonstrations are to commence before 6:00 a.m. or terminate after 8:00 p.m., or,
(2) Such parades or group demonstrations are to be held at the same time and place as those designated in a permit issued pursuant to a written
diversion of so great a number of police officers of
the Town to properly police the line of movement of the parade and of contiguous areas so that adequate police protection cannot be provided the remainder of the Town; or,
(5) The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances so that adequate ambulance service to portions of the Town not occupied by the parade and contiguous areas will be prevented; or,
(6) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will substantially interfere with adequate fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; or,
(7) The conduct of the parade is reasonably likely to result in violence to persons or property causing serious harm to the public; or,
(8) The parade is to be held for the primary purposes of advertising a product, good, or event, and is designed to be held primarily for private profit; or,
(9) The conduct of the parade will interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment to such an extent that adequate fire protection cannot be provided to the Town.
Section 6-2024 Requirements and issuance of permits.
The chief of police or his designee shall issue permits as required in the preceding section, and in the issuance thereof he shall:
(1) Require a written application for permit to be filed not less than twenty-four (24) hours in
advance of such parade, picket line, or group demonstration which application shall specify the time and place for the commencement of any such picket line and the time, place, route, and duration of any such parade or group demonstration.
(2) Require that the application for a permit specify whether or not minors below the age of eighteen (18) years will be permitted to
participate.
(3) Require that the application for a permit shall specify and the permit shall designate the person or persons in charge of the activity. Such person
6-2021 Licensing and Regulation 6-11
shall be required to accompany the parade, picket
line, or group demonstration and shall carry such permit with him at that time. Such permit shall not be valid in the possession of any other person.
Section 6-2025 Certain activities prohibited.
The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in conjunction with or as a part of, any parade, picket line, or group demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:
(1) The carrying on or about the person any firearm, or any weapon or article, including but not limited to blackjacks, nightsticks, or flashlights which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon; (2) The taking or keeping of any dog or
other vicious animal, whether leashed or unleashed.
Section 6-2026 Revocation of permit.
The chief of police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade, picket line, or group demonstration for any of the following causes:
(1) The violation by any participant of section 6- 2025 of this article;
(2) The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
Section 6-2027 Interference prohibited.
No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade, picket line, or group demonstration being conducted under authority of a permit duly issued by the chief of police.
Section 6-2028 Additional regulations ap-
plicable to picketing.
Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following additional regulations;
(1) Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used primarily for vehicular traffic;
(2) Not more than ten (10) pickets promoting the same objective shall be permitted to use either of the two (2) sidewalks within a single block at any one (1) time;
(3) Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding two (2) feet in width and two (2) feet in length promoting the objective for
which the picketing is done; provided, the words
used are not derogatory or defamatory in nature, (4) Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and must not march closer together than fifteen (15) feet, except in passing one another.
Section 6-2029 Exceptions.
Section 6-2021 through 6-2028 shall not apply to: (1) Funeral processions;
(2) Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
7-1001 Motor Vehicles and Traffic
PART 7 Section 7-1038
Section 7-1039
Motor Vehicles and Traffic Section 7-1040
Section 7-1041
CHAPTER 1 Section 7-1042
Section 7-1043
7-1
Interference with official traffic-control devices, signs or signals.
Authority to establish play streets. Traffic lanes.
Zone of quiet.
School zones.
Yield signs.
General Traffic Regulations
ARTICLE A
Words and Phrases defined
Section 7-1001 Definitions of words and phrases.
Sections 7-1002 through 7-1010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Traffic Administration
Section 7-1011 Definitions.
Section 7-1012 License tax levied; period of taxation.
Section 7-1013 License plates or stickers; duplicates.
Section 7-1014 Display of license plate or sticker.
Section 7-1015 License plates or stickers not transferable.
Section 7-1016 Exemptions.
Section 7-1017 Taxicabs.
Section 7-1018 Defacing or altering license plate or
sticker.
Section 7-1019 Penalties for violation.
Section 7-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Enforcement and Obedience to
Traffic Regulations
Section 7-1021 Application of chapter to person riding,
propelling, etc., pushcarts, tractors,
trailers, carts, animals, etc.
Section 7-1022 Public employees to obey traffic
regulations.
Section 7-1023 Authority of police and fire department
officials.
Section 7-1024 Obedience to police and fire department
officials.
Section 7-1025 Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar
devices restricted.
Section 7-1026 Authorized emergency vehicles.
Section 7-1027 through 7-1030 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Traffic-Control Devices
Section 7-1031 Obedience to signs, etc., generally.
Section 7-1032 Signs as prerequisite to enforcement.
Section 7-1033 Specifications for traffic-control devices.
Section 7-1034 Traffic-control signal legend.
Section 7-1035 Pedestrian control signals.
Section 7-1036 Flashing signals.
Section 7-1037 Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or
markings.
Sections 7-1044 through 7-1050 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Speed Regulations
Section 7-1051 General.
Section 7-1052 Exceptions.
Sections 7-1053 through 7-1060 reserved.
ARTICLE F
Turning Movements
Section 7-1061 Required position and method of turning
at intersections.
Section 7-1062 Turning markers.
Section 7-1063 Authority to place restricted turn signs.
Section 7-1064 Obedience to no-turn signs.
Section 7-1065 Limitations on turning around.
Sections 7-1066 through 7-1070 reserved.
ARTICLE G
One-way Streets and Alleys
Section 7-1071 Authority to sign one-way streets and
alleys.
Section 7-1072 One-way streets and alleys.
Sections 7-1073 through 7-1080 reserved.
ARTICLE H
Special Stops Required
Section 7-1081 Through streets designated.
Section 7-1082 Authority to erect stop signs.
Section 7-1093 Intersections where stop required
Section 7-1084 Signs to bear the word "Stop."
Section 7-1085 Vehicles to stop at stop signs.
Section 7-1086 Emerging from alley, driveway, or
buildings.
Sections 7-1087 through 7-1090 reserved.
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
Section 7-1091 Stop before entering a through street.
Section 7-1092 Stop when traffic obstructed.
Section 7-1093 Driving through funeral processions.
Section 7-1094 Vehicles shall not be driven on the
sidewalk.
Section 7-1095 Clinging to moving vehicles.
Section 7-1096 Use of coaster, roller skates, and similar
devices restricted.
Section 7-1097 Moving cars from parked positions.
Section 7-1098 Driving on roadways laned for traffic.
7-1001 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-2
Sections 7-1099 through 7-1110 reserved. Section 7-1172 Passenger loading zones.
Section 7-1173 Commercial loading zones.
ARTICLE J Section 7-1174 Public carrier stops and stands.
Section 7-1175 Stopping, standing, and parking of buses
Pedestrians' Rights and Duties and taxicabs regulated.
Section 7-1176 Restricted use of bus and taxicabs stands.
Section 7-1111 Pedestrians subject to traffic-control
signals.
Section 7-1112 Pedestrians' right-of-way in crosswalk.
Section 7-1113 Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk.
Section 7-1114 Crossing at right angles.
Section 7-1115 When pedestrian shall yield.
Section 7-1116 Pedestrians walking along roadways.
Section 7-1117 Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.
Section 7-1118 Drivers to exercise due care.
Sections 7-1119 through 7-1120 reserved.
ARTICLE K
(Reserved)
Sections 7-1121 through 7-1140 reserved.
ARTICLE L
Method of Parking
Section 7-1141 Standing or parking close to curb.
Section 7-1142 Signs or markings indicating angle
parking.
Section 7-1143 Obedience to angle parking signs or
markings.
Section 7-1144 Lights on parked vehicles.
Section 7-1145 Vehicles backed up to curb.
Section 7-1146 Unattended vehicles.
Section 7-1147 through 7-1150 reserved.
ARTICLE M
Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
Section 7-1151 Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited.
No signs required.
Section 7-1152 Parking not to obstruct traffic.
Section 7-1153 Parking in alleys.
Section 7-1154 All-night parking prohibited.
Section 7-1155 Standing or parking for certain purposes
prohibited.
Section 7-1156 Parking adjacent to schools.
Section 7-1157 Standing or parking on one-way
roadways.
Section 7-1158 No stopping, standing, or parking near
hazardous or congested places.
Section 7-1159 Stopping, standing, or parking for primary
purpose of advertising, prohibited.
Section 7-1160 Parking of trucks.
Section 7-1161 through 7-1170 reserved.
ARTICLE N
Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
Section 7-1171 Loading and unloading zones.
Sections 7-1177 through 7-1180 reserved.
ARTICLE O
Stopping, Standing, or Parking Restricted or Prohibited on
Certain Streets
Section 7-1181 Application of article.
Section 7-1182 Regulations not exclusive.
Section 7-1183 Parking prohibited at all times on certain
streets.
Section 7-1184 Parking time limited on certain streets.
Section 7-1185 Parking signs required.
Section 7-1186 Vehicles not to stop in streets, exceptions.
Section 7-1187 Parking prohibited between 6:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
Section 7-1188 Resident parking only on certain streets.
Sections 7-1189 through 7-1190 reserved.
ARTICLE A
Words and Phrases Defined
Section 7-1001 Definitions or words and phrases.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in any instance where otherwise specifically provided or where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. (1) Alley. A throughfare through the middle of a block.
(2) Authorized emergency vehicle. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporation as are designated or authorized by the Chief of Police. (3) Bicycle. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is over twenty (20) inches in diameter.
(4) Block. A portion of any street located between any two (2) intersections of any two (2) streets or public alleyways next adjacent to each other.
(5) Commercial Vehicle. Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of property.
(6)Controlled-access highway. Every highway, street, or roadway in respect to which owners or
7-1001 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-3
occupants of abutting property or lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street, or roadway.
(7) Crosswalk. That portion of any street or roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections. Any portion of a roadway or street distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface of such street or roadway.
(8) Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles dating the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
(9) Driver. Every person who shall drive or who shall be in actual physical control of the operation of any vehicle.
(10) Freight curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. (11) Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of the two (2) highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
Where a highway includes two (2)
roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty
(30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
(12) Laned roadway. A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(13) Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the Found, but excluding a tractor.
(14) Motor vehicle.Every vehicle which is self-
propelled and every vehicle designed to run upon the streets which is pulled by a self-propelled vehicle.
(15) Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this Town.
(16) Official traffic-control device. Any sign, signal, marking or device, not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of the governing body by a designated official having jurisdiction through authority given by the governing body, for the purpose of regulating, warning, prohibiting or guiding traffic upon the public streets and thoroughfares of the Town. (17) Official traffic signals. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, whereby traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed, or to turn, or to proceed with caution. (18) Park. The standing of any vehicle, whether occupied or unoccupied. otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or cargo.
(19) Passenger curb loading zone. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
(20) Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
(21) Person. Every natural person, firm, co- partnership, association, or corporation. (22) Police officer. Every peace officer of the Town, including every employee of the Town authorized and empowered to regulate traffic and to make arrests for any violations of the provisions of this chapter.
(23) Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implies permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(24) Public conveyance. Any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad train for transporting persons for a fare.
(25) Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the street or roadway. (26) Roadway. That portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadways
7-1001 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-4
separately but not to all such roadways Sections 7-1002 through 7-1010 reserved.
collectively.
(27) Safety zone. The area or space officially set apart within any roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which space shall be so protected or marked or indicated by visible and adequate markers or signs as shall be visible at all times while so set apart as a safety zone for pedestrians.
(28) Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
(29) Standing. Any stopping of any vehicle, whether or not the vehicle is occupied during such period of stopping.
(30) Stop. When required means the complete cessation of movement of any vehicle.
(31) Stop or stopping. When prohibited, means any stopping of any vehicle, except when such stopping means that it shall be necessary to stop such vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with section of any peace officer of the Town or by reason of ant traffic-control sign or signal or by reason of any emergency.
(32) Street and highway. The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular traffic.
(33) Through highway. Every street or highway
or portion thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter.
(34) Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles of all kinds, conveyances, tractors, bicycles, motorcycles and the like, either singly or together, while using any street or alleyway for travel, including the operation of, the loading or unloading of or the parking of any vehicle upon any of the public streets of the Town.
(35) Traffic bureau. The traffic division of the Police Department of this Town, or in the event a traffic division is not established, then said term whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the Police Department of this Town.
(36) Vehicle. Every device used in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon any street within the corporate limits, and for the purposes of this chapter any bicycle shall be deemed a vehicle.
7-1011 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-5
ARTICLE B Section 7-1014 Display of license plate or
sticker.
Traffic Administration
License plates, when authorized for issuance by
Section 7-1011 Definitions.
The following words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as set out below.
(1)”Motor Vehicle.” Every vehicle which is self- propelled, not including mopeds as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(27)dl.
(2) “Vehicle.” Every device in, upon or by
which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon fixed tracks or rails.
(3) “Resident within the Town” For purposes of determining whether a motor vehicle is “resident within the Town,” the provisions of G.S. 105-304, and other relevant provisions of the Machinery Act, shall be applicable, and any such motor vehicle which would be subject to ad valorem property taxation thereunder shall be subject to the tax imposed by this ordinance, specifically including motor vehicles which become “resident” within the Town after January 1 of any year,
unless exempted by a provision of this ordinance. (Ord. of 3/5/87, Sec.1)
Section 7-1012 License tax levied; period of taxation.
There is hereby levied a license tax of five dollars ($5.00) per year on every motor vehicle resident within the Town and licensed or required to be licensed by the State. The tax shall be paid for each calendar year period from January 1 through December 31, and shall not be pro-rated. (Ord. of 3/5/87, Sec. 2)
Section 7-1013 License plates or stickers; duplicates.
For each motor vehicle taxed, the appropriate official shall issue to the person paying the tax an appropriate license plate or sticker, as determined by the Board of Commissioners. If any such license play or sticker has been lost, stolen, destroyed or mutilated upon recognition, a duplicate shall be issued upon payment of original cost. (Ord. of 3/5/87, Sec. 3)
the Board of Commissioners, shall be
conspicuously displayed in the lower right-hand corner of the front windshield of the motor vehicle for which issued, not more than one (1) inch from the edge thereof, facing outward from the vehicle. License stickers for vehicles which do not have a front windshield shall be conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the front portion of the vehicle. License stickers authorized for issuance by the Board of Commissioners under this ordinance shall be of a color different from that of any vehicle inspection sticker required to be displayed during any part of the applicable calendar year by the State. The applicable license plate or sticker shall be displayed as provided herein at or before 12:00 midnight on February 15 in each calendar year; provided that the applicable license plate or sticker for any motor vehicle which is purchased or becomes resident within the Town after February 15 in any calendar year shall be
displayed immediately on the date upon which the tax imposed by this ordinance becomes due and payable. (Ord. of 3/5/87, Sec. 4)
Section 7-1015 License plates or stickers not transferable.
A license plate or sticker shall not be transferred from one vehicle to another. If ownership of a motor vehicle is transferred after the license tax for that calendar year has been paid, and the vehicle remains resident in the Town, the vehicle shall not be subject to additional tax for that calendar year; provided that the applicable license tag or sticker must be displayed as provided in this ordinance. (Ord. of 3/5/87, Sec. 5)
Section 7-1016 Exemptions.
The motor vehicle license tax levied by this ordinance shall not apply to motor vehicles belonging to members of the armed forces of the United States who are exempt from payment of such taxes by any applicable provision of the United States Code. The tax also shall not apply to motor vehicles held for sale as a part of the business inventory of any licensed motor vehicle dealer. The tax imposed by this ordinance need not be paid, and the applicable license plates or
7-1016 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-6
stickers need not be displayed, until after a motor of fifty dollars ($50.00). Officers of the Town
vehicle shall have been resident within the Town
for a period of thirty (30) days. Any motor vehicle which becomes resident within the Town after November 30 of any calendar year shall not be subject to the tax for that calendar year. (Ord. of 3/5/87, Sec. 6)
Section 7-1017 Taxicabs.
Every person engaged in the business of operating taxicabs shall pay an annual license tax for each vehicle so operated in the Town in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00), in addition to the tax
otherwise imposed by this ordinance, for the same calendar year period and subject to the applicable provisions of this ordinance. Payment of the tax shall be evidenced by issuance of a license certificate, plate or sticker, as directed by the Board of Commissioners. If a license certificate is issued, it shall be displayed prominently inside the taxicab and made available for inspection upon request of any authorized officer or agent of the Town. If a license plate or sticker is issued, it shall be displayed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. of 3/5/87, Sec. 7)
Section 7-1018 Defacing or altering license plate or sticker prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner of the motor vehicle to willfully mutilate, paint or otherwise deface in any manner a license plate or sticker issued by the Town for current display on any motor vehicle. It shall also be unlawful for any person to willfully alter or modify a license plate or sticker issued by the Town for current display on any motor vehicle. (Ord. of 3/5/87, Sec. 8)
Section 7-1019 Penalties for violation.
(a) Violation of this ordinance shall constitute a criminal misdemeanor, punishable upon
conviction by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment for not more than thirty
(30) days, as provided in G.S. 14-4.
(b) In lieu of or in addition to other available remedies, the owner of any motor vehicle subject to the tax imposed by this ordinance but not displaying the required license plate or sticker as provided in this ordinance shall pay a civil penalty
police department are hereby authorized to issue
civil citations of violation of this ordinance. Assessed civil penalties may be recovered by the Town in a civil action in the nature of debt the owner does not pay the penalty within a period of ten working days after the citation is issued, pursuant to G.S. 160-A-175. (Ord. of 3/5/87, Sec, 9)
Section 7-1020 reserved.
7-1021 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-7
ARTICLE C Section 7-1024 Obedience to police and fire
department officials.
Enforcement and Obedience to
Traffic Regulations No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of a police
Section 7-1021 Application of chapter to person
riding, propelling etc., pushcarts, tractors, trailers, carts, animals, etc.
Every person operating, riding, propelling or driving any pushcart, tractor, trailer, bicycle, buggy, cart or other type of machine or conveyance or any person riding or driving or leading an animal upon any of the public streets of the Town shall be subject to the provision of this chapter, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application (Code 1967, Ch. F, Art. II, Sec. 6)
Section 7-1022 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon streets shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this State or any other state, or any county or city. It shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any such provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter of by State statute. (Code 1967, Ch. F, Art. II, Sec. 4)
Section 7-1023 Authority of police and fire department officials.
(a) It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic.
(b) Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. (c) Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
officer or fire department official.
Section 7-1025 Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices restricted.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties, applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance.
Cross Reference: For provisions as to play streets see section 7-1039 of this chapter.
Section 7-1026 Authorized emergency vehicles.
(a) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated.
(b) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; (4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. (c) The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren,, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying a light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
7-1026 Motor Vehicles and Traffic
vehicle need not be equipped with or display a light visible from in front of the vehicle.
(d) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from
7-8
ARTICLE D
Traffic-Control Devices
the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of
all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
Sections 7-1027 through 7-1030 reserved.
Section 7-1031 Obedience to signs, etc., gen-
erally.
Any person failing or refusing to comply with the directions indicated on any sign, marker or device for the control or direction of traffic erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter when so placed or erected shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed to apply when the driver of a vehicle is otherwise directed by a police officer or when an exception is granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under section 7-1026.
Section 7-1032 Signs as prerequisite to
enforcement.
No provisions of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever any particular section in this chapter does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being placed to give notice thereof.
Section 7-1033 Specifications for traffic-control devices.
All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to State regulations. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of State law or this article shall be official traffic-control devices.
Section 7-1034 Traffic-control signal legend.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals (Appendix 1, Section 135) exhibiting the words, "Go," "Caution," or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one (1) at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and said terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green alone or "Go."
7-1034 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-9
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
b. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or "Go" signal.
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited.
b. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(3) Red alone or "Stop."
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone. Provided, however, that if a sign is not erected prohibiting turns on red lights, the vehicles may turn right on red lights after coming to a complete stop. Streets on which right turns on red are allowed are set out in Appendix 1, Section 131 hereof.
b. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(4) Red with green arrow.
a. Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
b. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(5) In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by
their nature can have no application. Any stop
required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
Section 7-1035 Pedestrian control signals.
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows:
(1) "Walk." Pedestrians facing such signals may proceed across the highway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(2) "Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the highway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing.
Section 7-1036 Flashing signals.
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(1) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall come to a complete stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. In no event shall such vehicle be driven into such crosswalk unless and until such entry can be made with safety to other persons and property at such place. (2) Flashing yellow (Caution signal) (Appendix 1, Section 137). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through such intersection past such signal only with caution.
Section 7-1037 Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or markings.
(a) No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device, sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
7-1037 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-10
effectiveness of any official traffic-control device, Section 7-1042 School zones.
sign or signal.
(b) No person shall place or maintain nor shall
any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
(c) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(d) Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
Section 7-1038 Interference with official
traffic-control devices, signs or signals.
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device, sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
Section 7-1039 Authority to establish play streets.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
Section 7-1040 Traffic lanes.
Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
Section 7-1041 Zone of quiet.
Whenever authorized signs are placed indicating a zone of quiet, the person operating a motor vehicle within such zone shall not sound the horn or any other warning device, except in an emergency.
Whenever authorized signs are placed designating
any street, or part thereof, as a school zone, drivers of motor vehicles using said street, shall exercise the greatest care for the protection of children.
Section 7-1043 Yield signs.
Whenever yield right-of-way signs are used they shall require vehicular traffic to yield the right-of- way to other intersecting traffic from any other road or street. Yield right-of-way signs shall be located at the streets designated in Appendix 1, Section 132, hereby made a part hereof.
Sections 7-1044 through 7-1050 reserved.
7-1051 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-11
ARTICLE E (7) Fifty-five (55 miles per hour (Appendix I,
Section 128)
Speed Regulations
Sections 7-1053 through 7-1060 reserved.
Section 7-1051 General.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour inside the municipal corporate limits.
Section 7-1052 Exceptions.
(a) It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the speeds listed below upon the streets or portions of streets of the State Highway System listed in each designated Appendix hereby made a part hereof:
(1) Twenty (20) miles per hour (Appendix, 1, Section 115)
(2) Twenty-five (25) miles per hour (Appendix I, Section 116)
(3) Thirty (30) miles per hour (Appendix I,
Section 117)
(4) Forty (40) miles per hour (Appendix I,
Section 118)
(5) Forty-five (45) miles per hour (Appendix I,
Section 119)
(6) Fifty (50) miles per hour (Appendix I,
Section 120)
(7) Fifty-five (55) miles per hour (Appendix I, Section 121)
(b) It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the speeds listed below upon the streets or portions of streets, not a part of the State Highway System, listed in each designated Appendix, hereby made a part hereof:
(1) Twenty (20) miles per hour (Appendix I, Section 122)
(2) Twenty-five (25) miles per hour (Appendix I, Section 123)
(3) Thirty (30) miles per hour (Appendix I,
Section 124)
(4) Forty (40) miles per hour (Appendix I,
Section 125)
(5) Forty-five (45) miles per hour (Appendix I,
Section 126)
(6) Fifty (50) miles per hour (Appendix I,
Section 127)
7-1061 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-12
ARTICLE F shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may
be removed when such turns are permitted.
Turning Movements Restrictions on turning movements shall be as
specified in Appendix 1, Sections 111 through
Section 7-1061 Required position and method 114, hereby incorporated herein.
of turning at intersections.
Section 7-1064 Obedience to no-turn signs.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an
intersection shall do so as follows:
(1) Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(2) Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
(3) Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
Section 7-1062 Turning markers.
When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.
Section 7-1063 Authority to place restricted turn signs.
The Board shall determined those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating
that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign.
Section 7-1065 Limitations around.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Sections 7-1066 through 7-1070 reserved.
7-1071 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-13
ARTICLE G ARTICLE H
One-Way Streets and Alleys Special Stops Required
Section 7-1071 Authority to sign one-way Section 7-1081 Through streets designated.
streets and alleys.
Those streets and parts of streets described in
Whenever any ordinance designates any one-way
street or alley there shall be signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
Section 7-1072 One-way streets and alleys.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in Appendix 1, Section I 10,
hereby made a part hereof, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
Sections 7-1073 through 7-1080 reserved.
Appendix 1, Section 108, hereby made a part
hereof, are declared to be through streets for the purpose of this article.
Section 7-1082 Authority to erect stop signs.
Whenever any ordinance designates and describes a through street, there shall be a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or intersecting portion thereof described and designated as such by any ordinance unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of said streets.
Section 7-1083 Intersections where stop re- quired.
The Board may determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and may determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. Such places are specified in Appendix I, Section 109, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1084 Signs to bear the word "Stop”.
Every sign erected pursuant to this article shall bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than eight
(8) inches in height and such signs shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, or by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway.
7-1085 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-14
Section 7-1085 Vehicles to stop at stop signs. ARTICLE I
When stop signs are erected as herein authorized Miscellaneous Driving Rules
at or near the entrance to any intersection, every
driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the Section 7-1091 Stop before entering a through
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or in
the event there is no crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal.
Section 7-1086 Emerging from alley, drive-
way, or buildings.
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Sections 7-1087 through 7-1090 reserved.
street.
When stop signs are placed, erected, or installed upon highways intersecting a through street at the entrance thereto, or at the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle, or street car, shall stop in obedience to such signs before entering the intersection and shall not proceed into, or across, the through street until he has first determined that no conflict with traffic will be involved. (Code 1967, Ch. F, Art. V, Sec. 1)
Section 7-1092 Stop when traffic obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection, or a marked crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk, to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (Code 1967, Ch. F, Art. V, Sec. 2)
Section 7-1093 Driving through funeral
processions.
No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except fire department vehicles, police patrols and ambulances, when the same are responding to calls. (Code 1967, Ch. F, Art. V, Sec. 4)
Section 7-1094 Vehicles shall not be driven on the sidewalk.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area. (Code 1967, Ch. F, Art. V, Sec. 6)
Section 7-1095 Clinging to moving vehicles.
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle, shall not attach the same, or himself, to any public conveyance, or moving vehicle upon any roadway. (Code 1967, Ch. F, Art. V, Sec. 7)
7-1096 Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Section 7-1096 Use of coaster, roller skates, and similar devices restricted.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in, or by
7-15
ARTICLE J
Pedestrians' Rights and Duties
means of, any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar
device, shall go upon any roadway, unless it be while crossing a street at a crosswalk or intersection, except upon streets set aside as play streets. (Code 1967, Ch. F, Art. V, Sec. 8)
Section 7-1097 Moving cars from parked positions.
Cars parked shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are parked at an angle with the curb they shall back out on that angle until they have cleared the other cars and shall then proceed in the direction they are most nearly headed in. (Code 1967, Ch. F, Art. V, Sec. 9)
Section 7-1098 Driving on roadways laned for traffic.
All vehicles operated on any roadway which has been clearly marked with lanes for traffic, shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. (Code 1967, Ch. F, Art. V, Sec. 11)
Sections 7-1099 through 7-1110 reserved.
Section 7-1111 Pedestrians subject to traffic-
control signals.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as heretofore declared in section 7-1034 and 7-1035 of this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article.
Section 7-1112 Pedestrians' right-of-way in crosswalk.
(a) When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. A pedestrian's right-of-way in a crosswalk is modified under the condition and as stated in section 7-1115(b).
(b) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
Section 7-1113 Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks.
Section 7-1114 Crossing at right angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk.
7-1115 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-16
Section 7-1115 When pedestrian shall yield. ARTICLE K
(a) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any Regulations for Bicycles
point other than within a marked crosswalk or
within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection Section 7-1121 Effect of regulations.
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.
(b) Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of- way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
Section 7-1116 Pedestrians walking along
roadways.
(a) Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
(b) Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction.
Section 7-1117 Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.
(a) No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle. (b) No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding or any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.
Section 7-1118 Drivers to exercise due care.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway; shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary; and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
Sections 7-1119 through 7-1120 reserved.
(a) The parent of any child and the guardian of
any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article.
(b) These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
Section 7-1122 Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application.
Section 7-1123 Obedience to traffic-control devices.
(a) Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(b) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which even such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
Section 7-1124 Riding on bicycles.
(a) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
(b) No bicycle shall be used to carry more
7-1124 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-17
persons at one time than the number for which it is Section 7-1130 Riding on sidewalks.
designed and equipped.
(a) No person shall ride a bicycle upon a
Section 7-1125 Riding on roadways and bicycle
paths.
(a) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
(b) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(c) Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
Section 7-1126 Speed.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
Section 7-1127 Emerging from alley or drive- way.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building, shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Section 7-1128 Carrying articles.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one (1) hand upon the handle bars.
Section 7-1129 Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
sidewalk within a business district.
(b) The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when such signs are in place no person shall disobey the same.
(c) Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
Section 7-1131 Lamps and other equipment on bicycles.
(a) Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. (b) No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
(c) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the brake wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
Sections 7-1132 through 7-1140 reserved.
7-1141 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-18
ARTICLE L (c) Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle
shall be depressed or dimmed.
Method of Parking
Section 7-1145 Vehicles backed up to curb.
Section 7-1141 Standing or parking close to In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to the
curb.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as otherwise provided in this article.
Section 7-1142 Signs or markings indicating angle parking.
(a) The Board shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, which are specified in Appendix 1, Section 107, hereby made a part hereof.
(b) Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street.
Section 7-1143 Obedience to angle parking signs or markings.
Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
Section 7-1144 Lights on parked vehicles.
(a) Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residence district no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
(b) Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a business or residence district during the hours between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white light on the roadway side visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear.
curb, except when actually loading or unloading.
Section 7-1146 Unattended vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the engine or motor of any motor vehicle running while the same is standing parked upon the streets.
Sections 7-1147 through 7-1150 reserved.
7-1151 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-19
ARTICLE M conditions as to leave available less than ten (10)
feet of the width of the roadway for free
Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in movement of vehicular traffic.
Specified Places
Section 7-1153 Parking in alleys.
Section 7-1151 Stopping, standing, or parking
prohibited. No signs required.
(a) No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
(1) On a sidewalk;
(2) In front of a public or private driveway; (3) Within an intersection;
(4) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; (5) On a crosswalk;
(6) Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(7) Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(8) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless signs or markings indicate a different length;
(9) Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(10) Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance
(when properly signposted);
(11) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
(12) On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(13) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
(14) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(b) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
Section 7-1152 Parking not to obstruct traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley, in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Section 7-1154 All-night parking prohibited.
When respective signs are placed in certain streets, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. upon any of the streets described in Appendix I, Section 102,
hereby made a part hereof, provided that this section shall not apply to automobiles, or other vehicles, if their owners are at work in the building, or on the premises, near which said vehicles are parked.
Section 7-1155 Standing or parking for certain purposes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle upon any street of the Town for the principal purposes of:
(1) Displaying for sale;
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs made necessary by a bona fide emergency;
(3) Storing by garages, dealers or other persons when such storing is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of such automobile or other vehicle; and
(4) Storing of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been disconnected or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another.
Section 7-1156 Parking adjacent to schools.
When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
7-1157 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-20
Section 7-1157 Standing or parking on one-way ARTICLE N
roadways.
Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more
separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one
(1) direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking.
Section 7-1158 No stopping, standing, or parking near hazardous or congested places.
When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
Section 7-1159 Stopping, standing, or parking for primary purpose of advertising, prohibited.
No person shall stand, or park, on any street any vehicle for the primary purpose of advertising.
Section 7-1160 Parking of trucks.
It shall be unlawful to park any trucks on the west side of Granville Street between King Street and Queen Street.
Sections 7-1161 through 7-1170 reserved.
Section 7-1171 Loading and unloading zones.
Whenever vehicle loading and unloading zones are designated and described by this article and when signs are place, erected or installed, giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle for any purpose or period of time except in accordance with the requirements of this article.
Section 7-1172 Passenger loading zones.
The streets, or parts thereof, described in Appendix 1, Section 129, hereby incorporated
herein, are hereby designated as passenger loading and unloading zones, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle therein during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. for any purpose other than the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, and then only for a period not to exceed ten (10) minutes.
Section 7-1173 Commercial loading zones.
The streets, or parts thereof, described in Appendix 1, Section 130, hereby incorporated
herein, are hereby designated as commercial loading and unloading zones and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle therein during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. for any purpose other than the expeditious unloading and delivery, or pickup and loading of materials and goods, and then only for a period not to exceed thirty (30) minutes.
Section 7-1174 Public carrier stops and stands.
Bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles, designated by appropriate signs, shall be as specified in Appendix 1, Section 106, hereby
made a part hereof.
Section 7-1175 Stopping, standing, and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated.
(a) The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other
7-1175 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-21
than at a bus stand so designated as provided ARTICLE O
herein.
(b) The operator of a bus shall not stop such Stopping, Standing, or Parking Restricted or
vehicle upon any street at any place for the
purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency. (c) The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther than eighteen (18) inches from the curb, and the bus approximately parallel to the curb, so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
(d) The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Section 7-1176 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
Sections 7-1177 through 7-1180 reserved.
Prohibited on Certain Streets
Section 7-1181 Application of article.
The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.
Section 7-1182 Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
Section 7-1183 Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described in Appendix 1, section 10 1, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1184 Parking time limited on certain streets.
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the times specified within the district or upon any of the streets described in Appendix 1,
Sections 104 through 105 and 138, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1185 Parking signs required.
Whenever by this or any other article any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets there shall be appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
7-1186 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7-22
Section 7-1186 Vehicles not to stop in streets, exceptions.
No vehicle shall stop in any street, except for the purpose of parking as prescribed in this chapter, unless such stop is made necessary by the approach of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other procession which is given right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the lowering of railway gates, by being given countermanding traffic signals, by the passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian, or by some emergency; in all cases covered by these exceptions said vehicles shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing, or street intersection if it can be avoided.
Section 7-1187 Parking prohibited between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
No person shall park a vehicle after the hour of 6:00 p.m., and before the hour of 6:00 a.m., on the streets or portion of streets specified in Appendix 1, Section 103, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1188 Resident parking only on certain streets.
On streets marked with "Resident Parking Only" signs, only residents, or their visitors, of dwellings abutting said streets shall be allowed to park. "Resident Parking Only" streets are specified in Appendix 1, Section 136, hereby made a part
hereof.
Sections 7-1189 through 7-1190 reserved.
8-1001 Nuisances
PART 8
Nuisances
Chapter 1 Definition and Authority
Chapter 2 Animals
Chapter 3 Abandoned/Derelict Vehicles
Chapter 4 Weeds, Hedges Tall Grass, and Other
Vegetation
Chapter 5 Rubbish, Litter
Chapter 6 General Health Regulations
Chapter 7 Disorderly Conduct
Chapter 8 Other General Nuisances
CHAPTER 1
Definition and Authority
ARTICLE A
Authority, Purpose, Enactment
Section 8.1001 Authority.
Section 8-1002 Purposes.
Section 8-1003 Enactment.
Section 8-1004 Conflicting ordinances.
Section 8-1005 Separability.
Section 8-1006 Inclusions.
Sections 8-1007 through 8-1009 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Definition/ Procedure
Section 8-1010 Definition.
Section 8-1011 Illustrative enumeration.
Section 8-1012 Prohibited.
Section 8-1013 Notice to abate.
Section 8-1014 Contents of notice.
Section 8-1015 Service of notice.
Section 8-1016 Abatement by Town.
Section 8-1017 Payment of costs.
Section 8-1018 Criminal action, other civil remedies.
Section 8-1019 Effective date.
ARTICLE A
Authority, Purpose, Enactment
Section 8-1001 Authority.
This chapter and subsequent chapters, is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to North Carolina municipalities through the North Carolina General
Statutes Chapter 160A, Article 8. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
8-1
Section 8-1002 Purposes.
It is in the intent of this part 8 and its subsequent chapters, to encourage a clean, healthy and satisfying environment for its citizens, one free from nuisances, eyesores, unhealthy or devaluating conditions. To these ends, this part 8 seeks to regulate, identify and provide a means to enforce the regulations, to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents and property owners. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-1003 Enactment.
For the purposes cited above and for the general purposes of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the Town, the Board of Commissioners does hereby ordain, adopt, and enact this part 8 in its entirety, including text, and all regulations, all of which shall be known as the Erwin Nuisance Ordinance. This part 8 shall apply to all land within the corporate limits of the Town. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-1004 Conflicting ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this part 8 or inconsistent with its provisions, specifically including previous ordinances of the Town or amendments thereto, are hereby repealed or superseded to the extent necessary to give this part 8 full force and effect. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-1005 Separability.
Should any provision of this part 8 be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect this part 8 as a whole or any part hereof except that specific provision which was the subject of the declaration. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-1006 Inclusions.
Current sections of part 8 of the Code of
Ordinances for the Town, that will remain in effect and incorporated into this new part 8 are as
follows:
Part 8 Chapter 2, Articles A-Animals and
B-Dogs
Part 8 Chapter 1, Disorderly Conduct
renumbered to Chapter 7
8-1006 Nuisances
Part 8 Chapter 5, General Health
Regulations renumbered
to Chapter 6 and
Part 8 Chapter 6, Other General Nuisances
renumbered to Chapter 8
(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Sections 8-1007 through 8-1009 reserved.
8-2
ARTICLE B
Definition/ Procedure
Section 8-1010 Definition.
For the purposes of this chapter, a public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, or use of property or things that:
(a) A public nuisance is a thing, act,
occupation, or use of property or things that:
(1) Annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, comfort, welfare, or repose of any considerable number of persons;
(2) Without permission of the owner or the trustee thereof, interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous or hazardous for passage or use, any navigable water or public place;
(3) In any way renders any considerable number of persons insecure in life, physical safety, or in the use of property; or
(4) Adversely and unreasonably affects the community or neighborhood.
(b) This Chapter, as well as other Sections of the Code, declare certain uses, actions, and activities to be public nuisances. It is the express intent of the Town Board that those declarations are in addition to, and not subject to, the generic determinations of public nuisances contained in and authorized by this Section. Further, none of the express declarations of public nuisances contained in this Chapter or the Code are to or shall be construed to be exclusive or in any other way to limit the authority of the Town to identify and abate public nuisances pursuant to Town, County, State, or Federal law.
(c) For purposes of this Chapter, "animal" means every organism of the animal kingdom, one of the three divisions into which natural objects have been traditionally divided, the others being mineral and plant. "Animal" includes but is not limited to, any amphibian, bird, mammal, reptile, fish, or insect. (Ord. of 3/25/86) (Ord. of 10/5/95)
Section 8-1011 Illustrative enumeration.
HEALTH NUISANCES The following are expressly declared to be public nuisances adversely affecting the public health:
(a) All decayed, infected, or unwholesome food, bartered, sold, or offered for sale to the public, or
8-1011 Nuisances
designed or offered for human consumption, including milk from diseased or otherwise unfit animals;
(b) All animals affected with disease or animal disease carriers, when the disease is one that may adversely affect the health of humans or other
animals;
(c) All ponds, pools, depressions, or vessels holding stagnant water in which mosquitos may breed;
(d) All ponds, pools, or vessels holding stagnant water that is generating or may tend to generate offensive or dangerous gasses;
(e) All uncovered or inadequately covered accumulations of manure, plant material, fruits, or rubbish that provide a breeding place for flies,
mosquitos, or vermin, or which release gases; (f) Pollution or contamination of any water supply or water course by sewage, creamery, industrial, chemical, oil, junk, debris, or any other waste or product;
(g) Smoke, fumes, gas, dust, soot, cinders, or other particulate matter in such quantities as to render the occupancy or use of property
uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities; (h) Public exposure of persons having a contagious disease, or one defined as contagious
by State law, that is subject to ready transmission to others;
(i) Maintenance, existence, or presence of a livery stable, brick yard, or automobile wrecking yard, or the depositing, storage, maintenance,
existence, or presence of junk or junk iron or metal, abandoned or salvaged appliances or furniture, or automobile parts or dilapidated or
dismantled vehicles or vehicle parts, or manure or fertilizer, within any residential district in the Town as the same are or hereafter are defined and
described by the Town Zoning Code; and (j) Any other acts, conditions, occupations, and uses of property that are in fact a -menace to the public health.
PUBLIC NUISANCES ADVERSELY
AFFECTING THE PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY The following are expressly declared to be public nuisances adversely affecting the public
peace and safety:
(a) Storage, leakage, release, or use of any explosive, flammable liquid, or other dangerous, toxic, or hazardous substance in any manner or in
any amount other than as permitted pursuant to this Code and County, State, or Federal Laws;
8-3
(b) All buildings and alteration of buildings, or parts thereof, made or erected in violation of Chapter 8, or any applicable County, State, or Federal laws prescribing the manner and materials for the construction or alteration;
(c) Obstructions, impediments, or excavations that interfere with the ordinary use by the public of any public street, way, or sidewalk or an attraction to persons, except when and as permitted pursuant to this Code or State law;
(d) Rainwater or drainage water issuing in a collected or directed manner or falling from any building, structure, or paved area upon any sidewalk or pedestrian way, or flowing across any sidewalk or pedestrian way;
(e) Any barbed wire or electrified fence within a plane of four (4) horizontal feet from any public street, way, sidewalk, path, or park; any wire, twine, or rope fences, consisting of one or more strands of wire, twine, or rope that is less than three (3) feet in height and less than three (3) feet from any public street, way, sidewalk, path, or park;
(f) Any dangerous, unguarded machinery or appliances left in any public place or so operated or situated on private property so as to attract the public;
(g) Any dead, diseased, infested, or dying tree or shrub on any property so near to a street, public right-of-way, or a public utility easement as to constitute a danger to street trees, public utility services, streets, sidewalks, vehicle travel, persons, or property, other than that of the owner of the tree;
(h) Vines or climbing plants growing into or over any street tree, fire hydrant, pole, utility wire, or electrolier;
(i) Branches, roots, trees, shrubs, or foliage that interfere with visibility on, illumination of, or the free, safe, or undamaged use of, or access to or along, any portion of any public street or sidewalk; (j) Hedges or dense, thorny shrubs extending into the public right of way;
(k) Branches of trees or shrubs that extend within eight (8) vertical feet from any portion of a public sidewalk or within fourteen (14) vertical feet from any portion of a public street;
(1) Weeds or vegetation allowed to grow to a height greater than twelve (12) inches on the
average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush, on any occupied or unoccupied lot or land less than one acre in area excluding
8-1011 Nuisances
woodlands, that may provide safe harborage for rats, mice, snakes, and other vermin.
(m) Generation of intense glare or heat that unreasonably affects use and enjoyment of neighboring property or confuses or interferes with
travel along a street or sidewalk;
(n) Excavations or ponds that are open and attractive to persons; and
(o) Any other act, occupation, and use of property that in fact endangers or jeopardizes the public peace and safety.
PROPERTY NUISANCES The following are expressly declared to be public nuisances: (a) Buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or which constitute a fire hazard, or which are otherwise dangerous to human safety and life; (b) Buildings that are in violation of Chapter 8; (c) Erosion, undercutting, excessive sloping, subsidence, saturation of soil, or surface water drainage of such magnitude or effect to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public or adjacent properties, whether -caused by grading operations, excavations, or fill, directed or disregarded drainage' or as a result of the topography, geology, or configuration of the land in its natural or altered state;
(d) Accumulation of debris or rank overgrowth constituting a fire hazard, potential to become a fire hazard, or a likely harborage for vermin;
(e) Buildings, fences, signs, or other structures that are or have been abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, or permitted to remain in a
state of partial construction for a period of ninety (90) days or more, except in the case of partial construction, in which case the time shall be for a
period of 180 days or more, and where
continuation of the condition is unsightly or is hazardous to the public health, safety, or welfare; (f) Unpainted buildings causing or tending to
cause dry rot, warping, or termite infestation; (g) Buildings with windows containing broken glass or missing glass, where the opening is of a type that normally contains glass and invites trespassers and malicious mischief;
(h) Trees, weeds, or other vegetation, which by reason of being overgrown, dead, decayed, or diseased, are:
(1) Likely to harbor vermin; or
(2) A serious risk of physical injury to inhabitants or occupants of the premises or to the public;
8-4
(i) Any wrecked, disabled, inoperative, salvaged or dismantled vehicle, vessel, equipment, appliances, or parts stored or parked for more than seven (7) consecutive days or more than ten (10) days total during a calendar month where the vehicle, vessel, equipment, or parts are visible from a public street or adjacent property, unless the vehicle, vessel, equipment, or parts are stored or parked pursuant to the provisions of this Code for operation of a dismantler, new or used vehicle or vessel dealer, automotive or boat repair or body shop, or junkyard;
(j) Packing boxes, litter, garbage, junk metal, automobile parts, or any other refuse or debris that by reason of its volume, type, or length of storage has promoted or will promote:
(1) Infestation by rats, vermin, or other pests; or
(2) A serious risk of harm to inhabitants or occupants of the premises or the public; (k) Broken, inoperative, or discarded furniture or other household equipment kept in a front or side yard required by the Town Zoning Code for more than seven (7) consecutive days or more than ten (10) days during any one calendar month; (1) Clotheslines in a front yard;
(m) Condition of premises that is so defective, unsightly, deteriorated, or disrepaired as to be materially detrimental to the use and enjoyment or value of nearby properties and improvements; and (n) Emanation of noise or vibrations of such a loud, unusual, unnecessary, penetrating, lengthy, raucous, annoying, untimely, or boisterous nature as to unreasonably disturb, annoy, injure, interfere with, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of the users of neighboring property. (Ord. of 10/5/95)
Section 8-1012 Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-1013 Notice to abate.
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the Town or the existence of a health and safety nuisance within the Town's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the Town manager or his designated officer shall issue a citation not to exceed fifty ($50.00) dollars with a written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such
8-1014 Nuisances
nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. (Ord. of 3/25/86)(Ord. of 2/5/98)
Section 8-1014 Contents of notice.
The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain:
(1) A citation not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) along with an order to abate the nuisance within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the
circumstances.
(2) The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary.
(3) A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
(4) A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
(5) A statement that waves citation if the nuisance is abated within the allotted time. (6) A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed within the prescribed time, the Town will abate such nuisance and assess the citation and cost thereof against such person. (Ord. of
3/25/86) (Ord. of 2/5/98)
Section 8-1015 Service of notice.
The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as any other legal process may be served pursuant to law. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-1016 Abatement by Town.
Upon the failure of the person upon whom in time notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to abate the same,
the duly designated officer of the Town shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement
thereof. (Ord. of 3/25/86)(Ord. of 2/5/98)
Section 8-1017 Payment of costs.
Upon completion of the abatement of any nuisance by the Town under the provisions of this chapter, the designated officer shall deliver to the Town
Tax Collector a statement including the costs of labor, hauling or other necessary items of expense for such abatement. The Tax Collector shall
thereupon mail to the owner of the lot a bill covering the costs. As provided in G.S. 160A-193, the amount of the bill shall become a lien upon
8-5
said property and if not paid within thirty (30) days shall be collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of delinquent taxes. (Ord. of 3/25/86)(Ord. of 2/5/98)
Section 8-1018 Criminal action, other civil remedies.
Violations of this part 8 shall constitute a criminal liability. The procedure set forth in this part 8 shall be in addition to any other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of public nuisances and this part 8 shall not prevent the Town from proceeding in a criminal action against any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this ordinance as provided in G.S. 14-4. In addition, each days violation shall constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction of said penalty, is punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation and violators shall be civilly liable for costs incurred by the town to abate said nuisances. (Ord. of
3/25/86)(Ord. of 2/5/98)
Section 8-1019 Effective date.
The sections of this chapter and subsequent chapters of Part 8 of the Code of Ordinances for the Town will become effective as of the date of passage. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
MUNICIPAL ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE
FOR THE TOWNS OF
ANGIER, COATS, ERWIN and LILLINGTON
Originally adopted January 08, 2008
Amended
July 11, 2013
CONTENTS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION XX Purpose and Intent of Chapter
SECTION XXI Establishment of Bird Sanctuary
SECTION XXII Hunting and Killing of Animals
SECTION XXIII Keeping Livestock within the Town / City Limits
SECTION XXIV Number of Chickens Permitted
SECTION XXV Number of Dogs Permitted
SECTION XXVI Number of Cats Permitted
SECTION XXVII Confinement and Running at Large
SECTION XXVIIIPossession of Animals and Strays
SECTION XXIX Impoundment and Reclaiming of Captured Animals
SECTION XXX Potentially Dangerous and Dangerous Dogs
SECTION XXXI Inherently Dangerous Exotic Animals
SECTION XXXII Enforcement, Penalties and Remedies
SECTION XXXIII Ordinance in Conflict
SECTION XXPurpose of Chapter
The purpose of this chapter is to provide and define authority of the Harnett County Animal Control department within the towns of Angier, Coats, Erwin and Lillington. Harnett County Animal Control now has charge of protecting the citizens of these towns from rabies transmitted by unconfined, uncontrolled or un-immunized animals, to regulate animals that may be a nuisance, to insure that all animals are treated in a humane manner and in the promotion of responsible pet ownership and animal welfare. Harnett County Animal Control in cooperation with the towns of Angier, Coats, Erwin and Lillington are hereby charged with the responsibility of Animal Control in conjunction within these town’s jurisdictions. This ordinance will supersede all town Animal Control ordinances and shall pertain to the towns of Angier, Erwin, Coats and Lillington only. The most current Harnett County Animal Control ordinance shall also pertain to the Towns in agreement of this ordinance.
SECTION XXI Establishment of Bird Sanctuary
(A) The area embraced within the corporate limits of the Town and all land
owned or leased by the Town outside the corporate limits is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
(B) It shall be unlawful to intentionally trap, hunt, shoot, or otherwise kill, within
a sanctuary hereby established, any native wild bird. It shall be lawful to trap birds or fowl specifically declared a nuisance by the Town board when such birds or fowl are found to be congregating in such number in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property.
(C) The bird clubs of the Town are hereby granted permission to erect artistic
signs, giving notice of the regulations therein provided, at such places and of such design as may be approved by the Town Board.
State Law Reference: Bird Sanctuary establishment, G.S. 160A-188
SECTION XXIIHunting, Killing, and Trapping of Animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or kill any animal within the territorial limits of the Towns. Trapping may be done with permission from the Harnett County Animal Control Department. This section does not apply to the Police Departments or Harnett County Animal Control, or duly authorized agents when enforcing the provisions provided in this Ordinance.
SECTION XXIII Keeping Livestock and Fowl
No person may keep within the Town any Livestock and/or Fowl except in accordance with this section.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep, house or stable any:
horse, mule, pony, cow, sheep, goat, swine or any other livestock including ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas within the corporate limits of the Town
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep or house any cattle,
goat, horse, swine, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas or any other Livestock on a fenced lot with in the corporate limits of Town.
(C) Any chickens kept within the corporate limits of the Town must be contained
by a fence, building or other enclosure that will ensure that the chickens will not run at large.
(D)Any Fowl found running at large may be taken into possession and/or
destroyed by Harnett County Animal Control anywhere within the corporate limits of the town.
SECTION XXIV Number of Chickens
(A)A maximum of six (6) hens (Gallus gallus domesticus) will be allowed per household.
(B) NO Roosters or other poultry breeds will be permitted.
(C)No free-ranging permitted Hens must be kept in a chicken coop or enclosed runs at all times and are not permitted to roam freely on the Owner’s lot.
(D) The location of the coop and in closed run must be in the rear of the Owner’s lot as determined by the line projected along the rear of the dwelling to each sideline and be 20 feet away from the adjoining Lots.
(E) The coop and enclosed run must be a minimum of ten feet (10’) in length and ten feet (10’) in width and a maximum of sixteen feet (16’) in length and sixteen feet (16’) in width.
(F) Coop design should provide ample ventilation to avoid odors and be made predator proof.
(G)All manure and wood shavings from the coop must be disposed of properly by removing off-site by the owner or professional removal service.
(H)Prior to beginning construction, a Land Use application shall be submitted and approved by the Zoning Administrator, for all coop and run designs.
(I)The Code Enforcement officer, and its designees, has the right to enter onto the property for the purpose of inspecting the coop and run to ensure compliance with these requirements. The home owner will be notified no less than three days prior to the inspection date and has the right to be present during the inspection
(J)Owners who are determined to be in violation may be allowed to correct the violation(s) and/or be subject to a fine, as per the Town’s code. Daily penalties will be assessed in the event that the violation(s) continue. The Town may revoke this privilege if an Owner has had three (3) or more violations during one calendar year.
SECTION XXV Number of Dogs
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on any lot or premises within the corporate limits more than three (3) dogs. This limitation shall not apply to dogs less than four (4) months of age.
Any person wanting to keep more than three (3) dogs will apply to the Town for a license to operate a dog kennel. Prior to the issuing of such license it shall be determined that the kennel would be in compliance with all Town and State regulations.
SECTION XXVI Number of Cats
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on any lot or premises within the corporate limits more than four (3) cats. This limitation shall not apply to cats less than four (4) months of age.
SECTION XXVII Confinement and Running at Large
(A)No person owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of any animal may cause, permit or allow the animal to stray or in any manner to run at large upon any public street, sidewalk or other public property or to stray, run at large or otherwise trespass upon the private property of another.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow such animal to be at
large on any Town property.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
any animal to fail or refuse to remove feces deposited by the animal on any
street, sidewalk, park or other publicly owned property.
(D)It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail or refuse to remove
feces deposited by the animal on any private property.
SECTION XXVIIIPossession of Animals and Strays
(A)It shall be unlawful for any person in the town knowingly and intentionally,
unless with consent of the owner, to harbor, feed and keep in their possession by confinement or otherwise allow to remain on their property any animal which does not belong to them unless they notify Harnett County Animal Control within forty-eight (48) hours from the time such animal came into his possession.
(B) Any person who feeds a stray animal and/or allows the animal to stay on their
property for at least two (2) days will be considered the legally responsible for such animal and any violations caused by the animal.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to surrender any such stray animal
to the Police Department or Harnett County Animal Control or person duly authorized upon demand.
(D) The purpose of this section is to aid in rabies control and to prevent the
intentional or unintentional possession of pets belonging to other persons.
SECTION XXIX Impoundment and Reclaiming of Captured Animals
(A)Any animal within the Town without an owner, any animal running at large within the
Town, or any animal whose owner fails to have the animal vaccinated in accordance with the laws of the State, or an animal appearing within the Town without a rabies vaccination tag shall be taken by Harnett County Animal Control and confined for a period of time until reclaimed by the owner with a pre-paid rabies voucher, adopted with a pre-paid rabies voucher or euthanized by the Harnett County Animal Control Department.
(B) If any animal is not redeemed by the owner within three (3) days from the time Animal
Control takes possession of the animal, the animal shall be put up for adoption or disposed of under the regulations set forth by the Harnett County Animal Control Ordinance and the North Carolina General Statutes.
(C) In order for the owner to redeem an animal, such owner must first show that the rabies
vaccination tag has been procured. In addition the owner shall pay a penalty of fifty (50) dollars for allowing the animal to run at large. The fee may be adjusted in the new fiscal years in the Harnett County Animal fees. The owner must pay daily expenses for boarding and caring for the animal.
SECTION XXX Potentially Dangerous and Dangerous Dogs
(A) It shall be unlawful for a citizen to keep a dog within the corporate limits of the Town a
dog that has been deemed potentially dangerous or Dangerous by Harnett County Animal Control.
(B) Any owner found in violation of this section will be required to release the dog to the Harnett County Animal Control Department for euthanasia and will face a civil fine of $400.00.
.
SECTION XXXI Inherently Dangerous Exotic Animals
Shall be in accordance with the Harnett County Animal Control Ordinance
SECTION XXXII Enforcement, Penalties and Remedies
Enforcement Administration
Primary responsibility for enforcing the provisions of this chapter is assigned to the Harnett County Animal Control Department. Municipal Police Departments will assist when needed.
Penalties and Remedies
Penalties and remedies shall be in accordance with the Harnett County Animal Control Ordinance.
SECTION XXXIII Ordinance in Conflict
All ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
Ordinance Adoption
This Ordinance shall become effective upon adoption.
Adopted this the _______ day of _____________ 2013 by the Town of _________________________
ATTEST:
___________________________________ ________________________________________
Town Clerk Mayor
Adopted this the _______ day of _____________ 2013 by the Town of _________________________
ATTEST:
___________________________________ ________________________________________
Town Clerk Mayor
Adopted this the _______ day of _____________ 2013 by the Town of _________________________
ATTEST:
___________________________________ ________________________________________
Town Clerk Mayor
Adopted this the _______ day of _____________ 2013 by the Town of _________________________
ATTEST:
___________________________________ ________________________________________
Town Clerk Mayor
Ordinance Adoption
This Ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption.
Adopted this the _______ day of _____________ 2013.
ATTEST:
___________________________________ ________________________________________
Clerk to the Board Chairman, Harnett County Board
Of Commissioners
8-09
CHAPTER 3
Abandoned/Nuisance Vehicles
Section 8-3001 Administration.
Section 8-3002 Definitions.
Section 8-3003 Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal
authorized.
Section 8-3004 Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal
authorized.
Section 8-3005 Junked motor vehicle regulated, removal authorized.
Section 8-3006 Removal of abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice requirements.
Section 8-3007 Exceptions to prior notice requirement.
Section 8-3008 Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements.
Section 8-3009 Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicle.
Section 8-3010 Redemption of vehicle during proceedings.
Section 8-3011 Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle.
Section 8-3012 Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property.
Section 8-3013 Protection against criminal or civil liability
Section 8-3014 Exceptions.
Section 8-3015 Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle.
Section 8-3016 Alternative Remedies.
Section 8-3001 Administration.
The Police Department and the Code Administrator of the Town shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this Chapter. The Police Department shall be responsible for administering the removal an disposition of vehicles determined to be “abandoned” on the public streets and highways within the Town, and on property owned by the Town. The Code Administrator shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposal of “abandoned”, “nuisance” and “junked” motor vehicles located on private property. The Town may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles, and junked motor vehicles, and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this Chapter and applicable State Laws. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the Police Department and Fire Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
8-3002 Nuisances
Section 8-3002 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words and terms are defined as herein indicated:
(A) Abandoned vehicle: As authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303, an abandoned vehicle is one that:
(1.) Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or
(2.) Is left upon a public street or highway for longer than seven (7) days; or
(3.) Is left upon property owned or operated by the Town for longer that twenty-four (24) hours; or
(4.) Is left upon private property without the consent of the owner, occupant, or lessee thereof for longer than two (2) hours.
(B) Authorized Official: The supervisory employee of the Police Department or the Town Code Administrator, respectively, designated to order the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this Chapter.
(C) Motor vehicle or vehicle: All machines designed or intended to travel over land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
(D) Junked motor vehicle: As authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303.2, the term junked motor vehicle means a vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that:
(1.) Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or
(2.) Cannot be self-propelled or move in the manner in which it originally was intended to move; or
(3.) Is more than five (5) years old and appears to be worth less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(E) Nuisance vehicle: A vehicle on public or private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:
(1.) A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or other pests; or
(2.) A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation which exceeds eight (8) inches in height; or
(3.) In a condition allowing the collection of pools or ponds of water; or
(4.) A concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil, or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor; or
(5.) An area of confinement which cannot be operated from the inside, such as, but not limited to, trucks or hoods; or
(6.) So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning over; or
(7.)A collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or any other rotten or putrescent matter of any kind; or
(8.)One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass;
(Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3003 Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the term is defined herein.
(b) Upon investigation, the authorized officials of the Town may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3004 Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
(b) Upon investigation, the Town Code Administrator may determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed.
(Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3005 Junked motor vehicle regulated, removal authorized.
(a)It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered removed.
(b) It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor vehicle, as defined herein, on the premises of private property. A single, permitted junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location and concealment requirements of this section.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the owner, person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to comply with the location requirements or the concealment
8-3006 Nuisances
requirements of this section.
(d)Subject to the provisions of subsection (e), the Town Code Administrator may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle found in violation of this Chapter to a storage garage or area. No such vehicle shall be removed from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises unless the Code Administrator finds in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood, or area appearance. The following, among other relevant factors, may be considered:
(1) Protection of property values;
(2) Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
(3) Indirect protection of public health and safety;
(4) Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
(5) Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of the area residents.
(e) Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicles:
(1) Once junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, may be located in the rear yard, as defined in the Town Zoning Ordinance, provided the junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public street and/or abutting premises by an acceptable covering for not more than sixty (60) calendar days shall be kept inside a completely enclosed building. The Town Code Administrator has the authority to determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to deteriorate.
(2)Any one or more junked motor vehicles kept for a period exceeding sixty (60) calendar days shall be kept within a completely enclosed building, as defined in the Town Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3006 Removal of abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice requirements.
Except as set forth in 8-3007 below, an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to
8-11
the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail. The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to show the name(s) and address(es) to whom and to which mailed, and the date mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the Town on a specified date (no sooner than seven (7) days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the Town on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is mailed or affixed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance vehicles and junked vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be made to the Board of Adjustments in writing, heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board od Adjustments, and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3007 Exceptions to prior notice requirements.
The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the authorized official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions, or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorized official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice includes:
(a) Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, the Board of Commissioners hereby determines that the immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:
8-3008 Nuisances
(1)Obstructing traffic.
(2) Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking.
(3) Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone.
(4) Parked in loading zones.
(5) Parked in bus zones, or
(6) Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions.
(b) Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicle left on town-owned property other than the streets or highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice only in those circumstance where the authorized official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety, and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private property. Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3008 Removal of vehicles; post towing notice requirements.
Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed may, as directed by the Town, be removed to a storage garage or area by a tow truck operator or towing business contracted to perform such services for the Town. Whenever such as vehicle is removed, the authorized Town official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle with such notice to include the following:
(1) The description of the removed vehicle;
(2) The location where the vehicle is stored;
(3) The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
(4) The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
(5) The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the removal.
The Town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice, indicating the information set forth in subsections (1) through (5) above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner’s last known address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his agent.
If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given within twenty-four (24) hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the State, notice shall be given to the registered owner within seventy-two (72) hours from the removal of the vehicle.
8-12
Whenever an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle is removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the authorized Town official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number to determine the last know registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information set forth in subsections (1) through (5) above. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3009 Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicle.
After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle, or junked motor vehicle, the owner or any person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court judge to receive such hearing requests. The Magistrate will set the hearing within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 20-219.11, as amended. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3010 Redemption of vehicle during proceedings.
At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the towing fees, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violations of this Chapter. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3011 Sale and disposition of
unclaimed vehicle.
Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the Town and in accordance with Article 1 of Chapter 44A of the North Carolina General Statutes.
(Ord. of 4/07/2005)
8-3012 Nuisances
Section 8-3012 Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property.
As a general policy, the Town will not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the vehicle removed under applicable State Law procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the Town from private property without a written request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where the vehicles is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by the Town Code Administrator. The Town may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the Town against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal, storage, or sale thereof. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3013 Protection against criminal or civil liability.
No person shall be held to answer to any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3014 Exceptions.
Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any vehicle (1) which is located in a bona fide “automobile graveyard” or “junkyard” as defined in N.C. G.S. 136-143, in accordance with the “Junkyard Control Act”, N.C.G.S. 136-141, et seq., (2) which is in an enclosed building, (3) which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner, or (4) which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the Town (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3015 Unlawful removal of impounded vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or to attempt to remove from any storage facility
8-13
designated by the Town any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter unless and until all towing impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees have been paid. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-3016 Alternative Remedies.
In addition to the remedies provided for herein, any violation of the terms of this Chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties and remedies, either criminal or civil or both, as set forth in Section 1-1005 of the Code of the Town of Erwin. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
8-4001 Nuisances
CHAPTER 4
Weeds, Hedges, Tall Grass and Other
Vegetation
Section 8-4001 Definitions.
Section 8-4002 Weeds or vegetative nuisance unlawful.
Section 8-4003 Enforcement.
Section 8-4004 Abatement by the Town.
Section 8-4005 Trimming plants at intersections.
Section 8-4006 Destruction of trees or bushes.
Section 8-4007 Trimming plants extending over streets.
Section 8-4008 Removal of unsafe trees by owner.
Section 8-4009 Assessment of costs by Town.
Section 8-4010 Penalty.
Section 8-4001 Definitions.
Weeds and nuisance vegetation under this chapter shall include the following which may occur on any lot within the corporate limits of the Town:
(1) Weeds or vegetation allowed to grow to a height greater than twelve (12) inches on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush, on any lot regardless of size and whether developed or undeveloped, or on any occupied or unoccupied lot or land less than one acre in area excluding wooded areas, that may provide safe harborage for rats, mice, snakes, and other vermin; (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
(2) Any dead diseased, infested, or dying tree or shrub on any property so near to a street, public right-of-way, or a public utility easement as to
constitute a danger to street trees, public utility services’ streets, sidewalks, vehicle travel, persons, or property, other than that of the owner
of the tree;
(3) Vegetation which creates a nuisance by its existence (i.e. poison ivy, kudzoo);
(4) Dead or dying trees or plants which may cause a hazardous situation if they fall.
(5) Vines or climbing plants growing into or over any street tree, fire hydrant, pole, utility wire, or electrolier;
(6) Branches, roots, trees, shrubs, or foliage that interfere with visibility on, illumination of, or the free, safe, or undamaged use of, or access to or
along, any portion of any public street or sidewalk; (7) Hedges or dense, thorny shrubs extending into the public right-of-way;
(8) Branches of trees that extend within eight (8) vertical feet from any portion of a public sidewalk or within fourteen (14) vertical feet from any
portion of a public street.(Ord. of 3/25/86)(Ord. of 2/5/98)
8-14
Section 8-4002 Weeds or vegetative nuisance unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for property owners to permit a weed or vegetative nuisance condition to exist on their property. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-4003 Enforcement.
When any condition in violation of this Chapter is found to exist, the Town Manager or such persons as may be designated by the Town Manager, shall give notice to the owner of the premises to abate or remove such conditions within a specified deadline.
Such notice shall be in writing, shall include a description of the premises sufficient for identification and shall set forth the violation and state that, if the violation is not corrected within the specified time, the Town may proceed to correct the same as authorized by this part. In addition, such notice shall state that if violation(s) remains thereafter, a Civil Citation may be issued and may also result in other forms of abatement, including additional court costs and/or attorney fees and liens
Service of such notice shall be by any one of the following methods.
1. By delivery to any owner personally or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of the owner with a person who is over the age of sixteen (16) years and a member of the family of the owner.
2. By depositing the notice in the United States Post Office addressed to the owner at his last known address with postage prepaid thereon.
3. By posting and keeping posted, for ten (10) days, a copy of the notice, in placard for, in a conspicuous place on the premises on which the violation exists, when notice cannot be served by method (1) and (2).
(Ord. of 4/07.2005)
Section 8-4004 Abatement by the Town.
If the owner of any property fails to comply with a notice given pursuant to this section, within the time specified after the service of such notice, he shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this
8-4005 Nuisances
Part in accordance with law and each day that such failure continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, the Town manager may have the condition described in the notice abated, removed or otherwise corrected and all expenses incurred thereby shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of the property and shall be collected as taxes and levies are collected. All such expenses shall constitute a lien against the property on which the work was done.
(Ord. of 4.07/2005)
Section 8-4005 Trimming plantsat
intersections.
The owner or occupant of any lot or lands lying and abutting on any intersection of two streets or any combination thereof in the Town and having
shrubs or bushes on such lot or lands, shall trim or cause to be trimmed all shrubs and bushes located within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the
property lines nearest to the street intersection and abutting the sidewalk or the normal sidewalk location, so that no bush or shrub shall exceed
three (3) feet in height above the surface of either the sidewalk or the normal sidewalk location. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-4006 Destruction of trees or bushes.
No person, except by direction or authority of the director of public works, shall box, bore, cut, break down, deface, injure or destroy any trees,
shrubs or bushes on any street or right-of-way. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-4007 Trimming plants extending over streets.
The owner or occupant of any lot or lands lying and abutting on any street in the Town and having trees, shrubs or bushes on his lot or lands
extending over the property line onto such street shall trim or cause to be trimmed such trees to the clear height of not less than nine (9) feet above the
surface of the sidewalk or street. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-4008 Removal of unsafe trees by owner.
The director of public works shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty to order trimming, preservation or removal of trees or
plants upon private property when he finds such an
act necessary to public safety or to prevent the spread of disease or insects in public trees or
places. The owner shall not fail to trim, remove or take steps to preserve such tree within thirty (30) days of the order to trim, remove or preserve the
tree. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-4009 Assessment of costs by Town.
Upon completion of the abatement of any nuisance by the Town under the provisions of this chapter, the designated officer shall deliver to the Town
Tax Collector a statement including the costs of labor, hauling or other necessary items of expense for such abatement. The Tax Collector shall
thereupon mail to the owner of the lot a bill covering the costs. As provided in G.S. 160A-193, the amount of the bill shall become a lien upon said property and if not paid within thirty (30) days shall be collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of delinquent taxes. (G.S. 160A-193)(Ord. of 3/25/86)(Ord. of 2/5/98)
Section 8-4010 Penalty.
Nothing in this part nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise nor shall enforcement of one remedy provided herein prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances, laws or as provided in N.C. G. S. 14-4. In addition to the remedies provided for herein, any violation of the terms of this part shall subject the violator to the penalties and remedies, either criminal or civil or both, as set forth in Section 1-1005 of the Code of the Town Erwin.
(Ord. of 4/07/2005)
State Law Reference: G.S. 160A- 193
8-5001 Nuisances
CHAPTER 5
Rubbish, Litter
Section 8-5001 Definitions.
Section 8-5002 Litter in public places.
Section 8-5003 Polluting rivers.
Section 8-5004 Scattering rubbish.
Section 8-5005 Placement of litter in receptacle so as to
prevent scattering.
Section 8-5006 Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
Section 8-5007 Merchant's duty to keep sidewalks free of
litter.
Section 8-5008 Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
Section 8-5009 Truck loads causing litter.
Section 8-5010 Litter in parks, lakes and fountains.
Section 8-5011 Litter on occupied and vacant private
property; owners' duty.
Section 8-5012 Clearing of litter from private property by
Town.
Section 8-5013 Penalties.
Section 8-5001 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall be defined as follows:
(1) Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
(2) Litter means garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
(3) Park means any park, reservation,
playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the Town owned or used by the Town and devoted to active or passive recreation.
(4) Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
(5) Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. (6) Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
(7) Refuse means all putrescible and
nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
8-16
dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
(8) Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, leaves, weeds, brush, shrubbery and similar materials.
(9) Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devises used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-5002 Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the Town except in public receptacles or in private receptacles for collection. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-5003 Polluting rivers.
No person shall deposit any rubbish, paper, paper waste, rags or waste material of any kind in any river, stream or natural waterway or upon the banks of same. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-5004 Scattering rubbish.
No person shall deposit in or upon, or scatter over or upon any of the streets, parks or public grounds within the Town any papers, paper waste, rags or waste material of any kind. No person who is the owner or lessee of any lot or land within the Town shall deposit any such material upon any such lot or land, or allow such to be deposited thereon. (Ord. of 3/25186)
Section 8-5005 Placement of litter in receptacle so as to prevent scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other grounds within the Town. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
8-5006 Nuisances
Section 8-5006 Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, ditch, street or other public place within the Town the accumulation of litter from any building
or lot or from the public sidewalks. Nor shall any owner or tenant abutting a public thoroughfare allow or suffer to remain litter upon the adjacent
public sidewalk including medians, so that litter, rubbish and refuse shall not be allowed to pile up or accumulate on such public right of way. (Ord.
of 3/25/86)
Section 8-5007 Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter.
No merchant or business within the Town shall allow litter to accumulate, and shall clean and otherwise rid his premises, including sidewalks, of
waste matter and litter although the same may not have been deposited by him, his agents, or his patrons. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-5008 Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No operator or passenger in any motor vehicle shall throw or deposit litter on any public street, right-of-way, sidewalk or upon private premises
while such vehicle is either stopped or in motion. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-5009 Truck loads causing litter.
No operator of any truck or hauling motor vehicle shall cause to be scattered on or about public or private premises or streets while in motion or
stopped, any litter, refuse, mud, dirt, sticky substances or rubbish. All loads shall be secured in such a manner so as to effect compliance with this
section. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-5010 Litter in parks, lakes and fountains.
No camper, spectator, participant, pedestrian, person engaged in recreational pursuit, or other person shall cause litter, rubbish or refuse to be
cast, thrown, deposited or scattered in or around public parks, lakes, waterways or other public lands, except in containers and receptacles
designed for such use. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
8-17
Section 8-5011 Litter on occupied and vacant private property; owner's duty.
Litter, rubbish, or refuse shall not be cast, scattered, thrown, or deposited on or about private property within the corporate limits to the detriment of public health, safety and welfare. The owner, lessees, agents or others in charge of premises within the Town shall rid such lands and abutting sidewalks and medians of such nuisance or place it in an authorized receptacle. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to dump, place or scatter litter, refuse or rubbish on or about private premises, whether such premises are vacant or inhabited. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-5012 Enforcement
(a) When any condition in violation of this Chapter is found to exist, the Town Manager or such persons as may be designated by the Town Manager, shall give notice to the owner of the premises to abate or remove such conditions within a specified deadline. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
(b) Such notice shall be in writing, shall include a description of the premises sufficient for identification and shall set forth the violation and state that, if the violation is not corrected within the specified time, the Town may proceed to correct the same as authorized by this part. In addition, such notice shall state that if violation(s) remains thereafter, a Civil Citation may be issued and may also result in other forms of abatement, including additional court costs and/or attorney fees and liens. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
(c) Service of such notice shall be by any one of the following methods.
(1) By delivery to any owner personally or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of the owner with a person who is over the age of sixteen (16) years and a member of the family of the owner.
(2) By depositing the notice in the United States Post Office addressed to the owner at his last known address with postage prepaid thereon.
(3) By posting and keeping posted, for ten (10) days, a copy of the notice, in placard form, in a conspicuous place on the premises on which the violation exists, when notice cannot be served by method (1) and (2)
(d) If the owner of any property fails to comply with a notice given pursuant to this section, within the time specified after the service of such notice, he shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this part in accordance with law and each day that such failure continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, the Town manager may have the
condition described in the notice abated, removed or otherwise corrected and all expenses incurred thereby shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of the property and shall be collected as taxes and levies are collected. All such expenses shall constitute a lien against the property on which the work was done.
(Ord. of 4/07/2005)
Section 8-5013 Alternative Remedies.
Nothing in this part nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise nor shall enforcement of one remedy provided herein prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinance, laws or as provided in N.C. G.S. 14-4. In addition to the remedies provided for herein, any violation of the terms of this part shall subject the violator to the penalties and remedies, either criminal or civil or both, as set forth in Section 1-1005 of the Code of the Town of Erwin. (Ord. of 4/07/2005)
8-5006 Nuisances 8-18
State Law Reference: G.S. 16OA-174 CHAPTER 6
General Health Regulations
Section 8-6001 Enforcement of this chapter under
supervision of County health officer.
Section 8-6002 Unlawful to hinder health officer or
assistants.
Section 8-6003 Right to enter.
Section 9-6004 Property kept clean.
Section 8-6005 Human waste.
Section 8-6006 Regulation of turkey shoots
Section 8-6007 Sale of food; eating establishments.
Section 8-6008 Debris from construction.
Section 8-6009 Spitting on sidewalks.
Section 8-6010 Penalties.
Section 8-6001 Enforcement of this chapter under supervision of County health officer.
The enforcement of this chapter shall be under the supervision of the County health officer. (Code 1967, Ch. G, Art. I, See. 1)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-6002 Unlawful to hinder health officer or assistants.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or delay the health officer or any of his assistants in the lawful discharge of their duties. (Code 1967, Ch. G, Art. I, See. 2)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-6003 Right to enter.
The health officer or any of his assistants have the right to enter at any reasonable time any premises for the purpose of making the inspection or investigations as required by this chapter. (Code 1967, Ch. G, Art. 1, Sec. 3)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-6004 Property kept clean.
Owners or occupants of premises required to keep the same clean. Every person owning or occupying any premises in the corporate limits shall keep the premises free from weeds, trash, and all other forms of animal or vegetable refuse which may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health, or which may constitute a public nuisance. No owner or occupant of any premises shall bury therein any animal or vegetable matter which, upon decaying may become dangerous or prejudicial to the public health, or may constitute a nuisance. (Ord. of
3/25/86)
8-6005 Nuisances
Section 8-6005 Human waste.
No person shall urinate or deposit any human waste of any kind on any street, lot or premises except in approved sanitary facilities. (Code 1968,
Ch. G, Art. I, Sec. 5)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-6006 Regulation of turkey shoots.
Any person, firm or corporation shall comply with the following requirements prior to sponsoring, hosting or operating a turkey shoot or any target
shooting contest where guns are fired.
(a) Application for permit.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation wanting to host, sponsor or operate a turkey shoot shall apply for a permit from the Town manager at the Town
Hall in Erwin from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday. There shall be a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) permit application fee for each
application submitted.
(2) Each individual applicant shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age, and shall not have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor.
Traffic offenses, except for those related to alcohol or drugs, are hereby excepted.
(b) Time. No person obtaining a permit shall be allowed to operate a turkey shoot before 12 o'clock noon or after 10:30 p.m. at night during weekdays
or on Saturdays. Turkey shoots are expressly prohibited on Sundays and holidays.
(c) General operation, equipment and parking. (1) The site for a turkey shoot shall be approved by the Town manager as safe with no
danger of weapon fire directed toward any nearby road, highway, residence of any type or other building, whether occupied or not.
(2) The applicant or the applicant's agent, whose name shall be on file at the police department, shall be on the premises and
accessible to Town officials or Town employees during the hours of operation.
(3) Any person, firm or corporation who receives a permit shall be the owner of the premises used for the turkey shoot or, at the time
of making application for a permit, present a written agreement with the owner authorizing a turkey shoot on the premises.
(4) Only .410,.20,.16, and .12 gauge shotguns with the barrel or barrels at least eighteen (18) inches in length may be used. No slugs or
buckshot shall be fired from any shotgun. Only
8-19
birdshot with a number four or higher classification shall be permitted.
(5) The site for a turkey shoot shall have sufficient lighting if used during a time thirty (30) minutes prior to or after sunset. Other reasonable precautions such as hay bales or similar objects to absorb the discharges, shall be in place prior to opening a turkey shoot.
(6) The applicant shall not allow any alcohol or illegal drugs to be consumed or used by any person while at the site of a turkey shoot. Violation of this ordinance shall result in the immediate revocation of the permit; revocation shall be in writing, signed by the Town manager, served on the operator or person in charge of the turkey shoot, and provide for a hearing on the next business day before the Town manager who shall hear the permittee and rule on the revocation. The Town manager may hear any evidence and no specific rules of evidence shall apply. (7) Parking of motor vehicles at the site of a turkey shoot by competitors or spectators shall not impede or any way block the normal flow of traffic on public streets or highways.
(d) Conducting any of the activities referred to in this section without a permit or after a permit is revoked and prior to reinstatement, shall constitute a misdemeanor as referred to elsewhere in these ordinances, and shall be punished as such. (Ord. of 11-5-87)
Section 8-6007 Sale of food; eating
establishments.
All persons, firms, or corporations selling food of any kind or serving prepared meals shall comply with all requirements pertaining thereto of the North Carolina State Board of Health. (Code 1968, Ch. G, Art. I, Sec. 7)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-6008 Debris from construction.
All refuse and debris, remaining both as a result of the repair of any buildings, or of the erection and completion of any buildings, shall be removed by the property owner within thirty (30) days from the completion of the aforesaid work. (Code 1968, Ch. G, Art. I, Sec. 8)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-6009 Spitting on sidewalks.
(a) It shall be unlawful to expectorate or spit in or upon any public building or sidewalk.
8-6009 Nuisances
(b) In addition to or in lieu of other available remedies, violations of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. 14-4. (Ord. of 1/7/88)
Section 8-6010 Penalties.
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and if found guilty of said misdemeanor, is punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding fifty ($50.00) dollars or
imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, for each violation. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
8-20
CHAPTER 7
Disorderly Conduct
Section 8-7001 General.
Section 8-7002 House of ill fame.
Section 8.7003 Profanity and boisterous conduct.
Section 8-7004 Public drunkenness.
Section 8-7005 Drinking in public.
Section 8-7006 Penalties.
Sections 8-7007through 8-7009 reserved.
Section 8-7001 General.
No occupant of any house whether residence or business shall permit same to be kept in an indecent and offensive or disorderly manner or permit loafers or idle persons to congregate therein or in front of same to the annoyance of persons passing by or living in the vicinity. (Code 1967, Ch. 1, Art. I, Sec. 1)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-7002 House of ill fame.
No person shall keep a house or other place of ill fame in the Town and no person shall knowingly rent any house to be used as a house of ill fame. All adult persons living in such house shall be considered as keepers thereof and be subject to the penalties of this code. (Code 1967, Ch. 1, Art. I, Sec. 3)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-7003 Profanity and boisterous
conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use loud and boisterous language so as to become a nuisance or use any form of profanity or indecent language on the street or in a gathering or audience or assembly, or in any public place whatsoever, or to indecently expose themselves within the corporate limits. (Code 1967, Ch. 1, Art. I, Sec. 4)(Ord. of 3/25186)
Section 8-7004 Public drunkenness.
It shall be unlawful for any intoxicated person to be on or upon any public street or other public place. (Code 1967, Ch. 1, Art. I, Sec. 5)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
8-7005 Nuisances
Section 8-7005 Drinking in public.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or sell beer, unfortified wine, whiskey, or alcoholic beverages of any' kind on any property owned or occupied by the Town. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-7006 Penalties.
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and if found guilty of said misdemeanor shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, for each violation. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Sections 8-7007 through 8-7009 reserved.
8-21
CHAPTER 8
Other General
Section 8-8001 Unreasonably loud noise prohibited.
Section 8-8002 Noises expressly prohibited.
Section 8-8003 Firearms regulated.
Section 8-8004 Posting bills; other advertising.
Section 8-8005 Concealed weapons prohibited on certain
municipal property.
Section 8-8006 Firebombs and "molotov cocktails"
prohibited.
Section 8-8007 Quiet zones.
Section 8-8008 Penalties.
Section 8-8001 Unreasonably loud noise
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to create or assist in creating, permit, continue, or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the Town. Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited. (Code 1967, Ch. 1, Art. II, Sec. 1)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-8002 Noises expressly prohibited.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
(a) The sounding of any horn or signal device or any device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended, the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
(b) The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle,
(c) The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity.
(d) The use or operation of any piano, manual or automatic, phonograph, radio, loud speaker, or any other instrument, or sound amplifying devices so loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof,
8-8002 Nuisances
or in such a manner as renders the same a public nuisance.
(e) The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
(f) The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work as a warning of danger. (g) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. (h) The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced.
(i) The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 7 a.m. and 9 p.m. on weekdays,
except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the Town clerk, which permit may be renewed for a period of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues.
(j) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, or court while the same are in session, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution, provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, court or hospital street without receiving a permit for the same, and notification of the Town.
(k) The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street adjacent to any church, provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street.
(1) The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, of the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
(m) The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof.
(n) The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood.
(o) The use of any drum, loud speaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
8-22
attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise. (p) The use of any mechanical loud speakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes except where specific license is received from the Board. (q) The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or filling station in any residential district so as to cause loud or offensive noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 am.
(r) The firing or discharging of squibs, crackers, gunpowder, or other combustible substance in the streets or elsewhere for the purpose of making noise or disturbance. (Code 1967, Ch. I, Art. II, Sec. 2)(Ord. of 3/26/86)
Section 8-8003A Firearms
regulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm of any type within the corporate limits except a peace officer in the performance of his duty, or other persons in self-defense or in the protection of property,or within a building licensed under Section 8-8003B. (Code 1967, Ch. I, Art. II, Sec. 3)(Ord. of 3/25/86)(Ord. of 8/1/91)
Section 8-8003B Conditional
Discharge of Firearms Permitted.
Upon application made on forms approved by the Town Manager or his designee. the owner or occupant of a building may apply to the Town Board for a permit allowing the discharge of firearms in an indoor firing area, but only in accord with the following standards:
1) The primary business engaged in on-the premises is the sale and/or repair of firearms. 2) The building containing the indoor firing area shall be fully enclosed.
3) The walls, ceiling, and floor of the indoor firing area shall be constructed such that rounds, ammunition, or projectiles utilized in the firing area cannot penetrate the walls, ceiling, or floor of the firing area.
4) There shall be no unreasonably loud or disturbing noise outside the building resulting from the direct use of firearms.
5) During all hours of use of the indoor firing area, there shall be on premises, a supervisor, who shall have obtained a certificate of completion of the National Rifle Association's Firearms Safety
8-8002 Nuisances
Course or an equivalent course conducted by an appropriate governmental agency, educational institution. or nationally recognized private firearms safety training certification organization as approved by the Council. (Ord. of 8/1/91)
Section 8-8004 Posting bills; other advertising.
No person shall stick, paint, brand, stamp, write or put upon any house, fence, wall, pavement, post or upon any property, owned by any person, firm, or corporation, or owned by the Town, any printed, written, painted or other advertisement, bill, notice, sign or poster, without first having obtained the permission of the owner of such property. (Code 1967, Ch. I, Art. II, Sec. 4)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-8005 Concealed Weapons Prohibited on Certain Municipal Property.
a) Posting of Signs Required. The Town Manager or his designee is hereby authorized and instructed to post conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or within each park and each building or portion of a building owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the Town of Erwin, as well as the appurtenant premises to such buildings, indicating that carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited therein. (List the building, appurtenant premises, and/ or parks to which the ordinance will apply.) b) Location of Signs. Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the building. The Town Manager or his designee shall exercise discretion in determining the number and appropriate location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises and parks.
c) Severability; Conflict of Laws. If this ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given separate effect and to that end the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed.
d) Effective Date. This ordinance shall be effective on and after December 1, 1995.
(Ord. 11/2/95)
8-22
Section 8-8006 Firebombs and "molotov cocktails" prohibited.
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed:
(1) "Molotov cocktail" is defined as any breakable container or any container which is designed in such a manner that upon being propelled it will at impact empty its contents, which is filled with a flammable fluid or substance, and which is fitted with a fuse or wick. (2) "Firebomb" is defined as any type of object designed or constructed so that upon being propelled it will explode or ignite its area of impact. (Code 1967, Ch. L, Art. II, Sec. 1) (b) Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to manufacture, possess, transport or use any molotov cocktail or other firebomb. (Code 1967, Ch. L, Art. II, Sec. 2) (c) Possession of materials restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to possess all the items or materials needed to manufacture molotov cocktails or other firebombs, other than on his or their premises. (Code 1967, Ch. L, Art. II, Sec. 3)(Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-8007 Quiet zones.
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, library, or sanitarium, or court while the same is in session, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institutions; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, court or hospital street, shall be deemed a violation of this article. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Section 8-8008 Penalties.
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and if found guilty of said misdemeanor, is punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or
imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, for each violation. (Ord. of 3/25/86)
Part 9
Chapter 1
ARTICLE A
General Administrative
Procedures
ARTICLE B
Repair, Closing, or Demolition of Unfit
Dwellings
ARTICLE C
Repair, Closing,
Demolition of
Abandoned Structures
Article A Building
Table of Contents Code
Enforcement
§ 9-1001 Organization of department.
§ 9-1002 Duties generally.
§ 9-1003 Additional enforcement duties; dwellings unfit for
human habitation.
§ 9-1004 Same; zoning.
§ 9-1005 Powers of inspectors.
§ 9-1006 Conflicts of interest.
§ 9-1007 Reports and records.
§ 9-1008 Inspection of work in progress; required generally.
§ 9-1009 Calls for inspection.
§ 9-1010 Same; survey of street lines.
§ 9-1011 Certificate of occupancy.
§ 9-1012 Oversight not to legalize violation.
§ 9-1013 through 9-1020 reserved.
§ 9-1021 Finding-, intent.
§ 9-1022 Duties of building inspector.
§ 9-1023 Powers of building inspector.
§ 9-1024 Standards for enforcement
§ 9-1025 Procedure for enforcement.
§ 9-1026 Procedure after hearing.
§ 9-1027 Failure to comply with order.
§ 9-1028 Service of complaints and orders.
§ 9-1029 through 9-1030 reserved.
§ 9-1031 Findings; intent
§ 9-1032 Duties of building inspector.
§ 9-1033 Powers of building inspector.
§ 9-1034 Standards for enforcement.
§ 9-1035 Procedure for enforcement.
§ 9-1036 Methods of service of complaints and orders.
§ 9-1037 In rem action by inspector, placarding.
§ 9-1038 Costs of lien on premises.
§ 9-1039 Alternative remedies.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 1- 1
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article A Building
General Administrative Code
Procedures Enforcement
§ 9-1001 Organization of department.
The inspection department shall consist of a building inspector and such other personnel as required, who will be responsible for heating and air-conditioning, electrical inspection and such other inspections as may be necessary. The Town manager may in his discretion designate a person as the department head or to assist the building inspector.
§ 9-1002 Duties generally.
The building inspector shall enforce all of the provisions of this article and make all
inspections necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of this article are being met.
§ 9-1003 Additional enforcement duties; dwellings unfit for human habitation.
The building inspector shall enforce any ordinances or codes adopted by the governing body relating to the repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation, pursuant to section 160A-441 et seq. of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
§ 9-1004 Same; zoning.
(a) If the building inspector is charged with enforcing the zoning ordinance of this code, then no permit for alteration, repair or construction of any building shall be issued unless the plans and specifications show that the building and its proposed use will be in compliance with applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance.
(b) If the building inspector is not charged with enforcing the zoning ordinance, then no permit for alteration, repair or construction of any building shall be issued unless a zoning permit has first been issued by the appropriate official charged with enforcing the zoning ordinance.
State Law references:
(a) For State laws as to building inspection generally, see G.S. 160A-441 et. seq. (b) For State law as to organization of inspection department, see G.S. 160A-411. (c) For State law as to duties of inspection department, see G.S. 160A-412.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 1- 2
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article A Building
General Administrative Code
Procedures Enforcement
§ 9-1005 Powers of inspectors.
(a) Authority. Inspectors are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Right-of-entry. Inspectors shall have the right-of-entry on any premises within the jurisdiction of the regulatory codes herein adopted at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of the requirements of this chapter, upon presentation of proper credentials.
(c) Stop orders. Whenever any building or part thereof is being demolished,
constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in a hazardous manner, or in violation of any
provision of this chapter or any other Town ordinance, or in violation of any provision of this
chapter, or any other Town ordinance, or in violation of any provision of any regulatory code
herein adopted, or in violation of the terms of the permit issued therefor, or in such manner as to endanger life or property, the appropriate inspector may order such work to be stopped immediately. Such order shall be made verbally or in writing to the owner of the property or his agent or to, the person doing the work and shall state the reasons therefor and the conditions under which the work may be resumed.
§ 9-1006 Conflicts of interest
No officer or employee of the inspection department shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or any part thereof or in the making of plans or specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of such building. No officer or employee of the inspection department shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interest of the Town.
§ 9-1007 Reports and records.
The inspection department and each inspector shall keep complete, permanent and
accurate records in convenient form of all applications received, permits issued, inspections and reinspections made and all other work and activities of the department. Periodic reports shall be submitted to the Town manager and to other agencies as required.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 1- 3
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article A Building
General Administrative Code
Procedures Enforcement
§ 9-1008 Inspection of work in progress; required generally.
(a) The inspection department shall inspect all buildings and work therein, for which a permit of any kind has been issued as often as necessary in order to determine whether the work complies with this article.
(b) When deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector, materials and assemblies may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication, or inspections may be made by approved and recognized inspection organizations provided, that no approval shall be based upon reports of such organizations unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such organization.
(c) All holders of permits, or their agents, notify the inspection department and the appropriate inspector at each of the following stages of construction so that approval may be given before work is continued:
(1) Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and the
necessary reinforcement and forms are in place, and before concrete is placed. Drilled footings, piles, and similar types of foundations shall be inspected as installed.
(2) Framing inspection. To be made after all structural framing is in place and all roughing-in of plumbing and electrical and heating has been installed, after all fire blocking, chimneys, bracing and vents are installed, but before any of the structure is enclosed or covered. Poured in place concrete structural elements shall be inspected before each pour of any structural member.
(3) Fireproofing inspection. To be made after all areas required to be protected by fireproofing are lathed, but before the plastering or other fireproofing is applied.
(4) Final inspection. To be made after building or structure has all doors hung,
fixtures set, and ready for occupancy, but before the building is occupied.
(d) The building inspector shall make every reasonable effort to be available to inspect work has ordered specific work or correction to be made.
State Law Reference:
(a) For similar State law on conflict of interest, see G.S. 160A-415.
(b) For similar State law as records, see G.S. 160A-433.
(c) For State law as to inspection of work in progress, see G.S. 160A-420.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 1- 4
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article A Building
General Administrative Code
Procedures Enforcement
§ 9-1009 Calls for inspection.
(a) Request for inspections may be made to the office of the inspection department or to the appropriate inspector. The inspection department shall make inspections as soon as practicable after request is made therefor, provided such work is ready for inspection at the time the request is made.
(b) Re-inspections may be made at the convenience of the inspector. No work shall be inspected until it is in proper and completed condition ready for inspection. All work which has been concealed before the inspection and approval shall be uncovered at the request of the inspector and placed in condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the work shall be furnished by the appropriate inspector in the form of a notice posted on the building or given to the permit holder or his agent. Failure to call for inspections or proceedings without approval at each stage of construction shall be deemed a violation of this article.
§ 9-1010 Same; survey of street lines.
Street or alley lines. Where the applicant for a permit proposes to erect any building or structure on the line of any street, alley, or other public place, he shall secure a survey of the line of such street, alley, or other public place, adjacent to the property upon which such building or structure is to be erected before proceeding with construction of such building or structure. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to see that the building does not encroach upon such street, alley, or other public place.
§ 9-1011 Certificate of occupancy.
No new building or part thereof, no addition or enlargement of any existing building, and no existing building after being altered or moved shall be occupied, and no change of occupancy shall be made in any existing building or part of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion and occupancy of the entire building. Application for a certificate of occupancy may be made by the owner or his agent after all final inspections have been made for new buildings, or, in the case of existing buildings, after supplying the information and date necessary to determine compliance with this chapter, the appropriate regulatory codes and any codes and any zoning ordinance for the occupancy intended. The inspection department shall issue a certificate of occupancy after examination and inspection, it
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 1- 5
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article A Building
General Administrative Code
Procedures Enforcement
is found that the building in all respects conforms to the provisions of this chapter, the regulatory codes, and any zoning ordinance for the occupancy intended.
§ 9-1012 Oversight not to legalize violation.
No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any inspector or other official or
employee of the inspection department shall be deemed to legalize the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of any regulatory code herein adopted.
Sections 9-1013 through 9-1020 reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 1- 6
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article B Building
Repair, Closing, or Code
Demolition of Unfit Dwellings Enforcement
§ 9-1021 Finding; intent.
It is hereby found that there exists within the Town dwellings that are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities, or other conditions that render the dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or morals of the residents of the Town. Therefore, pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. § 160A-441, it is the intent of this ordinance to provide for the repair, closing, or demolition of any such dwelling in accordance with the procedure set forth in North Carolina G.S. § 160A-143 et seq. (Ord., passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1022 Duties of the building inspector.
The building inspector is hereby designated as the Town officer to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the building inspector:
(a) To locate unfit dwellings within the Town and determine which dwellings are in violation of this ordinance;
(b) To take such action pursuant to this ordinance as may be necessary to provide for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings;
(c) To keep an accurate record of all enforcement proceedings begun pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance; and
(d) To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein or assigned to him by the Town Board of Commissioners.
(Ordinance, passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1023 Powers of the building inspector.
The building inspector is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary to
carry out the intent and the provisions of this ordinance, including the following powers in
addition to others herein granted:
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 1- 7
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article B Building
Repair, Closing, or Code
Demolition of Unfit Dwellings Enforcement
(a) To investigate the condition of dwellings within the Town in order to determine which dwellings are abandoned and in violation of this ordinance; (b) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections; (c) To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence; and
(d) To designate such other officers, agents and employees of the Town as he deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ordinance passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1024 Standards for enforcement.
Every dwelling within the Town shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance whenever such dwelling constitutes a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the Town citizens as a result of
(a) Dilapidation;
(b) Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; (c) Lack of ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities;
(d) Other conditions rendering the dwelling unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or
detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Town.
(Ordinance, passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1025 Procedure for enforcement.
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the Town charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the public officer on his own motion that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest in such dwellings a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer, or his designated agent, at a place within the county in which the property is located fixed not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 1- 8
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article B Building
Repair, Closing, or Code
Demolition of Unfit Dwellings Enforcement
complaint. The owner and parties in interest have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer.
(Ordinance, passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1026 Procedure after hearing.
(a) After such notice and hearing, the public officer shall state in writing his
determination whether such dwelling violates this ordinance. If the public officer determines that the dwelling is in violation, he shall state in writing his findings of fact to support such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to either repair, alter and improve such dwelling or else remove or demolish the dwelling within a specified period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days. (b) If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, such cost being - percent of the value of the dwelling, the public officer may issue an order requiring the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and dose the dwelling as a human habitation.
(c) If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made at a
reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, the public officer may issue an order
requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling. (Ordinance, passed 8-488)
§ 9-1027 Failure to comply with order.
(a) If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the public officer may cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard containing the language as prescribed in G.S. § 160A-443(4).
(b) If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling, the public officer may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished. The powers of the public
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 1- 9
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article B Building
Repair, Closing, or Code
Demolition of Unfit Dwellings Enforcement
officer to repair, alter or improve or to vacate, or remove or demolish the dwelling shall not be
exercised until the governing body shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to the particular property or properties which the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with the Housing Code. This ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.
(c) The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessments provided in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of General Statutes. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by- the public officer, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by the final order or decree of the court. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or otherwise.
(d) If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling, the public officer may file a civil action in the name of the Town to remove such occupant as prescribed in G.S. § 160A-443(7). (Ordinance, passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1028 Service of complaints and orders.
Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this ordinance shall be
served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer makes an affidavit to that
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
1- 10
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article B Building
Repair, Closing, or Code
Demolition of Unfit Dwellings Enforcement
effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the unknown owners or other persons
may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under the provisions of Part 6 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. (Ordinance, passed 8-4-88)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
1- 11
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article C Building
Repair, Closing, or Code
Demolition of Abandoned Structures Enforcement
§ 9-1031 Findings; intent.
It is found that there hereby found that there exists within the Town abandoned
structures which the Board of Commissioners finds to be hazardous to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Town due to the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children, or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities. Therefore, pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. § 160A-441, it is the intent of this ordinance to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of any such abandoned structures in accordance with the same provisions and procedures as are set forth by law for the repair, closing, or demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation. (Ordinance, passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1032 Duties of building inspector.
The building inspector is hereby designated as the Town officer to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the building inspector:
(a) To locate abandoned structures within the Town and determine which structures are in violation of this ordinance;
(b) To take such action pursuant to this ordinance as may be necessary to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of such structures;
(c) To keep an accurate record of all enforcement proceedings begun pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance; and
(d) To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein or assigned to him by the board of commissioners.
§ 9-1033 Powers of the building inspector.
The building inspector is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary to
carry out the intent and the provisions of this ordinance, including the following powers in
addition to others herein granted:
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
1- 12
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article C Building
Repair, Closing, or Code
Demolition of Abandoned Structures Enforcement
(a) To investigate the condition of buildings within the Town in order to determine which structures are abandoned and in violation of this ordinance; (b) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections; (c) To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence; and
(d) To designate such other officers, agents and employees of the Town as he deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ordinance, passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1034 Standards for enforcement.
(a) Every abandoned structure within the Town shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance whenever such structure constitutes a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the Town citizens as a result of
(1) The attraction of insects or rodents;
(2) Conditions creating a fire hazard;
(3) Dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children; or
(4) Frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities. (b) In making the preliminary determination of whether or not an abandoned structure is in violation of this ordinance, the Building Inspector may, by way of illustration and not limitation, consider the presence or absence of the following conditions:
(1) Holes or cracks in the structure's floors, walls, ceilings or roof which might attract or admit rodents and insects, or become breeding places for rodents and insects;
(2) The collection of garbage or rubbish in or near the structure which might attract rodents and insects, or become breeding places for rodents and insects;
(3) Violations of the State Building Code, the State Electrical Code, or the Fire Prevention Code which constitutes a fire hazard in such structure;
(4) The collection of garbage, rubbish or combustible material which constitutes a fire hazard in such structure;
(5) The use of such structure or nearby grounds or facilities by children as a play
area;
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
1- 13
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article C Building
Repair, Closing, or Code
Demolition of Abandoned Structures Enforcement
(6) Violations of the State Building Code which might result in danger to children using the structure or nearby grounds or facilities as a play area; and
(7) Repeated use of such structure -by transients and vagrants, in the absence of sanitary facilities, for living, sleeping, cooking or eating.
(Ordinance, passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1035 Procedure for enforcement.
(a) Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a petition is filed with the
building inspector by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the Town charging that any structure exists in violation of this ordinance or whenever it appears to the inspector, upon inspection, that any structure exists in violation hereof, he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such structure a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the inspector at a place therein fixed, not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of said complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition relating to such structure. Any person desiring to do so may attend such hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the inspector.
(b) Procedure after hearing.
(1) After such notice and hearing, the inspector shall state in writing his determination whether such structure violates this ordinance.
(2) If the inspector determines that the structure is in violation he shall state in
writing his findings of fact to support such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to either repair, alter, and improve such structure or else remove or demolish the same within a specified period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
1- 14
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article C Building
Repair, Closing, or Code
Demolition of Abandoned Structures Enforcement
(c) Failure to comply with order.
(1) In personam remedy. If the owner of any structure shall fail to comply with an order of the inspector within the time specified therein, the inspector may submit to the board of commissioners at its next regular meeting a resolution directing the Town Attorney to petition the superior court for an order directing such owner to comply with the order of the inspector, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).
(2) In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a structure to comply with an order of the inspector within the time specified therein, if injunctive relief has not been sought or has not been granted as provided in division (c) of this section, the inspector shall submit to the board of commissioners an ordinance ordering the inspector to cause such structure to be removed or demolished, as provided in the original order of the inspector, and pending such removal or demolition, to placard such dwelling as provided by G.S. § 160A-443. (d) Petition to superior court by owner. Any person aggrieved by an order issued by -the inspector shall have the right, within thirty (30) days after issuance of the order to petition the superior court for a temporary injunction restraining the inspector pending a final disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f). (Ord., passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1036 Methods of service of complaints and orders.
Methods of service of complaints and orders. Complaints or orders issued by the
inspector shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of such complaint or order upon such person may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town at least once, no later than the time at which personal service is required under section 91035 of this ordinance. Where service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. (Ordinance, passed 8-488)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
1- 15
Part 9
Chapter 1
Article C Building
Repair, Closing, or Code
Demolition of Abandoned Structures Enforcement
§ 9-1037 In rem action by inspector; placarding.
(a) After failure of an owner of a structure to comply with an order of the inspector
issued pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, and upon adoption by the Town Council of an ordinance authorizing and directing him to do so, as provided by G.S. § 160A443(5) and Section 9-1035(c) of this ordinance, the inspector shall proceed to cause such structure either to be repaired or else removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the board of commissioner and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of such structure a placard prohibiting the use or occupation of the structure. Use or occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(b) Each such ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the county register of deeds, and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by
G.S. § 160A-443(5).
(Ordinance, passed 8-4-88)
§ 9-1038 Costs of lien on premises.
As provided by G.S. § 160A-446(6), the amount of the cost of any removal or demolition caused to be made or done by the building inspector pursuant to this ordinance shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be enforced and the costs collected as provided by Article 10, Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.
(Ordinance, passed 8-488)
§ 9-1039 Alternative remedies.
Neither this ordinance nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this ordinance by criminal process, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.
(Ordinance, passed 8-4-88)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
1- 16
T
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eoof
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 2
ARTICLE A
General Provisions
ARTICLE B
Codes Adopted
Chapter 2 Building
Table of Contents Regulations
§ 9-2001 Scope of article.
§ 9-2002 Registration of contractors; required.
§ 9-2003 Same; bond.
§ 9-2004 Permits; required.
§ 9-2005 Same; contents of application.
§ 9-2006 Same; plans and specifications.
§ 9-2007 Same; limitations.
§ 9.2008 Same; issuance.
§ 9-2009 Same; revocation.
§ 9-2010 Time limitations on validity of permit.
§ 9-2011 Changes in work after permit issued.
§ 9-2012 Schedule of permit fees.
§ 9-2013 through 9-2020 reserved.
§ 9-2021 Scope of chapter and regulatory codes
§ 9-2022 Building code adopted. Administration and
enforcement adopted. Accessibility adopted.
§ 9-2023 Plumbing code adopted.
§ 9-2024 Mechanical code adopted..
§ 9-2025 Electrical code adopted.
§ 9-2026 Fire prevention code adopted.
§ 9-2027 Gas code adopted.
§ 9-2028 Residential code adopted.
§ 9-2029 Modular construction requirements adopted.
§ 9-2030 Existing buildings adopted.
§ 9-2031 Energy adopted.
§ 9-2032 Amendments to codes.
§ 9-2033 Compliance with codes.
§ 9-2034 Copies of codes on file.
Editorial Note: For State law as to Building Code generally, see G.S. 143-136 at seq.
2-1
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 2
§ 9-2001 Scope of article.
Article A Building
In General Regulations
(a) The provisions of this article and of the regulatory codes herein adopted shall apply
following
(1) The location, design, materials, equipment, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal, use and occupancy of every
building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such building or structure.
(2) The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains, waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems and all fixtures and appurtenances thereof.
(3) The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of
mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and appurtenances thereof.
(4) The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof.
(b) The adoption of this chapter and the codes herein adopted by reference shall
constitute resolution within the meaning of section 143-138 (b) of the General Statutes of North Carolina making the regulatory codes adopted applicable to dwellings and out buildings used in connection therewith and to apartment buildings used exclusively as the residence of not more than two families.
§ 9-2002 Registration of contractors; required.
Every person carrying on the business of building contractor, plumbing contractor,
heating and air-conditioning contractor or electrical contractor within the Town shall register at
the office of the inspection department, giving his name and place of business.
§ 9-2003 Same; bond.
The building inspector may at his discretion request a good and sufficient bond in the
sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), to be approved by the Town attorney, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of a contractor in doing any work which he contracts to do and
ess 2-2
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 2
Article A Building
In General Regulations
indemnifying the Town against loss in any manner whatsoever for any unskillful or negligent work or conduct in the performance of the duties imposed by the provisions of this article, for any damage to any utility lines, streets or sidewalks in the Town, for the use of defective or improper material in such work, for any damage which may accrue to any person by reason of default of the contract or for the payment of any inspection or other fees required by this article.
§ 9-2004 Permits; required.
(a) Building permit.
(1) No person shall commence or proceed with the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any building or any part thereof, without a written permit therefor from the building inspector; provided, that no building permit shall be required for work the total cost of which does not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) and which does not involve any change of the structural parts or the stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of egress from the building.
(2) In cases of removal or demolition of a building or structure, a good and
sufficient bond in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be required to be posted by the property owner or by his contractor at the time of application for a permit to insure complete removal or demolition, including all rubble and debris. Failure on the part of the property owner or his contractor to completely demolish, remove and clear the premises after thirty (30) days notice by the building inspector, shall be cause for forfeiture of such bond. (b) Plumbing permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension, or general repair of any plumbing system without a written permit therefor from the plumbing inspector; provided, that no permit shall be required for minor repairs or replacements on the house side of a trap to an installed system of plumbing if such repairs or replacements to not disrupt an original water supply or the waste or ventilating systems.
(c) Heating and air-conditioning permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any heating or cooling equipment system without a written permit from the heating and air-conditioning inspector: provided, that no permit shall be required for minor repairs or minor burner services or filter replacements of warm air furnaces or cooling systems.
(d) Electrical permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation,
extension, alteration or general repair of any electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment
ess 2-3
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 2
Article A Building
In General Regulations
without a written permit therefor from the electrical inspector; provided, that no permit shall be required for minor repair work such as the replacement of lamps or the connection of portable devices to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed. No permit shall be required for the installation, alteration or repair of the electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment installed by or for an electrical public utility corporation for the use of such corporation in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or for the use of such corporation in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence.
State Law Reference: For State law as to construction, plumbing, etc., see G.S. 160A417.
§ 9-2005 Same; contents of application.
Written application shall be made for all permits required by this article on forms
provided by the inspection department at least five (5) days prior to construction. Such
application shall be made by the owner of the building affected or by his authorized agent or
representative, and, in addition to such other information as may be required by the appropriate inspector, shall show the following:
(1) Name, residence and business address of the owner.
(2) Name, residence and business address of the authorized representative or agent, if
any.
(3) Name and address of the contractor, if any, together with evidence that he has
obtained a certificate from the appropriate State licensing board for such contractors, if such is required for the work involved in the permit for which application is made.
§ 9-2006 Same; plans and specification.
(a) Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for a permit when the estimated total cost of the building is in excess of the amount provided by State law, and for any other building where plans and specifications are deemed necessary by the appropriate regulatory codes.
(b) Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed, and the plans and specifications together shall contain information sufficient to indicate that the work proposed will conform to the provisions of this article.
ess 2-4
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 2
Article A Building
In General Regulations
(c) Where plans and specifications are required, a copy of the same shall be kept at
the work until all authorized operations have been I completed and approved by the appropriate inspector.
§ 9-2007 Same; limitations.
(a) No building permit shall be issued for any building the estimated total cost of which is more than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) unless the work is to be performed by a licensed general contractor.
(b) No building permit shall be issued for any building, other than a one (1) or two (2) family dwelling, the estimated total cost of which is more than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) unless the plans bear the State seal of a registered architect or a registered engineer.
(c) Where any provision of the State law or of this code or other ordinance required that work be done by a licensed specialty contractor of any kind, no permit for such work shall be issued unless it is to be performed by such contractor.
(d) Where detailed plans and specifications are required under this article, no building permit shall be issued unless such plans and specifications have been provided.
§ 9-2008 Same; issuance.
When proper application for a permit has been made and the appropriate inspector is satisfied that the application and the proposed work comply with the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue such permit upon payment of the proper fees as provided in section 9-2012.
§ 9-2009 Same; revocation.
The appropriate inspector may revoke and require the return of any permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for such revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any material departure from the approved application plans or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with proper orders of the inspector; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of this article, or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing such permit.
ess 2-5
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 2
Article A Building
In General Regulations
§ 9-2010 Time limitations on validity of permit.
All permits issued under this article shall expire by limitation six (6) months after the date of issuance if work authorized by the permit has not been commenced. If after commencement, the work is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, the permit therefor shall immediately expire. No work authorized by any permit, which has expired, shall thereafter be performed until a new permit therefor has been secured.
§ 9-2011 Changes in work after permit issued.
After a permit has been issued, no changes or deviations from the terms of the
application and permit or changes or deviations from the plans or specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be made until specific written approval of such changes or deviations has been obtained from the appropriate inspector.
§ 9-2012 Schedule of permit fees.
Fees for permits shall be based upon the total estimated cost of the proposed work,
including all sub-contracts if any, but in no case shall the total estimated cost be less than the market value of similar completed work in the town as determined by the appropriate inspector. Permit fees shall be as set out in the schedule in the Town clerk's office.
§ 9-2013 through 9-2020 reserved.
ess 2-6
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 2
Article B Building
Regulatory Codes Regulations
Adopted by Reference
§ 9-2021 Scope of Chapter and Regulatory Codes.
The provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes herein adopted shall apply to location, design, materials, equipment, construction, reconstruction, installation, erection, alteration, enlargement, extensions, maintenance, repair, moving, or demolition, of any new or existing building or structure including the mechanical, plumbing, electrical, energy, accessibility, fire prevention, and any regulatory codes and their requirements adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council.
§ 9-2022 Vol. I - Building Code Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina State Building Code, General
Construction, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2022 Vol. IA - Administration and Enforcement Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Administration and Enforcement, as
adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2022 Vol. IC - Accessibility Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Accessibility Code, as adopted by the
North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2023 Vol. 11 - Plumbing Code Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Plumbing Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
ess 2-7
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 2
Article B Building
Regulatory Codes Regulations
Adopted by Reference
§ 9-2024 Vol. III - Mechanical Code Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Mechanical Code, as adopted by the
North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2025 Vol. IV - Electrical Code Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Electrical Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2026 Vol. V - Fire Prevention Code Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2027 Vol. VI - Gas Code Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Gas Code, as adopted by the North
Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2028 Vol. VII - Residential Code Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Residential Building Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2029 Vol. VIII - Modular Construction Requirements Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Modular Construction Requirements
ess 2-8
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 2
Article B Building
Regulatory Codes Regulations
Adopted by Reference
Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2030 Vol. IX - Existing Buildings Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Existing Buildings Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2031 Vol. X - Energy Adopted.
The most current edition of the North Carolina Energy Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.
§ 9-2032 Amendments To Codes.
Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference herein, which are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations referred to herein shall be effective in the town at the time the amendments are filed with the Town Clerk-Treasurer or Building Inspector.
§ 9-2033 Compliance With Codes.
All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed, reconstructed, erected,
altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished, or moved shall conform to the requirements,
minimum standards, and other provisions of the applicable North Carolina State Building Codes.
§ 9-2034 Copies Of Codes On File.
An official copy of each regulatory code adopted herein and official copies of all
amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer or the
Building Inspector. Such copies shall be the official copies of the codes and the amendments.
ess 2-9
Part 9
Chapter 3
ARTICLE 1
Introductory Provisions
ARTICLE 2
Legal Provisions
ARTICLE 3
Procedure For Review and Approval of Subdivision
Plats
Chapter 3 Subdivision
Table of Contents Regulations
§ 9-3001 Title.
§ 9-3002 Purpose.
§ 9-3003 Authority.
§ 9-3004 Jurisdiction.
§ 9-3005 Prerequisite.
§ 9-3006 Thoroughfare Plans.
§ 9-3007 School Sites on Land Use Plan.
§ 9-3008 Zoning and Other Plans.
§ 9-3009 through 9-3010 reserved.
§ 9-3011 General Procedure for Plat Approval.
§ 9-3012 Statement by Owner.
§ 9-3013 Effect of Plat Approval on Dedications.
§ 9-3014 Penalties for Violation.
§ 9-3015 Separability.
§ 9-3016 Variances.
§ 9-3017 Amendments.
§ 9-3018 Abrogation.
§ 9-3019 Effective Date.
§ 9-3020 Adoption.
§ 9-3021 Administration.
§ 9-3022 through 9-3024 reserved.
§ 9-3025 Plat Shall be Required on Any Subdivision of
Land.
§ 9-3026 Approval Prerequisite.
§ 9-3027 Procedures for Review of Major or Minor
Subdivisions.
§ 9-3028 Procedure for Review of Minor Subdivisions.
§ 9-3029 Sketch Plan for Major Subdivisions.
§ 9-3030 Preliminary Plat Submission and Review.
§ 9-3031 Final Plat Submission and Review.
§ 9-3032 Information to be Contained in or Depicted on
Preliminary and Final Plat.
§ 9-3033 through 9-3034 reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 3-1
Part 9
Chapter 3
ARTICLE 4
Required Improvements, Dedication, Reservation, Minimum Standards of
Design
ARTICLE 5
Construction and
Acceptance Procedures
ARTICLE 6
Definitions
APPENDIX
Chapter 3 Subdivision
Table of Contents Regulations
§ 9-3035 General.
§ 9-3036 Suitability of Land.
§ 9-3037 Name Duplication.
§ 9-3038 Subdivision Design.
§ 9-3039 Improvements.
§ 9-3040 Construction Procedure.
§ 9-3041 Final Inspection.
§ 9-3042 As Built Drawings.
§ 9-3043 Defects Guarantee.
§ 9-3044 Acceptance.
§ 3-3045 Subdivision Defined.
§ 3-3046 Other Definitions.
§ 3-3047 Word Interpretation.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 3-2
Part 9
Chapter 3
§ 9-3001 Title.
Article 1 Subdivision
Introductory Provisions Regulations
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Erwin, North Carolina, and may be referred to as the Subdivision Ordinance.
§ 9-3002 Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish procedures and standards for the
development and subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of Town of Erwin. It is further
designed to provide for the orderly growth and development of the Town; for the coordination of streets and highways and with other public facilities; for the dedication or reservation of recreation areas serving residents of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision and of rights-of-way or easements for street and utility purposes; and for the distribution of population and traffic in a manner that will avoid congestion and overcrowding and will create conditions essential to public health, safety, and the general welfare. This ordinance is designed to further facilitate adequate provision of water, sewerage, parks, schools, and playgrounds, and also to facilitate the further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land.
§ 9-3003 Authority.
This ordinance is hereby adopted under the authority and provision of the General Statutes of North Carolina, Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 2.
§ 9-3004 Jurisdiction.
The regulations contained herein, as provided in G.S. 160A, Article 19 shall govern each
and every subdivision within the jurisdiction of Erwin.
§ 9-3005 Prerequisite.
After the effective date of this ordinance, each individual major subdivision of land within
the Town of Erwin's jurisdiction shall first be reviewed and considered for approval by the Erwin
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 3-3
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 1 Subdivision
Introductory Provisions Regulations
Planning Board, with final approval being required by the Erwin Town Board. (Ordinance of 2/3/94)
§ 9-3006 Thoroughfare Plans.
When a proposed subdivision includes any part of a thoroughfare which has been
designated as such upon the officially adopted thoroughfare plan of the Town, such part of such thoroughfare shall be plated by the subdivider in the location shown on the plan and at the width specified in this ordinance.
§ 9-3007 School Sites on Land Use-Plan.
If the Erwin Town Board of Commissioners and Board of Education have jointly
determined the specific location and size of any school sites to be reserved and this information appears in the comprehensive land use plan, the Planning Board shall immediately notify the Board of Education whenever a sketch plan for a subdivision is submitted which includes all or part of a school site to be reserved. The Board of Education shall promptly decide whether it still wishes the site to be reserved. If the Board of Education does not wish to reserve the site, it shall so notify the Planning Board. If the Board of Education has not purchased or begun proceedings to condemn the site within eighteen (18) months, the subdivider may treat the land as freed of the reservation.
§ 9-3008 Zoning and Other Plans.
Similarly, proposed subdivisions must comply in all respects with the requirements of the
zoning ordinance in effect in the area to be subdivided, and any other officially adopted plans.
§ 9-3009 through 9-3010 reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 3-4
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 2 Subdivision
Legal Provisions Regulations
§ 9-3011 General Procedure for Plat Approval.
After the effective date of this ordinance, no subdivision plat of land within the Town's jurisdiction shall be filed or recorded until it has been submitted to and approved by the Town Planning Board as set forth in § 9-3005 of this ordinance, and until this approval is entered in writing on the face of the plat by the Chairman of the Planning Board and by the Town Clerk.
The Harnett County Register of Deeds shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision of land located within the territorial jurisdiction of the Town of Erwin that has not been approved in accordance with these provisions, nor shall the Clerk of Superior Court order or direct the recording of a plat if the recording would be in conflict with this section.
§ 9-3012 Statement by the owner.
The owner of land shown on a subdivision plat submitted for recording, or his authorized agent, shall sign a statement on the plat stating whether any land shown thereon is within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction of Town of Erwin, North Carolina.
§ 9-3013 Effect of Plat Approval on Dedications
Pursuant to G. S. 160A-374, the approval of a plat does not constitute or effect the acceptance by the Town of the dedication of any street or other ground, public utility line, or other public facility shown on the plat and shall not be construed to do so.
§ 9-3014 Penalties for Violation.
§ 9-3014.1 After the effective date of this ordinance, any person who, being the owner or
agent of the owner of any land located within the territorial jurisdiction of this ordinance,
thereafter subdivides his land in violation of this ordinance or transfers or sells land by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat has been properly approved under the terms of this ordinance and recorded in the Office of the Harnett County Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The description by meets and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 3-5
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 2 Subdivision
Legal Provisions Regulations
transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The Town through its
attorney or other official designated by the Town Board may enjoin illegal subdivision, transfer or sale of land by action for injunction. Further, violators of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to fine and/or imprisonment as provided by G. S. 14-4.
§ 9-3014.2 The violation of any provision of this ordinance shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00 to be recovered by the Town. Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid within ten (10) days.
§ 9-3014.3 Each day's continuing violation of this ordinance shall be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 9-3014.4 Notwithstanding Subsection 9-3014.2 above, this ordinance may be enforced by appropriate equitable remedies issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 9-3014-5. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the use of remedies available to the Town. The Town may seek to enforce this ordinance by using any one, all, or a combination of remedies.
§ 9-3015 Separability.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be decided by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 9-3016 Variances.
The Erwin Town Board may only authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the Town Board shall make the findings required below, taking into account the nature of the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 3-6
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 2 Subdivision
Legal Provisions Regulations
vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the Town Board finds all four of the following conditions to clearly exist:
a) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property such that the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land.
b) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.
c) That the circumstances giving rise to the need for the variance are peculiar to the parcel and are not generally characteristics of other parcels in the jurisdiction of this ordinance.
d) That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which said property is situated. (Ordinance 2/3/94)
§ 9-3017 Amendments.
The Town Board may from time-to-time amend the terms of this ordinance (but no
amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been
submitted to the Planning Board for review and recommendation). If the Planning Board fails to submit a report within the specified time, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the amendment.
No amendment shall be adopted by the governing body until they have held a public
hearing on the amendment. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Erwin at least once a week for two (2) successive calendar weeks prior to the hearing. The initial notice shall appear not more than twenty-five (25) nor less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. In computing the ten (10)- twenty-five (25)-day period, the date of publication is not to be counted, but the date of the hearing is.
§ 9-3018 Abrogation.
It is not intended that this ordinance repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 3-7
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 2 Subdivision
Legal Provisions Regulations
§ 9-3019 Effective Date.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after __________________________,
§ 9-3020 Adoption.
Duly adopted by the Town of Erwin, North Carolina Board of Commissioners this the
____________ day of____________________.
Mayor Clerk
§ 9-3021 Administration.
This ordinance shall be administered and enforced by an Administrative Officer or the
designated representative who shall be named by the Town Board.
§ 9-3022 Reserved.
(Ordinance 2/3/94)
§ 9-3023 through 9-3024 Reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 3-8
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
§ 9-3025 Plat Shall be Required on Any Subdivision of Land.
Pursuant to G. S. 160A, Article 19, Part 2, a final plat shall be prepared, approved, and recorded pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance whenever any subdivision of land takes place.
§ 9-3026 Approval Prerequisite to Plat Recordation.
Pursuant to G. S. 160A-372, no final plat of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Erwin as established in § 9-3004 of this ordinance shall be recorded by the Register of Deeds of Harnett County until it has been approved as provided herein. To secure such approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall follow the procedures established in this article.
§ 9-3027 Procedure for Review of Major or Minor Subdivisions.
All subdivisions shall be considered major subdivisions except those defined as minor subdivisions in this section. Major subdivisions shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures in § 9-3029 through 9-3033. Minor subdivisions shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions in § 9-3028.
A minor subdivision is defined as one involving no new public or private streets or roads, or right-of-way dedication, no easements, and no utility extension. (Ordinance of 2/3/94) (Amended on May 7, 2009)
Minor Subdivisions shall be further defined as: (a) Any subdivision which creates a maximum of three (3) lots each of which front on a state or town maintained road or (b) Any subdivision which allows a maximum of three (3) lots to be created on a fifty (50) foot easement abutting a state or town maintained road which meets the following requirements:
A. Each lot shall meet the minimum zoning requirements in regards to lot size, use, and frontage at time of the subdivision.
B. An easement cannot be created off of an existing easement or privately maintained road. In addition, all new easements must have a road maintenance agreement approved and recorded alongside the subdivision plat.
C. Easements must be no longer than one thousand (1,000) feet in length total.
D. Access ways for minor subdivisions which allow more than one
(1) lot to be created on any easement, shall be required to meet the following road construction standards:
1. There shall be an access travel way width of a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
2. The travel way shall extend the entire length of the easement.
3. The travel way shall be clear of all obstruction and debris.
4. The travel way shall be compacted and layered with three (3) inches of aggregate base course or improved according to the NCDOT Subdivision Manual, latest edition.
(Amended on February 3, 2011)
§ 9-3028 Procedure for Review of Minor Subdivisions.
§ 9-3028.1 Sketch Plan for Minor Subdivision
Prior to submission of a final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the Subdivision Administrator two (2) copies of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision containing the following information:
a)sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads, and waterways;
b) The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be subdivided;
c) The total acreage to be subdivided;
d) The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision and the existing uses of land adjoining it;
e) The existing street layout and right-of-way width, lot layout and size of lots;
f) The name, address and telephone number of the owner,
g) The name, if any, of the proposed subdivision;
h) Streets and lots of adjacent developed or plated properties;
i) The zoning classification of the tract of adjacent properties;
j) A statement from the Harnett County Health Department that a copy of the sketch plan has been submitted to them, if a septic tank system or other on-site water or wastewater systems are to be used in the subdivision.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 3-9
Part 9 Article 3 Subdivision
Chapter 4 Procedure for Review and Regulations
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
The Subdivision Administrator shall review it for general compliance with the
requirements of this ordinance and the Zoning ordinance; the subdivision administrator shall advise the subdivider or his authorized agent of the regulations pertaining to the proposed subdivision and the procedures to be followed in the preparation and submission of the final plat.
One (1) copy of the sketch plan shall be retained by the subdivision administrator, and one (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his authorized agent.
§ 9-3028.2 Final plat for minor subdivisions.
Upon approval of the sketch plan by the subdivision administrator the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
The subdivider shall submit the final plat so marked, to the Subdivision Administrator who shall review it for compliance.
The final plat shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor currently licensed and registered in the State of North Carolina by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. The final plat shall conform to the provisions for plats, subdivisions, and mapping requirements set forth in G. S. 47-30 and the manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina.
Five copies of the final plat shall be submitted, two (2) of these shall be on reproducible material; three (3) shall be black or blue line paper prints. Material and drawing medium for the original shall be in accordance with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, where applicable, and the requirements of the Harnett County Register of Deeds.
The final plat shall be of a size suitable for recording with the Harnett County Register of Deeds and shall be at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet. Maps may be placed on more than one sheet with appropriate match lines.
Submission of the final plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee per the adopted Town of Erwin Fee Schedule available in the Town Clerk’s office. (Ordinance Amended 6/6/2013)
The final plat shall meet the specification in § 9-3032 of this ordinance.
The following signed certificates shall appear on all five (5) copies of the final plat.
a) Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described hereon, which is
located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of Erwin and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent and establish minimum building setback lines as noted.
Date Owner
b) Certificate of Survey and Accuracy
In accordance with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina:
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-11
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
On the face of each map prepared for recordation there shall appear a certificate
acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgements and executed by the
person making the survey or map including deeds and any recorded data shown thereon. The certificate shall include a statement of error of closure calculated by latitudes and departures. Any lines on the map which were not actually surveyed must be clearly indicated on the map and a statement included in the certificate revealing the source of information.
The certificate shall take the following general form:
State of North Carolina Town of Erwin
I, ____________________ certify that this map was drawn by me (drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book ___________________, Page ______________, Book ___________________, Page ______________, etc.) (other); that the ratio of precision as calculated by latitudes and departures is 1: _________(that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book__________, Page _________); that this map was prepared in accordance with G. S. 47-30, as amended.
Witness my hand and seal this _____ day of ____________, A. D. 20_____.
Registered Land Surveyor
Official Seal
Registration Number
I (officer authorized to take acknowledgements) do hereby certify that (name of registered surveyor) personally appeared before me this day and acknowledged the due
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-12
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
execution of this certificate. Witness my hand and (where an official seal is required by law) official seal this the ______________ day of ______ (year).
Notary Public
Official Seal
The subdivision administrator shall have the authority to approve all minor subdivisions, provided that all of the applicable requirements are met.
If the subdivision administrator approves the final plat, such approval shall be shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate:
Certificate of Approval for Recording
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown herein has been found to comply with the Subdivision Ordinance of Town of Erwin, North Carolina and that this plat has been approved for recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Harnett Count
Subdivision Administrator Date
Erwin, North Carolina
If the final plat is disapproved by the subdivision administrator, the reasons for such
disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of this ordinance with which the final plat does not comply. One (1) copy of such reasons and one (1) plat shall be retained by the subdivision administrator as part of the records; one (1) copy of the reason and three (3) copies of the plat shall be transmitted to the subdivider. If the final plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make such changes as will bring the final plat into compliance and resubmit same for reconsideration by the subdivision administrator, or appeal the decision to the Erwin Town Board. Before rendering a final ruling, the Erwin Town Board may utilize the services of
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-13
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
the Town Engineer, if such services are determined to be required. In such a case, all engineering expenses shall be paid by the subdivider.
If the final plat is approved by the subdivision administrator, the original tracing and one
(1) print of the plat shall be retained by the subdivider. One (1) reproducible tracing and one (1) print shall be filed with the Town Clerk, and one (1) print shall be retained by the subdivision administrator for the records.
The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the Register of Deeds of Harnett County within thirty (30) days of the approval; otherwise such approval shall be null and void. (Ordinance of 2/3/94)
§ 9-3029 Sketch Plan for Major Subdivisions.
§ 9-3029.1 Number of Copies and Contents
Prior to the preliminary plat submission, the subdivider shall submit to the subdivision administrator two (2) copies of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision containing the following information.
a) A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the Subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads, and waterways;
b) The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be subdivided;
c) The total acreage to be subdivided;
d) The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision and the existing uses of land adjoining it;
e) The proposed street layout with approximate pavement and right-of-way width, lot layout and size of lots;
f) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner;
g) The name, if any, of the proposed subdivision;
h) Streets and lots of adjacent developed or plated properties;
i) The zoning classification of the tract and of adjacent properties;
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-14
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
j) A statement from the Harnett County Health Department that a copy of the sketch plan has been submitted to them, if a septic tank system or other on-site water or wastewater systems are to be used in the subdivision.
§ 9-3029.2 Submission and Review Procedure
The Subdivision Administrator shall review the sketch plan for general compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the zoning ordinance; the Subdivision Administrator shall advise the subdivider or his authorized agent of the regulations pertaining to the proposed subdivision and the procedures to be followed in the preparation and submission of the preliminary and final plats.
One (1) copy of the sketch plan shall be retained by the subdivision administrator and one (1) copy shall be returned to subdivider or his authorized agent.
§ 9-3030 Preliminary Plat Submission and Review.
§ 9-3030.1 Submission Procedure
For every subdivision within the territorial jurisdiction established by § 9-3004 of this
ordinance, which does not qualify for the abbreviated procedure, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat which shall be reviewed and considered for approval by the Planning Board, with final approval being required by the Erwin Town Board.
Twenty (20) copies of the preliminary plat (as well as any additional copies which the Planning Board or Town Board determines are needed to be sent to other agencies) shall be submitted to the Subdivision Administrator at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting. Upon officially receiving the preliminary plat, the Planning Board shall make no recommendations for approval to the Erwin Town Board until the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting.
Preliminary plats shall meet the specifications in § 9-3032. (Ordinance of 2/3/94)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-15
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
§ 9-3030.2 Review by Other Agencies.
Concurrent with submission of the preliminary plat to the Subdivision Administrator, the subdivider shall submit copies of the preliminary plat and any accompanying material to other officials and agencies concerned with new development including but not limited to: the district highway engineer as to proposed streets, highways, and drainage systems; the Harnett County Health Director as to proposed water and sewerage systems; the North Carolina Department of Natural Resources and Community Development Land Quality Section as to the erosion control requirements; and any other agency or official designated by the Planning Board for review and recommendation. The Subdivision administrator will inform the subdivider which agencies are applicable for a given plat.
§ 9-3030.3 Review Procedure
If the Planning Board recommends approval of the preliminary plat, it shall be submitted to the Erwin Town Board for consideration of final approval. If the Erwin Town Board approves the preliminary plat, such approval shall be noted on two (2) copies of the plat. One (1) copy of the plat shall be retained by the Town Board and one (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider. If the Town Board approves the preliminary plat with conditions, approval shall be noted on two (2) copies of the plat along with a reference to the conditions. One (1) copy of the plat along with the conditions shall be retained by the Town Board and one (1) copy of the preliminary plat along with the conditions shall be returned to the subdivider. If the Town Board disapproves the preliminary plat, the reasons for such disapproval shall be specified in writing. One (1) copy of the plat and reasons shall be retained by the Town Board and one (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider. At any time during its review of the preliminary plat, the Town Board may choose to utilize the services of the Town Engineer to assist in the review process. The costs of these engineering services shall be paid for by the subdivider.
If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make the recommended changes and submit a revised preliminary plat.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-16
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
§ 9-3031 Final Plat Submission and Review
§ 9-3031.1 Preparation of Final Plat and Installation of Improvements
Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Town Board, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and the installation of or arrangement for required improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this ordinance. Prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall have installed the improvements specified in this ordinance or guaranteed their installation as provided herein. No final plat will be approved by the Erwin Town Board unless accompanied by written notice of the subdivision administrator and certification of the Town Engineer, acknowledging compliance with the improvements and guarantee standards of this ordinance. (Ordinance of 2/3/94)
§ 9-3031.2 Improvements Guarantees
Agreement and Security Required
In lieu of requiring the completion, installation, and dedication of all improvements prior to final plat approval the Erwin Town Board may enter into an agreement with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall agree to complete all required improvements. Once said agreement is signed by both parties and the security required herein is provided, the final plat may be approved by the Planning Board, if all other requirements of this ordinance are met. To secure this agreement, the subdivider shall provide, subject to the approval of the Town Board, either one or a combination of the following guarantees not exceeding 1.25 times the entire cost as provided herein.
Surety Performance Bond(s)
The subdivider shall obtain a performance bond(s) from a surety bonding company
authorized to do business in North Carolina. The bonds shall be payable to the Town of Erwin and shall be in an amount equal to 1.25 times the entire cost, as estimated by the subdivider
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-17
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
and approved by the Town Board, of installing all required improvements. The duration of the bond(s) shall be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the Town Board.
2. Cash or Equivalent Security
The subdivider shall deposit cash, an irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument
readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the Town or in escrow with a financial
institution designated as an official depository of the Town. The use of any instrument other than cash shall be subject to the approval of the Town Board. The amount of deposit shall be equal to 1.25 times the cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the Town Board, of installing all required improvements.
If cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow with a financial institution as provided above, then the subdivider shall file with the Town Board an agreement between the financial institution and himself guaranteeing the following:
(i) That said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the Town
Board and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider in any other matter during the term of
the escrow; and
(ii) That in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to complete said
improvements the financial institution shall, upon notification by the Town Board, and
submission by the Town Board to the financial institution of an engineer's estimate of the
amount needed to complete the improvements, immediately either pay to the Town the funds estimated to complete the improvement, up to the full balance of the escrow account, or deliver to the Town any other instruments fully endorsed or otherwise made payable in full to the Town.
b) Default
Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the subdivider to complete the required
improvements in a timely manner as spelled out in the performance bond or escrow agreement, then the surety, or the financial institution holding the escrow account shall if requested by the Town Board, pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow fund to the Town of Erwin up to the
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-18
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
amount needed to complete the improvements based on the Town engineer’s estimate. Upon payment, the Town Board, in its discretion, may expend such portion of said funds, as it deems necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements. The Town shall return to the subdivider any funds not spent in completing the improvements.
c) Release of Guarantee Security
The Town Board may release a portion of any security posted as the improvements are completed and approved by the Town Engineer. When the Town Board approves said improvements, then the Town Board shall immediately release any security posted.
§ 9-3031.3 Submission Procedure
The subdivider shall submit the final plat, so marked, to the subdivision administrator,
who shall forward it to the Erwin Town Board for review at their next regular meeting; further the final plat for the first stage of the subdivision shall be submitted not more than twelve (12) months after the date on which the preliminary plat was approved; otherwise such approval shall be null and void, unless a written extension of this limit is granted by the Erwin Town Board on or before the twelve (12) month anniversary of the approval.
The final plat shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor currently licensed and registered in the State of North Carolina by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. The final plat shall conform to the provisions for plats, subdivisions, and mapping requirements set forth in G. S. 47-30 and the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina.
Five (5) copies of the final plat shall be submitted; two (2) of these shall be on
reproducible material; three (3) shall be black or blue line paper prints. Material and drawing
medium for the original shall be in accordance with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, where applicable, and the requirements of the Harnett County Register of Deeds.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-19
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
The final plat shall be of a size suitable for recording with the Harnett County Register of Deeds and shall be at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet. Maps may be placed on more than one (1) sheet with appropriate match lines.
Submission of the final plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee per the adopted Town of Erwin Fee Schedule available in the Town Clerk’s office. (Ordinance 6/6/2013)
The final plat shall meet the requirements in § 9-3032 of this ordinance.
The following signed certificates shall appear on all five (5) copies of the final plat:
Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of Erwin and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent, establish minimum building setback lines and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites and easements to public or private use as noted. Furthermore, I hereby dedicate all sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water lines to the Town of Erwin.
DATE OWNERS
b) Certificate of Survey and Accuracy
In accordance with the manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina.
On the face of each map prepared for recordation there shall appear a certificate acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgements and executed by the person making the survey or map including deeds and any recorded data shown thereon. The certificate shall include a statement or error of closure calculated by latitudes and departures. Any lines on the map which were not actually surveyed must be clearly indicated on the map and a statement included in the certificate revealing the source of information.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-20
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
The certificate shall take the following general form:
I, ______________________, certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my
supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book _________________, Page____, Book
__________________, Page ____, etc.) (other); that the ratio of precision as calculated by latitudes and departure is 1: _____. (that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book ___________, Page ___________): that this map was prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30 as amended. Witness my hand and seal this ________day of ___________, A.D. 20 ___.
Registered Land Surveyor Registration Number
Official Seal
I, (officer authorized to take acknowledgements) do hereby certify that (name of registered surveyor) personally appeared before me this day and acknowledged and due execution of this certificate. Witness my hand and (where an official seal is required by law) official seal this the _______day of ___________ (year).
Notary Public
Official Seal
c) Installation of Streets, Utilities, and Other Required Improvements.
I hereby certify that all streets, utilities and other required improvements have been
installed in a manner approved by the appropriate state or local authority and according to Town specifications and standards in the __________________________ Subdivision or that
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-21
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
guarantees of the installation of the required improvements in an amount and manner
satisfactory to Town of Erwin has been received, and that the filing fee for this plat, in the amount of $__________ has been paid.
Subdivision Administrator Date
The Erwin Town Board shall review the final plat at or before its next regularly scheduled meeting which follows at least fifteen (15) days after the Erwin Town Board receives the final plat and shall approve, or disapprove of the final plat with reasons within forty (40) days of its first consideration of the plat.
During its review of the final plat the Erwin Town Board shall have its Town Engineer to confirm the accuracy of the final plat. The costs for these engineering services shall be paid by the subdivider.
If the Erwin Town Board approves the final plat, such approval shall be shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate:
Certificate of Approval for Recording
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with
the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Erwin, North Carolina, and that this plat has been
approved by the Erwin Town Planning Board for recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Harnett County.
Chairman of the Planning Board Date
Erwin, North Carolina
If the final plat is disapproved by the Erwin Town Board, the reasons for such
disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of this ordinance with which the
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-22
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3 Subdivision
Procedure for Review and Regulations
Approval of Subdivision Plats
final plat does not comply. One (1) copy of such reasons and one (1) print of the plat shall be retained by the Erwin
Town Board as part of its proceedings; one (1) copy of the reasons and three (3) copies of the plat shall be transmitted to the subdivider. If the final plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make such changes as will bring the final plat into compliance and resubmit same for reconsideration by the Erwin Town Board.
If the final plat is approved by the Planning Board, the original tracing and one (1) print of the plat shall be retained by the subdivider. One (1) reproducible tracing and one (1) print shall be filed with the Town Clerk, and one (1) print shall be retained by the Planning Board for its records.
The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the Register of Deeds of Harnett
County within six (6) months of Planning Board approval; otherwise such approval shall be null and void. (Ordinance of 2/3/94)
§ 9-3032 Information to be Contained in or Depicted on Preliminary and Final Plat.
The preliminary and final plats shall depict or contained the information indicated in the
following table:
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-23
Part 9
Chapter 3
Title Block Containing
Property designation Name of owner
Article 3
Procedure for Review and Approval of Subdivision Plats
Plats
Information
Subdivision
Regulations
Preliminary Final
??????
????????
Location (including township, county and state) ??????
Date or dates survey was conducted and plat prepared ??????
A scale of drawing in feet per inch listed in words or figures ??????
A bar graph ??????
Name, address, registration number and seal of the Registered Land Surveyor ??????
The name of the subdivider ??????
A sketch vicinity map showing the relationship between the proposed ??????
subdivision and surrounding area
Corporate limits, township boundaries, county lines if on the subdivision tract ??????
The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners, ??????
mortgagees, registered land surveyors, land planners, architects, and
professional engineers responsible for the subdivision
The registration numbers and seals of the professional engineers ??????
Date of plat preparation ??????
North arrow and orientation ??????
The boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to be subdivided, distinctly ??????
and accurately represented with all bearings and distances shown
The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, fully ??????
dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the location of existing
boundary lines of adjoining lands
The names of owners of adjoining properties ??????
The names of any adjoining subdivisions of record or proposed and ??????
under review
Minimum building setback lines ??????
The zoning classifications of the tract to be subdivided and adjoining ??????
properties
Existing property lines on the tract to be subdivided and on adjoining ??????
properties
Existing buildings or other structures, water courses, railroads, bridges, ??????
culverts, storm drains, both on the land to be subdivided and land
immediately adjoining
Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers, and approximate dimensions ??????
The lots numbered consecutively throughout the subdivision ??????
Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes, or ??????
streambeds and any streams other natural features affecting the site
The exact location of the flood hazard, floodway and floodway fringe ??????
areas from the community's FHBM or other FEMA maps
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-24
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3
Procedure for Review and Approval of Subdivision Plats
Plats
Information
Subdivision
Regulations
Preliminary Final
The following data concerning streets: ??????
Proposed streets ??????
Existing and plated streets on adjoining properties and in the proposed ??????
subdivision
Rights-of-way, locations and dimensions ??????
Payment widths ????1
Approximate grades ????1
Design engineering data for all corners and curves ??????
Typical street cross sections ??????
Street names ??????
Type of street dedication; all streets must be designated either “public" ??????
or "private". Where public streets are involved which will not be
dedicated to a municipality, the subdivider must submit the following documents to the N. C. Department of Transportation District Highway Office for review: a complete site layout, including any future expansion anticipated; horizontal alignment indicating general curve data on site layout plan; vertical alignment indicated by percent grade, PI station and vertical curve length on site plan layout; (the District Engineer may require the plotting of the ground profile and grade line for roads where special conditions or problems exist);
1-Required on preliminary and final plats for major subdivisions and required only on a final plats for minor subdivisions.
Typical section indicating the pavement design and width and the
slopes, widths and details for either the curb and gutter or the shoulder and ditch proposed; drainage facilities and drainage areas.
Where streets are dedicated to the public, but not accepted into a ???
municipal or the state system before lots are sold, a statement explaining the status of the street.
If any street is proposed to intersect with a state maintained road, the subdivider shall apply for driveway approval as required by the North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of Highways' Manual on Driveway Ordinance
Evidence that the subdivider has obtained such approval ??????
The location and dimensions of all:
Utility and other easements ??????
Riding trails ??????
Natural buffers ??????
Pedestrian or bicycle paths ??????
Parks and recreation areas with specific type indicated ??????
School sites ??????
Areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public use ??????
Areas to be used for purposes other than residential with the purpose of ??????
each stated
Plats
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-25
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 3
Procedure for Review and Approval of Subdivision Plats
Information
Subdivision
Regulations
Preliminary Final
The future ownership (dedication or reservation for public use to governmental ??????
body, for owners to duly constituted homeowners' association, or for tenants
remaining in subdivider's ownership) of recreation and open space lands
The plans for utility layouts including:
Public or Community Sewage System (if any) ????1
Storm sewers ????1
Other drainage facilities, (if any) ????1
Public water system (if any) ????1
Natural gas lines ????1
Telephone lines ????1
Electric lines ????1
Illustrating connections to existing systems, showing line sizes, the location of
fire hydrants, blow offs, manholes, force mains and gate valves.
Plans for individual water supply and septic tank systems, if any. ??????
Profiles based upon Mean Sea Level datum for sanitary sewers and storm ???
sewers
Site calculations including: -Acreage in total tract to be subdivided. ???
Acreage in parks and recreation areas and other nonresidential uses. ???
1-Required on preliminary and final plats for major subdivisions and required only on a final plats for
minor subdivisions.
Total number of parcels in created ???
Acreage the smallest lot in the subdivision ???
Linear feet in streets ???
The name and location of any property or buildings within the proposed ??????
subdivision or within any contiguous property that is located on the U.S.
Department of Interior's National Register of Historic Places-
Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground ???
every straight or curved line, street line, lot line, right-of-way line, easement line, and setback line, including dimensions, bearings, or deflection angles, radii, central angles, and tangent distance for the center line of curved property lines that are not the boundary line of curved streets. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and all angles to the nearest minute.
The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers and control ???
points.
A copy of any proposed deed restrictions or similar covenants. Such ??????
restrictions are mandatory when private recreation areas are established.
A copy of the erosion control plan submitted to the appropriate authority, and a ??????
copy of the letter of approval of the erosion control plan by the appropriate
authority.
Topographic map with contour intervals of five feet ??????
All certifications required in § 9-3031 ??????
??
??
??
??
??
??
??
??
??
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-26
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 4
Required Improvements, Dedication, Reservation, Minimum Standards of Design
Subdivision Regulations
§ 9-3035 General.
Each subdivision shall contain the improvements specified in this article, which shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and paid for by the subdivider, unless other means of financing is specifically stated in this ordinance. Land shall be dedicated and reserved in each subdivision as specified in this article. Each subdivision shall adhere to the minimum standards of design established by this article.
§ 9-3036 Suitability of Land.
§ 9-3036.1 Land which has been determined by the Town Board, on the basis of engineering or other expert surveys, to pose an ascertainable danger to life or property by reason of its unsuitability for the use proposes shall not be plated for that purpose, unless and until the subdivider has taken the necessary measures to correct said conditions to eliminate said dangers.
§ 9-3036.2 Areas that have been used for disposal of solid waste shall not be subdivided
unless tests by the Harnett County Health Department, a structural engineer and a soils expert determine that the land is suitable for the purpose proposed.
§ 9-3036.3 All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
§ 9-3037 Name Duplication.
The Name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision within the Town of Erwin and its extraterritorial jurisdiction area.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-27
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 4
Required Improvements, Dedication, Reservation, Minimum Standards of Design
Subdivision Regulations
§ 9-3038 Subdivision Design.
§ 9-3038.1 Blocks
a) block lengths shall not exceed fourteen hundred (1400) feet or be less than four hundred (400) feet.
b) Blocks should have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate
depth except where otherwise required to separate residential development from other types of development.
c) Where deemed necessary by the Planning Board, a pedestrian crosswalk at least fifteen (15) feet in width may be required to provide convenient public access to a public area such as a park or school, to a water area, or to areas such as shopping centers, religious or transportation facilities.
§ 9-3038.2 Lots
1) All lots in new subdivisions shall conform with the dimensional requirements contained in the Town of Erwin's Zoning Ordinance.
2) Every lot shall front or abut a public street or shall have access to a public street via an approved private street or drive. Approved private streets and drives shall meet the following requirements:
a) The street or drive must be adequately designed to allow access by public service and public safety vehicles.
b) A permanent easement shall be recorded allowing use by the lot owners and building occupants; and by public service and safety agencies.
c) The developer/subdivider shall execute and record an approved statement waiving any claims for damages resulting from normal use by public service and safety agencies, waiving rights to request municipal maintenance in the future (unless designed and constructed to Town street standards), acknowledging public agencies' rights to discontinue services unless the street or drive is maintained property, and establishing responsibility for continuing maintenance of the private nature of the street or drive shall also be included as covenant in all transfers of lots or units in the development.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-28
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 4
Required Improvements, Dedication, Reservation, Minimum Standards of Design
Subdivision Regulations
d) Private streets and drives shall be clearly labeled "private" on all plats.
3. Where public water and sewer facilities are not available, every lot shall contain not less than the area prescribed in the zoning ordinance of the Town for the appropriate zone or zones in which the subdivision exists.
4. Where public water and sewer facilities are not available each residential lot shall contain a minimum of 20,000 square feet. Where community water supply is available and sewer facilities are not available each residential lot shall contain a minimum of 15,000 square feet. In no event shall the lot area be less than that prescribed for the area by the zoning regulations.
5. Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra width of twenty (25) feet to permit adequate building setback from side streets.
6. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to separate residential development from through traffic. A buffer strip shall then be deeded to the Town to alleviate this problem.
7. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight streets or radial to curved streets, whenever possible.
8. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial use and industrial purposed shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.
§ 9-3038.3 Buffer Strips
It is recommended that in residential districts a buffer strip at least ninety (90) feet in depth, in addition to the normal lot depth required, be provided adjacent to all railroads, limited access highways, and commercial developments. This strip shall be a part of the platted lots, but shall have the following restriction lettered on the face of the plat: "This strip reserved for the planting of trees or shrubs by the developer; the building of structures hereon is prohibited.'' (Ordinance 2/3/94)
§ 9-3038.4 Traffic Signs and Street Signs
Street name signs shall be uniform and ordered through the Town. Costs shall be borne by the subdivider. These signs shall not be a part of the improvements for which a guarantee is
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-29
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 4
Required Improvements, Dedication, Reservation, Minimum Standards of Design
Subdivision Regulations
required. They must be paid for and ordered before the final plat is approved. The signs shall be installed by the Town.
§ 9-3038.5 Drainage, Grading
a) Lots shall be graded so that water drains away from each building. Surface drainage swales shall be designed so that surface water will drain into a driveway, street gutter or ditch, drain inlet or natural drainageway.
b) Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream or drainage
way, an easement of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided conforming with the lines of the stream and of sufficient width to be adequate of the minimum used in design.
§ 9-3038.6 Connection to Sewer System
a) All subdivision lots within the Town limits shall be served by the Town's sewer system unless the Town is unable to add new customers onto to the system.
b) All subdivision lots of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or less in the Town's
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be served by the Town's sewer system if any portion of the
subdivision is within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a Town manhole or gravity sewer line, unless the Town is unable to add new customers onto the system.
§ 9-3038.7 Streets
a) Generally in any new subdivision, the street layout shall conform to the
arrangement, width and location indicated on any current official plans or maps for the Town. In areas for which such plans have not been designed and located in proper relation to the existing and proposed streets, to the topography, to such natural features as streams and tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of land to be served by such streets.
(1) All streets shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of
principal streets in surrounding areas and provide reasonable means of ingress and egress for surrounding tracts. The Town reserves the right to require the subdivider to extend the dedicated right-of-way for any subdivision street, existing or proposed, to any property line. All
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-30
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 4
Required Improvements, Dedication, Reservation, Minimum Standards of Design
Subdivision Regulations
streets and roads shall be paved and constructed according to the specification of the North Carolina Department of Transportation and the Town of Erwin.
(2) The proposed street layout shall be made according to good land planning practice for the type of development proposed and shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding areas. All streets must provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of principal streets in surrounding areas and provide reasonable means of ingress and egress for surrounding acreage tracts.
(b) Street Classifications.
(1) Major streets and thoroughfares shall be planned for continuation of
movement of fast traffic between points of heavy traffic generation and from one section of the community to another. They shall contain as few intersections with minor streets as possible. Such thoroughfares should traverse the community and should be spaced approximately one
(1) mile apart.
(2) Collector streets shall provide a traffic route from minor streets to major thoroughfares.
(3) Minor residential streets shall be connecting or loop streets, that shall provide direct and full access to each lot and shall be laid out so that their use by flow through traffic is not encouraged. Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets may also fall under this description if specified conditions exist.
(4) Marginal access streets shall be cul-de-sacs or dead end roads directly
serving no more than twenty lots. A marginal access street meeting this description may serve as a feeder to other marginal access streets, provided that the total number of lots directly and indirectly accessed does not exceed thirty. In any case, if more than thirty lots are serviced indirectly and directly, the “feeder street” shall be described as a minor residential street and shall comply with all applicable restrictions.
(5) Service drives shall be designed to provide only secondary access.
(6) Rural streets are local streets in rural areas where lot size, rural zoning and lack of centralized services preclude the need for curbs and gutters (c) Right-of-way widths. Minimum street right-of-way width shall be as shown in the thoroughfare plan of the community and not less than the following:
1. Major streets and thoroughfares 80 feet
2. Collector streets 60 feet
3. Minor (residential) streets 60 feet
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-31
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 4
Required Improvements, Dedication, Reservation, Minimum Standards of Design
Subdivision Regulations
A minimum right-of-way width of fifty feet is acceptable when adequate rolled curbing or
curb and guttering is provided, in lieu of open drainage swells.
4. Marginal access streets 50 feet
5. Cul-de-sacs, 100 feet (diameter)
(d) Pavement widths. Paving widths for the following streets shall be no less than the
following:
1. Major streets and thoroughfares 48 feet
2. Collector streets 30 feet
3. Minor (residential) streets 22 feet
4. Marginal access streets 22 feet
5. Cul-de-sacs, 80 feet (diameter)
(e) Grades. Unless necessitated by the exceptional topography and subject to the
approval of the Erwin Town Board, the grades shall be not more than 10 percent (10%) nor less than one quarter of one percent (.25%) on any street.
(1) Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed 5 percent (5%) for a distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet from the centerline of said intersection.
(2) Streets grades shall be established wherever practicable in such a manner as to avoid excessive grading, the promiscuous removal of ground cover and tree growth and general leveling of topography.
(3) All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a
minimum length equivalent in feet to fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference in the rates of
grade for major and collector streets, and one-half (1/2) this minimum for all other streets.
(f) Cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets. Streets designed to be permanently ended shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn around having an outside pavement diameter of at least eighty (80) feet and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet. If such street is of a temporary nature and a further extension into adjacent land is anticipated, then said turning circle, but beyond the boundaries of the street proper. Such easements shall be automatically vacated to abutting property owners, when said dead-end street is legally extended into adjacent land. If such dead- end street extends only one lot depth past a street intersection, no turnaround will be required.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-32
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 4
Required Improvements, Dedication, Reservation, Minimum Standards of Design
Subdivision Regulations
(g) Corner radii. Property line at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet for major streets or thoroughfares, thirty (30) feet for collector and industrial streets, and twenty (20) feet for local streets. Chords of cutoff may be permitted in place of rounded corners.
(h) Horizontal curves. Angles in the alignment of street lines shall be connected by a curb with a radius on the center line of not less than two hundred (200) feet for local streets, three hundred (300) feet for collector and industrial streets, and five hundred (500) feet for major arterial thoroughfares. Between reverse curves there shall be a tangent at least one hundred (100) feet along major arterial thoroughfares.
(i) Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be prohibited.
(j) Names and numbers of streets.
(1) Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing of platted street names unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing platted streets.
(2) House numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the house numbering system now in effect in the Town. All new streets shall be named in accordance with ordinance regulations of the Town.
(k) Tangents. A tangent at least-one hundred (100) feet long shall be provided between all reverse curbs on all streets.
(l) Intersections with a major street or highway shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart. (Ordinance of 2/3/94)(Ordinance of 5/3/94)
§ 9-3039 Improvements
Monuments
Monuments and markers shall be installed in accordance with the "Manual of Practice for Land Surveying", published by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-33
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 4
Required Improvements, Dedication, Reservation, Minimum Standards of Design
Subdivision Regulations
§ 9-3039.2 Streets
(a) Grading. All streets shall be cleared and graded to their full right-of-way width so as to provide adequate shoulders and pedestrian walkways. Finished grades, cross section, and profile shall be approved by the Town Board, after inspection by the Town Subdivision Administrator and the Town Engineer.
(b) Paving. The subdivider will be responsible for the installation of the road base and paving necessary to serve his needs and meet the requirements of this ordinance. Paving and base shall be installed in accordance with Town specifications and shall be approved by the subdivision administrator.
(c) Streets shall be designed, constructed and paved to the North Carolina Department of Transportation Minimum Construction Standards for Subdivision Roads. (July 1, 1985)
§ 9-3039.3 Reserved. (Ordinance of 2/3/94)
§ 9-3039.4 Storm Drainage.
Storm drainage shall be provided by the use of open swells, whose slopes shall not exceed a 3 to 1 ratio of fall. In cases where drainage swells may exceed these limits, storm sewers, drainage pipes, catch basins, etc., shall be required in accordance with city specifications, and shall be approved by the Town Engineer. Further these swells shall be no closer than six feet from the edge of the pavement. These six feet shoulders between the pavement edge and the drainage swells shall have a maximum slope of 12 to 1. (Ordinance of 2/3/94)
§ 9-3039.5 Utilities
Water mains shall be a minimum of six (6) inches. Water mains and sewers installed by the subdivider shall be installed according to Town specifications and approved by the Subdivision Administrator.
§ 9-3039.6 Street Lights
The subdivider shall arrange with the Town for the installation of streetlights in the subdivision.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-34
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 5 Subdivision
Construction and Regulations
Acceptance Procedure
§ 9-3040 Construction procedure
(a) No construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a subdivision until the preliminary plan has been approved by the Erwin Town Board. (b) Inspection. The subdivider, prior to starting any work within the subdivision, shall make arrangements with Town manager and Subdivision Administrator to provide for adequate inspection. Completed work must be approved before release of the guarantee. (c) Access. The Town Manager and Subdivision Administrator shall have access to premises and structures during reasonable hours to make inspections which insure compliance with this chapter. (Ordinance of 2/3/94)
§ 9-3041 Final inspection
Upon completion of all improvements including roads, grading, culverts, seedings, mulching, monumentation, street name signs and other items, the developer shall notify the Town Manager or Subdivision Administrator, by letter, that all of the improvements have been completed. The Town Engineer and Subdivision Administrator shall then inspect the site and either recommend acceptance of the project to the Erwin Town Board, or provide the developers a list of defects to be corrected prior to this recommendation. (Ordinance of 2/3/94)
§ 9-3042 "As built" drawings.
At the completion of the construction and before acceptance, the subdivider's engineer shall deliver to the Subdivision Administrator one (1) set of linen or mylar tracing for permanent record, showing the locations, sizes, and elevations of all improvements as constructed.
§ 9-3043 Defects guarantee.
The Town shall require a guarantee on utility taps, ramps, streets, pavement, drainage facilities, water and sewer lines, and other improvements against defects for one (1) year from
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-35
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 5 Subdivision
Construction and Regulations
Acceptance Procedure
the date of acceptance of construction and/or installation. The amount shall be in the amount determined by the Town Manager in consultation with the developer's engineers and/or surveyors. One of the guarantees listed under § 9-3033.2. herein shall be used. The defects guarantee shall, however, be satisfied if the subdivider presents a contract or other forms of written evidence that the contractor building the required improvements guarantees those improvements to the Town or a period of one (1) year from the date of acceptance by the Town.
§ 9-3044 Acceptance
Acceptance is not final until such a motion has been passed by the Board of
Commissioners.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-36
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 6 Subdivision
Definitions Regulations
§ 9-3045 "Subdivision Defined:
For the purposes of this ordinance, "subdivision" means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not be included within this definition nor be subject to any the regulations enacted pursuant to this ordinance.
a) The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality as shown in this ordinance;
b) The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved;
c) The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets, and
d) The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two
(2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality as shown in this ordinance.
9-3045.1Exempt Plat/Plan Procedures (Ordinance Amended 6/6/2013)
Exempt plats/plans, although exempt from the subdivision regulations of this Ordinance, shall meet all other requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance, as well as other local, State, and Federal regulations, as applicable.
A. A soils evaluation shall be submitted, performed by an appropriately licensed profession, on all lots meeting the above criteria for subdivision exemption with on-site septic systems to verify that the entire system and repair area are contained within the proposed new lot lines. Such evaluation shall include statements regarding the functionality of the existing system, conformity to setback requirements of the Harnett County Department of Public Health, adequate repair area, and all other items necessary for staff to evaluate whether conformity to 15A NCAC 18A.900 (checking with HC to ensure this is the correct rule #) is met. Permits for existing on-site systems may be used as verification for this purpose.
B. In all other cases of Exempt Plat/Plans where a soils evaluation is not required by this Ordinance, the plat/plan shall note that an evaluation was not applicable.
C. Affix the applicable Floodplain Notation on exempt plat/plans:
The parcels of land as shown on this plat are located in a 100 year floodplain FEMA Panel Number ______
OR
The parcels of land as shown on this plat are not located in a 100 year floodplain.
D. Affix the applicable Watershed Notation on exempt plat/plans:
The parcels of land as shown on this plat are located in the __________________Watershed.
OR
The parcels of land as shown on this plat are not located in a Watershed.
9-3045.3 Exempt Plat/Plan Fee
Submission of a recombination plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee per the adopted Town of Erwin Fee Schedule available in the Town Clerk’s office.
9-3045.3 Exempt Plat/Plan Certificates (Ordinance 6/6/2013)
The following signed certificates shall appear on each copy of a recombination plat:
a.Combination/Recombination Certificate
I certify to the best of my ability I have determined that this plat or map is exempt from the Town of Erwin Subdivision Ordinance because it is a combination or recombination of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the Town of Erwin’s Subdivision Ordinance, therefore, NO APPROVAL IS REQUIRED.
Town of Erwin Planning Director Date
b.Owner Certificate
We (I), the undersigned, being the owners of all affected parcels of land shown on this plat, do hereby certify that We (I) are (am) the owners of the property shown and described hereon, which is located in the Planning Jurisdiction of the Town of Erwin, and that We (I) hereby agree to the recombination as shown.
_____________________________________ _________________
Signed Date
_____________________________________ __________________
Signed Date
§ 9-3046 Other Definitions
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows:
Block. A piece of land bounded on one or more sides by streets or roads.
Building Setback Line. A line parallel to the front property line in front of which no structure shall be erected. Setbacks shall be figured from the right-of-way line.
Dedication. A gift by the owner, or a right to use of land for a specified purpose or purposes.
Because a transfer of property rights is entailed, dedication must be made by written instrument, and is completed with an acceptance.
Easement. A grant by the property owner of a strip of land for a specified purpose and use by the public, a corporation, or persons.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-37
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 6 Subdivision
Definitions Regulations
Half Street. A street whose centerline coincides with a subdivision plat boundary, with one-half (1/2) the street right-of-way width being contained within the subdivision plat. Also, any existing street to which the parcel of land to be subdivided abuts on only one side. Lot. A portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit of transfer of ownership or for development or both.
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the Office of Register of Deeds of Harnett County prior to the adoption of this ordinance, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
Lot Types:
Corner Lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Double Frontage Lot. A continuous (through) lot which is accessible from both streets upon which it fronts.
Interior Lot. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on more than one street.
Through Lot or a "Double Frontage Lot." A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double frontage lots. Reversed Frontage Lot. A lot on which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles (interior angles less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees) to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot, an interior lot or a through lot. Single-Tier Lot. A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a railroad, a physical barrier, or another type of land use and to which access from the rear is usually prohibited. Official Maps or Plans. Any maps or plans officially adopted by the Erwin Town Board of Commissioners.
Open Space. An area (land and/or water) generally lacking in man-made structures and reserved for enjoyment in its unaltered state.
Plat. A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been subdivided.
Public Water System. A system for the provision to the public of piped water for human
consumption if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-38
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 6 Subdivision
Definitions Regulations
Public or Community Sewage System. A single system of sewage collection, treatment, and disposal owned and operated by a sanitary district, a metropolitan sewage district, a water and sewer authority, a county or municipality, or a public utility.
Private Driveway. A roadway serving two (2) or fewer lots, building sites or other division of land and not intended to be public ingress or egress.
Private Street. A undedicated private right-of-way which affords access to abutting properties and requires a subdivision streets disclosure statement in accordance with G.S. 136-102.6. Reservation. A reservation of land does not involve any transfer of property rights. It simply constitutes an obligation to keep property free from development for a stated period of time. Septic Tank System. A ground absorption sewage treatment and disposal system consisting of a septic tank and a nitrification field, necessary pipelines, conduits, pump stations, and other appurtenances required for proper collection, distribution, treatment, disposal, operation and performance, or any other system approved by the Health Department.
Street. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic (or a private road only if permitted by this ordinance). The following classifications shall apply:
Rural Roads
Principal-Arterial. A rural link in a network of continuous routes serving corridor movements having trip length and travel density characteristics indicative of substantial statewide or interstate travel and existing solely to serve traffic. This network would consist of interstate routes and other routes designed as principal arterials.
Minor Arterial. A rural link in a network joining cities and larger towns and providing intrastate and intercounty service at relatively high overall travel speeds with minimum interference to through movement. This network would primarily serve traffic.
Major Collector. A road which serves major intracounty travel corridors and traffic generators and provides access to the arterial system.
Minor Collector. A road which provides service to small local communities and links locally important traffic generators with their rural hinterland.
Local Road/Street. A local road serves primarily to provide access to adjacent land and for travel over relatively short distances.
Specific Type Rural or Urban Streets
Freeway, Expressway, or Parkway. Divided multilane roadway designed to carry large
volumes of traffic at relatively high speeds. A freeway is a divided highway providing for
continuous flow of vehicles with no direct access to abutting property or streets and with access
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-39
Part 9
Chapter 3
Article 6 Subdivision
Definitions Regulations
to selected crossroads provided via connecting ramps. An expressway is a divided highway with full or partial control of access and generally with grade separations at major intersections. A parkway is a highway for noncommercial traffic, with full or partial control of access, and usually located within a park or a ribbon of park-like development.
Residential Collector Street. A local access street which serves as a connector street between local residential streets and the thoroughfare system. Residential collector streets typically collect traffic from 100 to 400 dwelling units.
Local Residential Street. Cul-de-sacs, loop streets less than 2,500 feet in length, or streets
less than one mile in length that do not connect thoroughfares, or serve major traffic generators, and do not collect traffic from more than 100 dwelling units.
Cul-de-sac. A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being permanently terminated and a vehicular turnaround provided.
Frontage Road. A local street or road that is parallel to a full or partial access controlled facility and functions to provide access to adjacent land.
Alley. A strip of land, owned publicly or privately, set aside primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Subdivider. Any person, firm, or corporation who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
§ 9-3047 Word Interpretation
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural
number include the singular, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. The word "person" includes a firm, association, corporation, trust, and company as well as an individual.
The word "use for" shall include the meaning "designed for". The word "structure" shall include the word "building”. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot" "parcel", or "tract".
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. (Ordinance of 7/11/91) (Ordinance of 6/16/94)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
3-40
Part 9
ARTICLE 1
Legal Provisions
4-4
ARTICLE 2
Chapter 4 Zoning
Table of Contents Ordinance
§ = Section
§ 9-4001 Title
§ 9-4002 Purpose
§ 9-4003 Authority
§ 9-4004 Jurisdiction
§ 9-4005 Minimum Regulations
§ 9-4006 Severability
§ 9-4007 Vested Rights
§ 9-4008 Effective Date
§ 9-4008 through 9-4010 reserved
§ 9-4011 Interpretations of Certain Terms and Words
§ 9-4012 Definitions
Definitions And Interpretations
Of Terms
4-8
ARTICLE 3
Official Zoning Map And Zoning Districts
4-24
ARTICLE 4
General Provisions
4-55
§ 9-4013 through 9-4020 reserved
§ 9-4021 Zoning Map
§ 9-4022 Interpretation of District Boundaries
§ 9-4023 Zoning Districts
§ 9-4024 R-D (Rural District)
§ 9-4025 R-15 (Residential District)
§ 9-4026 R-10 (Residential District)
§ 9-4027 R-6 (Residential District)
§ 9-4028 C-B (Central Business)
§ 9-4029 B-1 (Neighborhood Business District)
§ 9-4030 B-2 (Highway Business District)
§ 9-4031 M-1 (Industrial District)
§ 9-4032 CON (Conservation District)
§ 9-4021 MHP (Manufactured Home Park District)
§ 9-4033 through 9-4040 reserved
§ 9-4041 General Provisions
§ 9-4043 through 9-4050 reserved
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-1
Part 9
ARTICLE5
Nonconforming
4-67
ARTICLE 6
Lighting Requirements4-72
ARTICLE7
Chapter 4 Zoning
Table of Contents Ordinance
§ 9-4051 Nonconforming Uses
§ 9-4052 through 9-4060 reserved
§ 9-4061 Lighting Requirements
§ 9-4061 through 9-4070 reserved
§ 9-4071 Off Street Parking Requirements
§ 9-4072 Off Street Loading Requirements
Off Street Parking And Loading
Requirements § 9-4073 through 9-4080 reserved
4-76
ARTICLE 8 § 9-4081 Sign regulations
Sign Regulations § 9-4082 through 9-4090 reserved
4-80
ARTICLE 9
§ 9-4091 Administration and Enforcement
Administration And
Enforcement § 9-4092 through 9-4100 reserved
4-87
ARTICLE 10 § 9-4101 Board of adjustment
Board Of Adjustments § 94102 - 9-4110 reserved
4-92
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-2
Part 9
ARTICLE 11
Conditional Uses
4-97
ARTICLE 12
Chapter 4 Zoning
Table of Contents Ordinance
§ 9-4111 Conditional Uses
§ 9-4112 through 9-4120 reserved
§ 9-4121 Changes and Amendments
Changes And Amendments § 9-4122 through 9-4130 reserved
4-114
APPENDIX
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-3
Part 9
Article 1 Zoning
Chapter 4
§ 9-4001 Title.
Legal Provisions
Ordinance
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Erwin, North Carolina.
§ 9-4002 Purpose.
In order to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other
dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to conserve the value of buildings; to protect the public water supply, and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the corporate area in accordance with the Town’s Land Use Plan, there is hereby adopted and established an official Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Erwin, North Carolina.
§ 9-4003 Authority.
This Zoning Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority vested in the Town of Erwin by the General Statutes of North Carolina, particularly Chapters 160A-381 to 160A-392.
§ 9-4004 Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply within the corporate limits and the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town of Erwin, North Carolina, as shown on the Official Zoning Map and Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Map on file in the Town Hall.
§ 9-4005 Minimum Regulations.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with, abrogate, or annul easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other
ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-4
Part 9
Article 1 Zoning
Chapter 4
§ 9-4006 Severability.
Legal Provisions
Ordinance
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance is for any
reason held to be invalid by the courts, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Ordinance. The Board of Commissioners hereby declares that it has passed this Ordinance and each section, subsection, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid.
§ 9-4007 Vested rights.
A vested right shall be deemed established with respect to any property upon the valid approval, or conditional approval, of a site-specific development plan or a phased development plan, following notice and public hearing by the Board of Commissioners. Such vested right shall confer upon the landowner the right to undertake and complete the development and use of said property under the terms and conditions of the site-specific development plan or the phased development plan including any amendments thereto. The Board may approve a site- specific development plan or a phased development plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Such conditional approval shall result in a vested right, although failure to abide by such terms and conditions will result in a forfeiture of vested rights. The Board of Commissioners shall not require a landowner to waive his vested rights as a condition of developmental approval. A site-specific development plan or a phased development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the Board’s action. A right, which has been vested, shall remain vested for a period of two years.
A vested right, once established, precludes any zoning action which would change, alter, impair, prevent, diminish, or otherwise delay the development or use of the property as set forth in an approved site-specific development plan or an approved phased development plan except:
a. With written consent of the affected landowner.
b. Upon findings that natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the property, if not corrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as contemplated in the site specific development plan or the phased development plan.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-5
Part 9
Article 1 Zoning
Chapter 4
Legal Provisions
Ordinance
c. To the extent that the affected landowner receives compensation for all costs, expenses, and losses incurred.
d. Upon findings that the landowner or his representative intentionally supplied
inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which made a difference in the
approval by the Town of the site specific development plan or the phased development plan; or
e. Upon the enactment of a State or Federal law or regulation which precludes
development as contemplated in the site specific development plan or the phased development plan.
§ 9-4008 Effective Date.
This Ordinance and its provisions governing the use of land and buildings, the height of
buildings, and other matters as hereinafter set forth are hereby established and declared to be in full force and effect from and after its passage.
Approved and adopted by the Board of Commissioners this ______ day of
__________________, 2000.
Mayor
ATTEST:
Town Clerk
CERTIFIED BY:
Town Attorney
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-6
Part 9
Article 1 Zoning
Chapter 4
Legal Provisions
§ 9-4009 through 9-4010 reserved
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
Ordinance
4-7
§ 9-4011 Interpretation of certain terms and words.
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
2. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular.
3. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
4. The word “may” is permissive.
5. The words “used” or “occupied” include the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.
6. The word “lot” includes the words “plot” or “parcel”.
7. The word “persons” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.
§ 9-4012 Definitions.
Except as herein defined, all other words in this Ordinance shall have their customary dictionary definitions.
Accessory Use. (See use, accessory).
Administrative Official. The official charged with the enforcement or the Zoning Ordinance. In Erwin, the administrative official is designated by the Town Manager.
Adult Entertainment Establishments. Includes clubs and eating and drinking establishments
with nude or seminude entertainment or dancing; physical culture establishments, such as, but not limited to, masseurs, massage parlors, etc.; and establishments that include adult bookstores or stores where the preponderance of its publications, books, magazines, or other periodicals and videos are adult in nature, adult motion picture theaters, adult motels and hotels, and other similar establishments which depict or emphasize sexual activities and/or nudity.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-8
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning
Chapter 4 Definitions Ordinance
Alley. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as a secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street.
Athletic & Exercise Facilities, Indoor and Instructional. A business/organization that instructs students on skills that may include but are not limited to physical fitness centers, batting and pitching, soccer, football, tennis, squash, racquetball, golf, dance, gymnastics, martial arts, art, and music and shall not include truck driving or driver training schools. Incidental outdoor instructional usage may be considered permissible at the discretion of the zoning administrator. (Adopted January 9, 2014)
Bed and Breakfast Inn. A use, that takes place within a building that prior to such an
establishment was a single family dwelling, which consists of renting one or more rooms on a daily basis to tourists, vacationers, and business people, where provision of meals is limited to the breakfast meal, available only to guests. The homeowner shall reside on site and employment shall not exceed two full-time employees, not including the owner(s).
Billboard. (See sign outdoor advertising.)
Boarding House. A building where, for compensation, lodging and/or meals are provided.
Body Piercing Establishments. An establishment within a structure where patrons’
(customers’) bodies are pierced with body piercing tools; typically for the display of jewelry, such as rings and pendants that are inserted through the body piercing.
Buffer Strip. A buffer strip shall consist of a planted strip of land at least ten (10) feet in width composed of deciduous and/or evergreen trees, spaced not more than twenty (20) feet apart, and not less than one (1) row of dense shrubs, spaced not more than five (5) feet apart and five
(5) feet or more in height after one (1) growing season, which shall be planted and maintained in a healthy, growing condition by the property owner; or a masonry wall located within the required buffer area; such wall shall be a minimum height of six (6) feet (above finished grade;) and, if a block wall, it shall be painted on all sides; or an opaque fence six (6) feet in height, finished side of fence must face out; such fence or masonry wall shall conform to the Erwin Fence Ordinance.” (Amended December 10, 2009)
Building. Any structure enclosed and isolated by exterior walls constructed or used for
residence, business, industry or other public or private purposes, or accessory thereto, and including trailers, or mobile homes, manufactured homes, freestanding signs, and similar structures whether stationary or movable.
Building Height. The vertical distance from the mean elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-9
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning
Chapter 4 Definitions Ordinance
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 2 Zoning
Definitions Ordinance
Building Setback Line. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the
nearest portion of any building and the existing property line when measured perpendicularly
thereto as displayed on an accurate current survey of the property or in the event said survey is not available, the current Harnett County tax maps.
Bulletin Board. A board for posting notices.
Campus The grounds or Property of a School, College, University, Church, Municipal Facility or Hospital, often
understood to include buildings and other structures incidental to the primary use.(Amended on May 6, 2010)
Carport (Also Freestanding Carport). A structure that is open on at least three sides and is customarily used for the sheltering/shading of a parked vehicle.
Club or Lodge. An association of persons, who are bona fide members paying dues, which
owns, hires, or leases a building, or portion thereof; the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such "club or lodge" are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed provided it is secondary and incidental to the promotion or some other common objectives of the organization, and further provided that such, sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal, state, and local laws.
Conditional Use. (See Use, Conditional.)
Condominiums A project of two (2) or more units in one or more multi-unit buildings in which the ownership of the occupancy rights to each dwelling unit is individually owned or for sale to an individual and such ownership is not inclusive of any land.
Convalescent Home. (See Nursing Home.)
Convenience Store. A commercial building where a variety of items are sold, which may
include food, magazines, automobile accessories and maintenance supplies, and other such items. In addition to the commercial building, other services on the premises may include gasoline sales, and a coin operated (automated) car wash.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-10
Curb Cut. A lowered or cut-away curb designed for the purpose of vehicle ingress or egress to property abutting a public street.
Customary Home Occupation. Any profession or occupation carried on by a member of a family provided that the occupational use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the building for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof, and that not over twenty-five (25) percent of the total actual floor area of any structure is used for home occupations or professional purposes (see Article 4: General Provisions for additional requirements).
District. Any territorial division of the Town of Erwin Planning & Zoning limits into defined areas (districts) where the zoning regulations are uniform.
Dwelling. Any building, structure, or portion thereof that meets the North Carolina Building
Code Standards and which is designed, arranged, or used for permanent residential occupancy. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include a motel, hotel, or tourist home.
Dwelling, Multi-Family. A dwelling arranged or designed for occupancy by (3) three or more families, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
Dwelling, Single-Family. A detached residential dwelling unit, other than a manufactured (mobile) home, designed for and occupied by one family only.
Dwelling, Two-Family. A dwelling arranged or designed for occupancy by (2) two families, with separate housekeeping, cooking facilities for each and a shared wall.
Electronic Gaming Operations. Any business or enterprise, whether as a principal or an accessory use, where persons utilize electronic machines, including but not limited to computers and gaming terminals to conduct games of chance, including sweepstakes, and where money, credit, merchandise or other items or allowance of value are redeemed by or otherwise distributed. This definition applies whether or not the value of such distribution is determined by electronic games played or by predetermined odds. This term includes, but is not limited to internet cafes, cybercafés, sweepstakes entertainment business, or internet sweepstakes. This does not include any lottery approved by the State of North Carolina.
Equine Stables for Commercial or Private Use
Building(s) that are used for the shelter and feeding of horses. This definition will apply to any structure where a group of these animals are lodged, trained, or kept in any way.
Existing Trees. Trees found on a site prior to development, which may be used to meet some or all of the requirements of this Article.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-11
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 2 Zoning
Definitions Ordinance
Family. Family is an individual, two or more persons related by blood, marriage or law, or a
group of not more than five persons living together in a dwelling unit. Servants having common housekeeping facilities with a family consisting of an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or law, are a part of the family for this ordinance but not including a group occupying a boarding house, club, fraternity house or similar type dwelling.
Family Care Home. A facility for not less than two (2) and no more than six (6)children, adolescents, or adults who are mentally, visually or physically handicapped. Adult care is provided as well as a program of services and protective supervision in a home setting. No family care home shall be allowed to locate within a one-half mile radius of an existing family care home. (Amended on May 7, 2009)
Flea Markets/Rummage Sales – Sales area (exclusively indoors) in which space is set aside or rented, and is intended for use to sell a variety of articles such as those which are either homemade, handcrafted, new, used, old or obsolete. (Amended on March 11, 2010)
Floor Area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, or
portion thereof, devoted to such use. However, for the purposes or measurement for off-street parking spaces, floor area shall not include floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes, loading facilities, or to basement floor area other than that area devoted to retailing activities.
Garage Service. A repair shop for automotive vehicles.
Junk Yard. An open area where waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron, and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "junk yard" does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
Large Shade Tree. A tree whose height, under average regional growing conditions will exceed twenty-five (25) feet at maturity.
Lot. A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building or group of main buildings and accessory buildings, together with such yards, open spaces, lot width and lot areas as are required by this ordinance, and having not less than the minimum required frontage upon a street, either shown on a plat of record, or considered as a unit of property and described by metes and bounds.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-12
Lot Line. Any boundary line of a lot.
Lot of Record. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Harnett County, or a lot which has been described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Harnett County.
Lot Depth The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line, measured from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear.
Lot, Corner A lot abutting the intersection of two (2) or more streets or a lot abutting on a
curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at any angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot, Interior A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, Irregular Shaped Lots located at corners or intersections, which create shapes with three sides or more and contain corner angles greater than 90 degrees. The front yard and rear yard of such lots shall be determined with respect to adjacent homes and/or the placement of the existing home, and the maintenance of street views.
Lot, Substandard A parcel of land held in separate ownership, occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal building or structure together with accessory buildings, and uses, having insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area, yard, off-street parking areas, or other open space provisions of this Ordinance.
Lot, Through An interior lot having a frontage on two (2) streets, or a corner lot having frontage on three (3) streets.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-13
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning
Chapter 4 Definitions
Lot Width . The distance between side lot lines measured at the building line.
Manufactured Home. A dwelling unit that is not constructed in accordance with the standards of the North Carolina State Building Code, and is composed of one or more components, each of which are substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported to the home site on its own chassis, and exceeds forty feet in length and eight feet in width (commonly called a mobile home). (Amended 3 February 1994)
Manufactured Home, Class A. A manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976 that meet or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction and that satisfies the following additional criteria:
a. The manufactured home has a length not exceeding four times it width, with
length measured along the longest axis and width measured at the narrowest part of the other
axis.
b. The manufactured home has a minimum of 1200 feet of enclosed and heated
living area.
c. The pitch of the roof of the manufactured home has minimum vertical rise of
three and two tenths feet for each twelve feet of horizontal run (3.2 feet by 12 feet) and the roof is finished with a type of composition shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction.
d. The roof eaves and gable overhangs shall be 12-inch minimum (rain gutters may
be included in the minimum dimensions).
e. The exterior siding consists predominantly of vinyl or aluminum horizontal lap siding (whose reflectivity does not exceed that of gloss white paint), wood, or hardboard, comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction.
f. The front entrance to the manufactured home has stairs and a porch, the porch
being at least four feet by six feet in size. Stairs, porches, entrance and exit to and from the
home shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the North Carolina State Building
Code.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-14
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning
g. The manufactured home is set up in accordance with the standards set by the
North Carolina Department of Insurance and a continuous, permanent masonry foundation or
masonry curtain wall, un-pierced except for required ventilation and access, is installed under
the perimeter of the manufactured home.
h. The moving hitch, wheels, axles, and transporting lights have been removed.
i. Each manufactured home shall be only for single-family occupancy.
j. A manufactured home shall comply with the FHA (Federal Housing
Administration) requirements relative to tie downs.
k. The electrical meters servicing the manufactured home shall he mounted
(attached) directly to the manufactured home.
l. A multi-sectional manufactured home is required. A singular sectional
manufactured home is prohibited.
m. All manufactured homes shall otherwise meet all applicable zoning regulations
for the zoning district in which the home is located.
It is the intent of these criteria to insure that a Class A manufactured home, when
installed, shall have substantially the appearance of an on site conventionally built, single family dwelling to include landscaping in harmony with surrounding dwellings.
Manufactured Home, Class B. (Commonly referred to a single section manufactured home.) A manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction and that satisfies the following additional criteria:
a. The manufactured home has a minimum length of fifty-two (52) feet measured along the longest axis and a minimum width of fourteen (14) feet measured at the narrowest part of the other axis;
b. The manufactured home has a minimum of seven hundred and twenty-eight (728) square feet of enclosed living area;
c. Pitch of the roof of the manufactured home has a minimum vertical rise of three feet for each twelve feet of horizontal run;
d. The exterior siding consists predominantly of vinyl or aluminum horizontal lap siding (whose reflectivity does not exceed that of gloss white paint), wood, or hardboard, comparable
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-15
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning Chapter 4 Definitions
in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction;
e. The manufactured home is set up in accordance with the standards set by the North Carolina Department of Insurance and rests upon a continuous uniform foundation enclosure, unpierced except for required ventilation and access. The foundation skirting shall be of a noncombustible material or material that will not support combustion. Any wood framing for foundation skirting shall be constructed with treated lumber;
f. Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps, and other means of entrance and exit to and from the home shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the standards set be the North Carolina State Building Code; and
g. The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and transporting lights have been removed;
Manufactured Home, Class C. (Commonly referred to as a house trailer or a mobile home.) Any manufactured home that does not meet the definitional criteria of a Class A or a Class B manufactured home.
Manufactured Home Lot. A manufactured home lot is a piece of land within a manufactured home park: (a) whose boundaries are delineated in accordance with the requirements of the Ordinance, and (b) that is designed and improved in accordance with the requirements of the Ordinance to accommodate a single manufactured home.
Manufactured Home, Park. Any lot of land used, maintained, or intended to be used for
occupancy by five (5) or more manufactured homes together with accessory structures provided in connection therewith. This definition shall not include manufactured home sales lots on which unoccupied manufactured homes are parked for the purpose of inspection and sale.
Mobile Food Vending Unit. The truck, vehicle-mounted, or vehicle-towed piece of equipment designed to be readily moved by food vendors. (Amended October 3, 2013)
Mobile Food Vendor. A mobile food service establishment that serves foods for sale that have been prepared, pre-portioned and individually pre-wrapped at a restaurant or commissary, or prepares and serves food and/or beverages for sale to the general public on a recurring basis from a truck, vehicle-mounted, or vehicle-towed piece of equipment designed to be readily moved.
Modular Home. A structure that (a) consists of a single unit completely assembled at the
factory or of multiple principal components totally assembled at the factory and joined together at the site; and (b) is designed so that the total structure or each component thereof can be transported; and (c) is built to the North Carolina Building Code Standards for conventionally built homes; and (d) contains a minimum of 1,000 square feet of living area; and (e) is designed to be used as a dwelling and provides complete, independent living facilities for a family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation; and (f) is actually being used or is held ready for use as a dwelling.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-16
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning Chapter 4 Definitions
Nonconforming Use. A legal use of a building and/or land that predates the adoption or these regulations and does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located.
Nursing Home. An institution, which is advertised, announced, or maintained for the express or implied purpose of providing nursing or convalescent care for persons unrelated to the licensee. A nursing home is a home for chronic or convalescent patients who, on admission, are not as a rule, acutely ill and who do not usually require special facilities, such as an operating room, x-ray facilities, laboratory facilities, and obstetrical facilities. A nursing home provides care for persons who have remedial ailments or other ailments, for which continuing medical and skilled nursing care is indicated; who, however, are not sick enough to require general hospital care. Nursing care is their primary need, but they will require continuing medical supervision. A major factor, which distinguishes nursing homes, is that the residents will require the individualization of medical care. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a "nursing home" shall also be considered a “convalescent home."
Off Street Parking A parking space located off the street with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering rows.
Open Storage. Unroofed storage areas, whether fenced or not. (Also see Outdoor Storage)
Outdoor Storage. The placement or storage of goods, equipment, or material outside of an
enclosed building for a period of more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours shall be considered outdoor storage. Outdoor storage does not refer to licensed vehicles in use by the person occupying the property, or other minor and incidental storage, such as items specifically designed for outdoor use including; lawn furniture, outdoor grill, swing set, lawn care equipment, which would not have a negative impact on the health, safety and general welfare of adjacent property owners and land uses.
Parking Space. The storage space for one automobile of not less than eight (8) feet by twenty
(20) feet, plus the necessary access space.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-17
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning Chapter 4 Definitions
Parapet Wall. Shall mean that portion of the building support wall that is constructed in conjunction with the building structure, extends above the level of the roof line, and is a part of the original construction or a part of substantial structural changes made subsequent to the original construction.
Planned Unit Development (PUD). A use designed to provide for developments incorporating a single type or a variety of residential or related uses, which are planned and developed as a unit. Such development may consist of individual lots and common building sites. Common open space and a permanent owners association must be elements of the planned unit development.
Principal Building. The main building for which a lot is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained.
Produce Stands, Temporary On-Premise. Stands offering plants or produce or other consumable goods produced on the premises, that are not located in a permanent structure and the use is seasonal and temporary per applicable sections of this ordinance.
Produce Stands, Mobile. Stands offering plants or produce or other consumable goods, that are not located in a permanent structure and the use is seasonal and temporary per applicable sections of this ordinance.
Projecting Sign. A sign which is attached to and projects more than twelve (12) inches from a building face or wall.
Property Line. (See lot line.)
Public Facility. All public and private land use (excluding Municipal Facilities) that include
schools, colleges, governmental offices and facilities, fire stations, libraries, hospitals, utilities, or other such uses that serve a public health, safety, or general welfare interest in the community. (Adopted 3 May 2001)
Public Street. Any publicly maintained right of way set aside for public travel, which has been accepted for maintenance as a street by the Town of Erwin or the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
Residence. (See dwelling.)
Roof Line. Shall mean the edge of the roof around the building structure where a wall intersects with the eaves of the roof.
Rooming House. (See boarding house.)
Salvage Yard. (See junkyard.)
Service Station. Any building or tract of land where fuels and lubricants for motor vehicles are sold or dispensed and where certain repairs are performed incidental to the conduct of the service station.
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning Chapter 4 Definitions
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning Chapter 4 Definitions
Setback Line. The minimum horizontal distance between the front line of a building or structure and the front property line (also see building setback line).
Sign. Any letter, symbol, number, or combination of these including the structure, frame, base, supports and all related accouterments, which may be seen from the right-of-way of a street or highway.
Sign, Freestanding. A sign, which is erected or constructed to stand on its own foundation free of architectural or supporting frame or attachment.
Sign, Outdoor Advertising. A standard structural poster panel or painted sign either free-
standing or attached to a building, for purpose of conveying information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject unrelated to the premises upon which it is located.
Sign, Wall. A sign which is attached to or painted on a building, with the exposed face thereof in a plane parallel to and which does not project more than one foot in front of the plan of the wall with which it is associated.
Small Ornamental Tree. A tree whose height, under average regional growing conditions will not exceed twenty-five (25) feet at maturity.
Street. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
Streetscape. Improvements, such as landscaping, primarily intended for the enhancement of the right-of-way.
Streetscape Trees. Any tree planted within or adjacent to a right-of-way.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, including buildings, fences, and signs.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-18
Tattoo Parlor and/or Establishment. An establishment within a structure where a tattoo artist tattoos bodies of the establishment’s patron’s (customers’) with the appropriate tools and methods that are regulated by the State of North Carolina.
Tower. Telecommunications towers, including but not limited to, relay stations for commercial operations, such as cable television, radio/cellular telephones, radio, television stations, and the operation of such uses. “Tower” shall not include structures that support antennae or similar devices that support or facilitate HAM radio or Citizen Band communication.
Tie Downs. Galvanized steel cables or strapping which "tie" a manufactured (mobile) home and its steel frame to anchors embedded in the ground.
Tourist Home. A dwelling wherein rooms are rented as a home occupation to provide overnight accommodations for transient guests.
Town home/Townhouse A project of two (2) or more units in one or more multi-unit buildings in which the ownership of the occupancy rights to each dwelling unit and land is individually owned or for sale to an individual.
Use. Any continuous or continual occupation or activity, taking place upon a parcel of land.
Use, Accessory. A subordinate building or use, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building or use on the same lot. Under no circumstances shall an accessory building be used for residential occupancy (i.e.: swimming pools and satellite dishes).
Use, Conditional. A use which is unusual or not customarily permitted in a district and is only allowed if expressly recommended by the Planning Board and/or authorized by the Board of Commissioners.
Use, Principal. A use which is permitted outright in a district for which a building or Zoning Permit may be issued by the Building Inspector.
Use Seasonal. A use carried on for only a part of the year. Note: Typical seasonal uses are selling flowers, produce, honey, vegetables, fruits, etc. as well as holiday sales to include pumpkins, trees, wreaths, etc.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-19
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning Chapter 4 Definitions
Variance. Modification of the existing Zoning Ordinance when strict enforcement of this
ordinance would cause undue hardship on the property owner because of the unique
circumstances of the individual property on which the variance is granted (Refer to Article 10 - Board of Adjustments)
Yard. An open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein.
Yard, Front. The yard between the front setback line and the front property or street right-of- way line extending across the full width or the lot.
Yard, Rear. The yard between the rear line of the principal building and the rear line of the lot extending across the full width of the lot.
Yard, Side. The line between the sideline of the building and the sideline of the lot extending from the building setback line to the rear yard line.
Yard Sales. Yard sale shall mean and include all general sales, open to the public, conducted on a residential property, typically held outdoors at the home of the seller, for the purpose of disposing of personal property. These sales are typically called yard or garage sales. This definition shall not include a situation where not more than five specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically names those items to be sold.
Nonprofit Exception. A nonprofit organization may conduct such sales of the organization’s personal property or donated items, inside or out, from their property. (Amended 3/6/2014)
Zoning Certificate of Compliance. A certificate issued by the Administrative Official when a proposal to erect, install or alter a structure, building, sign, or lot fully meets the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
§ 9-4013 through 9-4020 reserved
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-20
Part 9 Article 2 Zoning Chapter 4 Definitions
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Map and Zoning Districts Ordinance
§ 9-4021 Zoning Map.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Town of Erwin is hereby divided into zoning
districts whose locations and boundaries are shown on the Official Zoning Map for the Town of Erwin, which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
This Zoning Map and all the notations, references, and all amendments thereto, and
other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this Ordinance the same as if such information set forth on the map were all fully described and set out herein. The Zoning Map properly attested is on file in the Town Hall and is available for inspection by the public.
The Administrative Official or his representative shall be responsible for the maintenance and revision of the Official Zoning Map. Upon notification by the Town Board that a zoning change has been made, the administrative official shall make the necessary changes on the Official Zoning Map within seven (7) calendar days of notification.
§ 9-4022 Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
a. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, where district boundaries are shown on the Zoning Map as approximately parallel or following the centerlines of streets, highways, utility easements, or streambeds, or such line extended, then such lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries
b. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries
c. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the requirements for the district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall be extended to the balance of the lot, provided that such extension shall not include any part of such lot which lies more than fifty (50) feet beyond the district boundary, and further provided that the remaining parcel shall not be less than the minimum required for the district in which it is located
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-22
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Map and Zoning Districts Ordinance
d. Where any public street is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to parcels of abutting property shall apply to that portion of such street of alley thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment
e. The Board of Adjustment shall be empowered to interpret the intent of the Zoning Map as to the location of district boundaries in case any further uncertainty exists.
§ 9-4023 Zoning districts.
In order that the purpose of this Ordinance may be accomplished, the incorporated
territory of the Town of Erwin, as set forth on the accompanying zoning map, is hereby divided into ten (10) districts as follows:
• Rural District - RD
• Residential District - R-15
• Residential District - R-10
• Residential District - R-6
• Central Business District - CB
• Neighborhood Business District - NB
• Highway Business District - HB
• Industrial District - MI
• Conservation District - CON
• Manufactured Home Park District - MHP
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-23
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Rural District (RD) Ordinance
§ 9-4024 R-D Rural district.
§ 9-4024.1 Intent
This district is established to promote low-density residential and agricultural uses. The regulations of this district are intended to protect the agricultural sections of the community from an influx of uses likely to render them undesirable for farms and future development and to insure that residential developments dependent on private wells and septic tanks will occur at sufficiently low densities to insure a healthful environment.
§ 9-4024.2 Permitted principal uses and structures.
1. Single-family dwellings.
2. Farms and agricultural uses for crop and livestock production. Note: A farm shall not be construed to include commercial poultry and swine production; cattle feed lots, and fur bearing animals.
3. Family Care Home.
4. Religious uses including churches and other places of worship, religious education buildings, and parish houses.
5. Municipal Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
§ 9-4024.3 Permitted accessory uses and structures.
1. Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal use or structure or to a conditional use for which a permit has been issued (Refer to Article 4 - General Provisions).
2. Stands to sell agricultural products produced on the premises, provided that sufficient off-street parking is provided off of the right-of-way. (See Accessory Uses – On-premise Produce Stands). (Amended on September 5, 2013)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-24
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Rural District (RD) Ordinance
§ 9-4024.4 Conditional uses.
1. Public Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
2. Social uses such as social halls, lodges, and headquarters of fraternal organizations, clubs, and similar activities.
3. Cemeteries.
4. Animal medical care.
5. Places of public assembly.
6. Fairground and carnival activities.
7. Day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, and similar uses. Day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, and similar uses may not be located within a 300 foot radius measured from the center of the property of another day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, or similar use.
8. New Manufactured “Class A Homes” on individual lots. (Amended October 3, 2013)
9. Customary home occupations
10. Equine Stables (Private or Commercial Use) (Adopted May3, 2012)
§ 9-4024.5 Dimensional requirements.
The following regulations shall govern all permitted and conditional uses in this district:
1. Minimum lot area = 20,000 square feet. (.459 acres)
2. Minimum lot width = 100 feet (for lots without public water and sewer). (Except in subdivisions - Minimum lot widths of 75 feet and 60 feet for cul-de-sac lots.)
3. Minimum required front yard = 40 feet (excluding steps) measured from the front property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
4. Minimum required rear yard = 40 feet (excluding steps) measured from the rear property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
5. Minimum required side yard = 12 feet measured from the side property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
6. Maximum building height = 35 feet.
All Setbacks shall be measured from either the property line or public right of way whichever is closer. If no public right of way exists then the measurement will be taken from the access easement line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
§ 9-4024.6 Off-street parking and loading.
Refer to Article 7.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-25
Part 9
Chapter 4
§ 9-4024.7 Signs.
Refer to Article 7.
§ 9-4024.8 Lights.
Refer to Article 6.
Article 3 Zoning
Rural District (RD) Ordinance
§ 9-4024.9 General Provisions.
Refer to Article 4.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-26
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Residential (R 15) Ordinance
§ 9-4025 R-15 Residential district.
§ 9-4025.1 Intent.
This district is established as an area in which the principal use of land is for single family residential purposes. The regulations or this district are intended to stabilize existing residential areas and promote low density, high quality residential areas.
§ 9-4025.2 Permitted uses and structures.
1. Single-Family Dwellings
2. Municipal Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
§ 9-4025.3 Permitted accessory uses and structures.
1. Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal use or structure or to a conditional use for which a permit has been issued. (See Article 4 - General Provisions)
§ 9-4025.4 R-15 Conditional Uses and Structures.
1.Customary home occupations
2.Equine Stables (Private or Commercial Use) (Adopted May 3, 2012)
§ 9-4025.5 Dimensional requirements.
The following regulations shall govern all permitted and conditional uses in this district:
1. Minimum lot area = 15,000 square feet. (.344 acres)
2. Minimum lot width = 75 feet.
3. Minimum required front yard = 35 feet (excluding steps) measured from the front property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
4. Minimum required rear yard = 35 feet (excluding steps) measured from the rear property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
5. Minimum required side yard = 10 feet measured from the side property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
6. Maximum building height = 35 feet.
7. See Article 4 - Street Access
All Setbacks shall be measured from either the property line or public right of way whichever is closer. If no public right of way exists then the measurement will be taken from the access easement line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-27
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Residential (R 10) Ordinance
§ 9-4025.6 Off-street parking and loading.
Refer to Article 7
§ 9-4025.7 Signs.
Refer to Article 7
§ 9-4025.8 Lights.
Refer to Article 6
§ 9-4025.9 General Provisions.
Refer to Article 4
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-28
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Residential (R 10) Ordinance
§ 9-4026 R-10 Residential district.
§ 9-4026.1 Intent.
The purpose of this district is to provide for proper development of neighborhoods with medium population densities comprised primarily of single family dwellings.
§ 9-4026.2 Permitted uses and structures.
1. Single-family dwellings.
2. Municipal Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
3. Religious uses including churches and other places of worship, religious education buildings, and parish houses, but not including cemeteries.
4. Family Care Home
§ 9-4026.3 Permitted accessory uses and structures.
1. Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal use or structure or to a conditional use for which a permit has been issued. (See Article 4 - General Provisions)
§ 9-4026.4 Conditional Uses.
1. Day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, and similar uses. Day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, and similar uses may not be located within a 300 foot radius measured from the center of the property of another day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, or similar use.
2. Planned unit development.
3. Condominiums and Townhouse Development
4. Nursing homes.
5. Clubs or lodges.
6. Customary home occupations.
7. Public Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-29
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Residential (R 10) Ordinance
§ 9-4026.5 Dimensional requirements.
The following regulations shall govern all permitted and conditional uses in this district:
1. Minimum lot area = 10,000 square feet. (.229 acres)
2. Minimum lot width = 75 feet.
* The Administrative Official shall determine frontage for irregularly shaped lots.
* All setbacks may not apply to individual planned units, condominium, or
town home developments.
* The following are the minimum setbacks or building envelopes for properties located within the R-10 district: (Amended August 5, 2010)
3. Minimum required front yard = 35 feet (excluding steps) measured from the front property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
4. Minimum required rear yard = 35 feet (excluding steps) measured from the rear property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
5. Minimum required side yard = 10 feet measured from the side property line.
(Adopted August 2, 2012)
6. Maximum building height = 35 feet.
7. Street Access - See Article 4
All Setbacks shall be measured from either the property line or public right of way whichever is closer. If no public right of way exists then the measurement will be taken from the access easement line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
§ 9-4026.6 Off-street parking and loading.
Refer to Article 7
§ 9-4026.7 Signs.
Refer to Article 8
§ 9-4026.8 Lights.
Refer to Article 6
§ 9-4026.9 General Provisions.
Refer to Article 4
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-30
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Residential (R 6) Ordinance
§ 9-4027 R-6 Residential District.
§ 9-4027.1 Intent.
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for a mixture of single-family and multifamily dwelling units.
§ 9-4027.2 Permitted principal uses and structures.
1. Single-family dwelling units.
2. New Class” A” Manufactured Homes. (Amended October 3, 2013)
3. Religious uses including churches and other places of worship, religious education buildings, and parish houses.
4. Family Care Home.
5. Municipal Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
§ 9-4027.3 Permitted accessory uses and structures.
1. Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal use or structure or to a conditional use for which a permit has been issued.(See article 4. General Provisions).
§ 9-4027.4 Conditional uses.
1. Day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, and similar uses. Day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, and similar uses may not be located within a 300 foot radius measured from the center of the property of another day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, or similar use.
2. Planned Unit Developments.
3. Condominium and Townhouse Developments
4. Two-family Dwelling
5. Multi-Family Dwelling.
6. Customary home occupations.
7. Manufactured Home, Class A (Used but less than five years old as of date of zoning permit issuance)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-31
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Residential (R 6) Ordinance
8. Public Facilities (Amended 3 May 2001)
§ 9-4027.5 Dimensional requirements.
The following regulations shall govern all permitted and conditional uses in this district:
1. Minimum lot area = Single-family dwelling: 6,000 square feet.
2. Two-family or Multi-family dwelling: 8,000 square feet per development and an additional 2000 square feet per unit.
3. Minimum lot width = Single-family dwelling: 50 feet.
4. Multi-family dwelling: 75 feet.
* The Administrative Official shall determine frontage for irregularly shaped
lots.
* All setbacks may not apply to individual planned units, condominium, or town
home developments.
* The following are the minimum setbacks or building envelopes for properties located within the R-6 district: (Amended August 5, 2010)
5. Minimum required front yard = 25 feet (excluding steps) measured from the front property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
6. Minimum required rear yard = 25 feet (excluding steps) measured from the rear property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
7. Minimum required side yard = 8 feet measured from the side property line.
(Adopted August 2, 2012)
8. Maximum building height = 35 feet.
All Setbacks shall be measured from either the property line or public right of way whichever is closer. If no public right of way exists then the measurement will be taken from the access easement line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
§ 9-4027.6 Off-street parking and loading.
Refer to Article 7
§ 9-4027.7 Signs.
Refer to Article 8
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-32
Part 9
Chapter 4
§ 9-4027.8 Lights.
Refer to Article 6
Article 3 Zoning
Residential (R 6) Ordinance
§ 9-4027.9 General Provisions.
Refer to Article 4
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-33
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Central Business (C-B) Ordinance
§ 9-4028 C-B Central business.
§ 9-4028.1 Intent.
This district is established to protect and promote the centrally located trade and commercial service center of the community.
§ 9-4028.2 Permitted principal uses and structures.
1. Retail shops and stores and service establishments whose operation is conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
2. Offices for business and professional purposes.
3. Social uses such as social halls, lodges, headquarters of fraternal organizations, clubs, and similar activities.
4. Trades and similar enterprises catering to households and business establishments, provided that all materials are stored and operations take place within an enclosed building.
5. Motels, hotels, bed and breakfast, boarding and rooming houses, and other similar establishments.
6. Religious uses, including churches and other places of worship, religious education buildings, and parish houses.
7. Family Care Home.
8. Municipal Facilities (Amended 3 May 2001)
9. Mobile Food Vendor (Amended October 3, 2013)
§ 9-4028.3 Permitted accessory uses and structures.
1. Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal use or structure or to a conditional use for which a permit has been issued (Refer to Article 4 - General Provisions)
2. Commercial signs customarily incidental to a business establishment subject to the provisions of Article 8.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-34
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Central Business (C-B) Ordinance
§ 9-4028.4 Conditional uses.
1. Service stations and service garages other auto oriented business establishments.
(Amended July 23, 2009)
2. Convenience Store
3. Multi-family dwellings (on upper floors of commercial buildings).
4. Public Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
§ 9-4028.5 Dimensional requirements.
1. Minimum lot area = There shall be no minimum area requirement for lots in this
district.
2. Minimum lot width = There shall be no minimum width requirement for lots in this
district.
3. Minimum required front yard = The minimum front yard depth shall be the average or the front yard depths which have been established by buildings in one or both adjoining side lots; in all cases, there shall be sufficient setback from the street curb line to provide space for a minimum 12 foot sidewalk.
4. Minimum required rear yard = 10 feet measured from the rear property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)No rear yard is required where a public alley abuts the rear property line. Minimum required side yard = There shall be no minimum side yard required
All Setbacks shall be measured from either the property line or public right of way whichever is closer. If no public right of way exists then the measurement will be taken from the access easement line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
§ 9-4028.6 Buffers.
Buffer strips as herein defined shall be required in this district for all uses where they abut land which is zoned residential. (Refer to definition.)
The buffering requirement may be waived by the Board of Adjustment upon
recommendation of the Planning Board along any boundary which is naturally screened by evergreen plant materials or topography or may be deferred in isolated areas.
Refer to Article 4 for additional landscaping requirements (Amended December 10, 2009)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-35
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Central Business (C-B) Ordinance
§ 9-4028.7 Off-street parking and loading.
Refer to Article 7
§ 9-4028.8 Signs.
Refer to Article 8
§ 9-4028.9 Lights.
Refer to Article 6
§ 9-4028.10 General Provisions.
Refer to Article 4
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-36
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Neighborhood Business (B-1) Ordinance
§ 9-4029 B-1 Neighborhood business district.
§ 9-4029.1 Intent.
This district is established to promote and protect small commercial and service uses providing convenience type goods to surrounding residential districts.
§ 9-4029.2 Permitted principal uses and structures.
1. Small retail stores and shops and service establishments whose operation is conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
2. Offices for business and professional purposes.
3. Principal uses permitted in the R-6 District, with the exception of Class A Manufactured Homes.
4. Family Care Home.
5. Public facilities
6. Bed and Breakfast
7. Mobile Food Vendors (Amended October 3, 2013)
§ 9-4029.3 Permitted accessory uses and structures.
1. Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal use or structure or to a conditional use for which a permit has been issued (Refer to Article 4 - General Provisions).
2. Commercial signs customarily incidental to a business establishment subject to the provisions of Article VIII.
§ 9-4029.4 Conditional uses.
1. Service stations and service garages.
2. Convenience Store
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-37
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Neighborhood Business (B-1) Ordinance
3. Day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, and similar uses. Day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, and similar uses may not be located within a 300 foot radius measured from the center of the property of another day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, or similar use.
4. Customary home occupations.
§ 9-4029.5 Dimensional requirements.
1. Minimum lot area = 6,000 square feet. (.138 acres)
2. Minimum lot width = 50 feet.
3. Minimum required front yard = 20 feet measured from the front property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
4. Minimum required rear yard = 30 feet measured from the rear property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
5. Minimum required side yard = There shall be no required side yard except where a lot abuts a residentially zoned lot. In such instance, the abutting side yard shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide.
6. Maximum building height = 35 feet.
All Setbacks shall be measured from either the property line or public right of way whichever is closer. If no public right of way exists then the measurement will be taken from the access easement line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
§ 9-4029.6 Buffers.
Buffer strips as herein defined shall be required in this district for all uses where they abut land which is zoned residential. (Refer to definition.)
The buffering requirement may be waived by the Board of Adjustment upon
recommendation of the Planning Board along any boundary which is naturally screened by evergreen plant materials or topography or may be deferred in isolated areas.
• Refer to Article 4 for additional landscaping requirements (Amended December 10, 2009)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-38
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Neighborhood Business (B-1) Ordinance
§ 9-4029.7 Off-street parking and loading.
Refer to Article 7
§ 9-4029.8 Signs.
Refer to Article 8
§ 9-4029.9 Lights.
Refer to Article 6
§ 9-4029.10 General Provisions.
Refer to Article 4
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-39
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Highway Business (B-2) Ordinance
§ 9-4030 B-2 Highway business district.
§ 9-4030.1 Intent.
It is the purpose of the Highway Business District to accommodate a wide variety of large commercial, wholesale, and retail businesses.
§ 9-4030.2 Permitted principal uses and structures.
1. Retail shops and stores and service establishments whose operation is conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
2. Offices for business and professional purposes.
3. Social uses such as social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations, clubs, and similar
activities.
4. Trades and similar enterprises catering to household and business establishments.
5. Motels, hotels, bed and breakfast, boarding and rooming houses, and other similar establishments.
6. Religious uses, including churches and other places of worship, religious education buildings, and parish houses.
7. Family Care Home.
8. Municipal Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
9. Mobile Food Vendors (Amended October 3, 2013)
§ 9-4030.3 Permitted accessory uses and structures.
1. Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal use or structure or to a conditional use for which a permit has been issued. (See article 4. General Provisions).
2. Commercial signs customarily incidental to a business establishment subject to the provisions of Article 8.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-40
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Highway Business (B-2) Ordinance
§ 4030.4 Conditional uses.
1. Convenience Store
2. Outdoor display, storage or sale of vehicles or other equipment or material provided that in the interest of safety to children and adjacent property, outdoor storage areas shall be encompassed by a wall, at least six (6) feet high, or a fence and buffer strip approved by the Planning Board.
3. Service stations and other auto oriented business establishments.
4. Public Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
5. Private Recreation facilities for profit (Adopted 3 May 2001)
6. Electronic Gaming Operations (Adopted September 6, 2012)
7. Day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, and similar uses. Day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, and similar uses may not be located within a 300 foot radius measured from the center of the property of other day care centers, day nurseries, preschools, or similar use (Adopted January 9, 2014)
§ 9-4030.5 Dimensional requirements.
1. Minimum lot area = 20,000 square feet. (.459 acres)
2. Minimum lot width = 100 feet.
3. Minimum required front yard = 30 feet measured from the front property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
4. Minimum required rear yard = 20 feet measured from the rear property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
5. Minimum required side yard = There shall be no required side yard except where a lot abuts a residentially zoned lot. In such instance, the abutting side yard shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide.
6. Maximum building height = 35 feet.
All Setbacks shall be measured from either the property line or public right of way whichever is closer. If no public right of way exists then the measurement will be taken from the access easement line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-41
Part 9
Chapter 4
§ 9-4030.6 Buffers.
Article 3 Zoning
Highway Business (B-2) Ordinance
Buffer strips as herein defined shall be required in this district for all uses where they abut land which is zoned residential. (Refer to definition.)
The buffering requirement may be waived by the Board of Adjustment upon
recommendation of the Planning Board along any boundary which is naturally screened by evergreen plant materials or topography or may be deferred in isolated areas. (Amended December 10, 2009)
• Refer to Article 4 for additional landscaping requirements
§ 9-4030.7 Off-street parking and loading.
Refer to Article 7
§ 9-4030.8 Signs.
Refer to Article 8
§ 9-4030.9 Lights.
Refer to Article 6
§ 9-4030.10 General Provisions.
Refer to Article 4
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-42
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Industrial District (M1) Ordinance
§ 9-4031 M-1 Industrial district.
§ 9-4031.1 Intent.
This district is established to protect and promote suitable locations for wholesaling, manufacturing, and processing industries.
§ 9-4031.2 Permitted principal uses and structures.
1. Manufacturing, assembling, and processing industries.
2. Wholesale, warehouse, and transfer activities may include retail showroom, display, or sales area as an accessory use (Amended January 9, 2014).
3. Farms and agricultural uses.
4. Service stations and other auto oriented business establishments.
5. Family care home.
6. Convenience Store
7. Municipal Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
8. Offices for Business and Professional purposes (Adopted May 3, 2012)
9. Mobile Food Vendors (Amended October 3, 2013)
10. Athletic and exercise facilities, indoor and instructional (Adopted January 9, 2014)
§ 9-4031.3 Permitted accessory uses and structures.
1. Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal use or structure or to a conditional use for which a permit has been issued (See Article 4. General Provisions).
2. Commercial signs customarily incidental to a business establishment subject to the provisions of Article 8.
a. Except industrial sites that are 50 acres or greater see Section 9-4081.3, Special Provisions for Certain Signs. (Adopted January 9, 2014)
3. Wholesale and warehouse activities may include retail showroom, display, or sales area as an accessory use. (Adopted January 9, 2014)
§ 9-4031.4 Conditional uses.
1. Junkyards and auto salvage yards (Refer to Article 4 § 9-4041.20).
2. Billboards and outdoor advertising signs (Refer to Article 8).
3. Body Piercing Establishments. (May not be located within 300 feet of another body piercing establishment, tattoo parlor/establishment or an adult entertainment establishment).
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-43
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Industrial District (M1) Ordinance
4. Tattoo Parlor and /or establishment (May not be located within 300 feet of another tattoo parlor/establishment, body piercing establishment or an adult entertainment establishment).
5. Flea Markets/Rummage (see definition) sales that are enclosed completely within a building. (Amended on March 11, 2010)
6. Adult entertainment establishments. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another adult entertainment establishment. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any property zoned for residential use or any church or school. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 300 feet of a tattoo parlor/establishment or body-piercing establishment.
Note: All measurements for the following distances shall be measured from the property lines of the lots of said uses as shown on a current survey or where a current survey is not available, as shown on the Harnett County Official Tax Maps.
7. Tower (Collocation alternatives shall be encouraged as well as the use of existing structures for antennae placement).
8. Outdoor Storage (see definition) provided that in the interest of safety to children and adjacent property, outdoor storage areas shall be encompassed by a wall, at least six (6) feet high, or a fence and buffer strip approved by the Planning Board.
9. Public Facilities (Amended 3 May 2001)
10. Electronic Gaming Operations within M-1 & B-2 Zoning District (Adopted September 6, 2012)
§ 9-4031.5 Dimensional requirements.
1. Minimum lot area = 40,000 square feet. (.918 acres)
2. Minimum lot width = 100 feet.
3. Minimum required front yard = 40 feet measured from front property line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
4. Minimum required rear yard = 20 feet except where a lot abuts a residential district. In such an instance, the abutting rear yard shall be at least 30 feet wide.
5. Minimum required side yard = 15 feet except where a lot abuts a residential zoned lot. In such an instance, the abutting rear yard shall be at least 30 feet wide.
6. Maximum building height = 35 feet unless each required setback is increased by one (1) Foot for each foot above thirty-five (35) feet. Maximum lot coverage by all structures = 50%.
All Setbacks shall be measured from either the property line or public right of way whichever is closer. If no public right of way exists then the measurement will be taken from the access easement line. (Adopted August 2, 2012)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances4-44
Part 9
Chapter 4
§ 9-4031.6 Buffers.
Article 3 Zoning
Industrial District (M1) Ordinance
Buffer strips as herein defined shall be required in this district for all uses where they abut land which is zoned residential. (Refer to definition.)
The buffering requirement may be waived by the Board of Adjustment upon
recommendation of the Planning Board along any boundary, which is naturally screened by evergreen plant materials or topography or may be deferred in isolated areas. (Amended December 10, 2009)
§ 9-4031.7 Off-street parking and loading.
Refer to Article 7
§ 9-4031.8 Signs.
Refer to Article 8
§ 9-4031.9 Lights.
Refer to Article 6
§ 9-4031.10 General Provisions.
Refer to Article 4
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-45
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Conservation (CON) Ordinance
§ 9-4032 CON Conservation district.
§ 9-4032.1 Intent.
This district is established to encourage the preservation of natural areas that are
unsuitable for development due to severe soil limitations, flooding, or unique natural resources.
§ 9-4032.2 Permitted principal uses and structures.
1. Farms and agricultural uses for crop and livestock production.
2. Parks and recreational activity.
3. Nature preserves.
4. Municipal Facilities (Adopted 3 May 2001)
§ 9-4032.3 Permitted accessory uses and structures.
1. Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal use or structure or to a conditional use for which a permit has been issued. (See Article 4, General Provisions).
§ 9-4032.4 Conditional Uses (Adopted 3 May 2001)
§ 9-4032.5 Dimensional requirements.
Within this district there shall be no minimum lot areas, widths, or yards required due to
the exceptional physical characteristics or this area.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-46
Part 9
Chapter 4
§ 9-4032.5 Signs.
Refer to Article 8
§ 9-4032.6 Lights.
Refer to Article 6
Article 3 Zoning
Conservation (CON) Ordinance
§ 9-4032.7 General Provisions.
Refer to Article 4
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-47
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Manufactured Home Ordinance
Park District (MHPD)
§ 9-4033 Manufactured home park district.
§ 9-4033.1 Intent
It is the intent of the Manufactured Home Park District to provide a safe and healthy location for the placement and clustering of several manufactured homes.
§ 9-4033.2 Manufactured home park requirements.
1. Area. The area or the manufactured home park shall be a minimum of two [2] acres, and the park shall have a minimum of five [5] manufactured home spaces available at first occupancy.
2. Utilities. The manufactured home park and all occupied units located in it must be connected to the municipal water and sewerage systems or other systems approved by the Harnett County Health Department or the North Carolina Department of Human Resources and the North Carolina Department of Natural Resources and Community Development, Division of Environmental Management.
3. Access and Parking. Paved, privately maintained, roadways must be provided for access to individual units and other facilities located within the park. Required parking spaces are not required to be paved.
4. Other Permitted Uses. Service buildings, recreation buildings, and other areas or structures providing laundry, sanitation, and managerial facilities are permitted subject to approval of the Planning Board. Such facilities shall serve only the park in which it is located. No such facility shall have direct access to a public street but shall be served by the privately maintained roadway.
5. Buffers. Buffer strips as herein defined shall be required along all rear and side
property lines of the park. [Refer to definition]. The buffering requirement may be waived by the Board of Adjustment upon the recommendation of the Planning Board along any boundary which is naturally screened by evergreen plant materials or topography, or may be deferred in isolated areas. (Amended December 10, 2009)
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Manufactured Home Ordinance
Park District (MHPD)
§ 9-4033.3 Manufactured home space requirements.
Manufactured home units shall be located only in spaces which meet the following requirements.
1. Access. Each space shall have access to an interior roadway with a paved width of at least twenty [20] feet. No space shall have direct access to a public street.
2. Clearance. Each space shall be designed so that at least a thirty [30] foot clearance width will be maintained between units and other structures within the park.
3. Setbacks. Manufactured home units shall be located so that a fifteen [15] foot setback is maintained from the centerline of the private interior roadway.
4. Utilities. Each space shall have hook-up facilities for water, sewer, electricity, and telephone services. All occupied manufactured home units shall have and use approved sanitary facilities within the manufactured home unit.
5. Parking. At least one [l] of the two [2] required parking spaces shall be located on or adjacent to each manufactured home space.
§ 9-4033.4 Additional requirements.
1. Recreational Areas. When a manufactured home park shall contain at least twenty [20] lots, a recreation area will be developed and maintained that shall include not less than eight percent of the total park area. The minimum size of any recreation area shall be 2,500 square feet. Lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, swamps, and marshlands shall not be considered as meeting [in part or whole] the recreation area requirements or this section.
2. New setups: New setups will not be allowed for Manufactured Homes that are older than five [5] years at time of the units building permit application. (Repealed on May 7, 2009)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-49
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Manufactured Home Ordinance
Park District (MHPD)
3. Steps. The park operator shall be required to provide and supervise the placement of pre-cast concrete or metal steps or pressure treated lumber steps at the entrances to each manufactured home located in the park or meet the requirements of the North Carolina State Building Codes, whichever is greater.
4. Tie-Down and Anchoring Requirements. Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to the ground by means of a tie-down system. When the manufactured home is factory equipped with a tie-down system designed by a registered architect or engineer, then the owner is to use the Manufacturer’s set of instructions as the standard of proper tie-down procedures. If no such set of instructions is available or if the system has not been designed by a licensed architect or engineer, then the administrative official is to enforce standards listed in the "State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes” booklet published by the North Carolina Department of Insurance.
5. Skirting. Each manufactured home shall be underpinned with exterior rated materials, of a type suitable for skirting, maintained, and in a manner approved by the administrative official.
6. Storage Buildings. Each manufactured home lot may be equipped with a storage building not to exceed ten feet by ten feet [10' x 10'] provided that all such buildings are located adjacent to the rear lot line.
7. Storage of Possessions. Storage of possessions and equipment in the area beneath a manufactured home shall be prohibited.
§ 9-4033.5 Responsibilities and duties of park operators.
1. Manufactured Home Park Maintenance. Manufactured home park operators shall be required to provide adequate supervision to maintain the park in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. Further, the manufactured home park operators shall keep all park-owned facilities, improvements, equipment, and all common areas in good repair and maintained in such a manner as to prevent the accumulation or storage of materials which would constitute a fire hazard or would cause insect or rodent breeding and harborage.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-50
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Manufactured Home Ordinance
Park District (MHPD)
2. Placement and Anchoring. Operators shall be required to supervise the placement of all manufactured homes to guarantee that they are properly anchored and attached to utilities.
3. Assist County Tax Supervisor. Operators shall be required to comply with
G.S.105-316 [a][1] which requires that as of January 1 of each year each operator of a park renting lots for six [6] or more manufactured homes furnish to the county tax supervisor the names of the owner of and a description of each manufactured home located in the park.
4. Solid Waste Disposal. The park operator will operate or provide for the operation of a solid waste disposal system, including providing park tenants with appropriate containers.
§ 9-4033.6 Procedure for securing approval of manufactured home parks.
1. Manufactured Home Park Initial Permit Application Procedure
a. Prior to the construction of a new manufactured home park or the expansion of an existing manufactured home park, the developer shall make application to the administrative official for a permit to construct or expand such a park. The application shall be accompanied by five [5] copies of the proposed park plan.
b. The park shall be drawn at a scale of fifty [50] feet to one [1] inch or larger and shall include the following:
1. The name of the park, the names and addresses of the owner or owners, and the designer or surveyor.
2. Date, scale, and approximate North arrow.
3. Boundaries of the tract shown with bearings and distances.
4. Site plan showing streets, traffic circulation, driveways, recreation areas, parking spaces, service buildings, water courses, easements, manufactured home lots, lot numbers, all structures to be located in the park site, and total acreage of the park.
5. Vicinity map showing the location of the park and the surrounding land usage.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-51
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Manufactured Home Ordinance
Park District (MHPD)
6. Names or adjoining property owners.
7. The existing and proposed utility system for surface water drainage, streetlights, water supply, and solid waste and sewage disposal facilities.
8. Certification of approval of water supply system plans by the appropriate municipal, county or state authority having jurisdiction.
9. Certification or approval of sewage collection systems by the appropriate municipal, county, or state authority having jurisdiction.
10. Certification of approval of solid waste storage collection and disposal plans by the County Health Department or the authority having jurisdiction. .
11. Certification of lot approved by Soil and Water Conservation District, including suitability for septic tank systems if used.
2. Review of the Proposed Manufactured Home Park Plan
a. The administrative official shall review the proposed manufactured home park plan to determine if it is in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Article.
b. If the administrative official finds that all requirements have been met, he shall refer the plan to the Planning Board and the Town Board of Commissioners for their review and approval. One approved copy shall be given to the developer or his agent.
3. Issuance of Initial Permit and Business License
a. After receiving approval of the proposed manufactured home park plan, the
administrative official is authorized to issue an initial permit. The intent of this permit is to enable the construction of the park according to the proposed plan but shall not be construed to entitle the applicant to offer spaces for rent or lease or to operate a manufactured home park.
b. If construction of the manufactured home park has not begun within twelve [12] months from the issued date of the initial permit, the administrative official may grant an extension or the permit when the applicant shows reasonable cause for the delay.
c. When the developer has completed the construction of the manufactured home park, he shall apply to the administrative official for a business license. The administrative
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-52
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 3 Zoning
Manufactured Home Ordinance
Park District (MHPD)
official and a representative of the County Health Department shall make an on-site inspection of the park.
1. If the park conforms to the approved plan, the administrative official shall issue the developer a business license.
2. If the park does not conform with the approved plan, the administrative official shall delay issuance of the business license until it comes into conformity.
d. The business license issued to the applicant shall constitute the authority to operate the manufactured home park. The business license shall expire after a one-year period and must be renewed to be valid.
e. When a manufactured home park is to be developed in stages, the proposed plan may be submitted for the entire development; and application for a business license may be made for each stage completed.
f. Violation of any of the ordinance requirements constitutes grounds for refusing to issue a license or renew a license or to revoke an issued license. Operating a manufactured home park without a valid license is a misdemeanor punishable under the terms of this Ordinance.
g. Manufactured home parks existing prior to the adoption of this Ordinance shall be required to obtain a conditional business license within ninety [90] days after the adoption of this Ordinance. The conditional business license shall be issued by the administrative official when the existing manufactured home park complies with the standards contained in § 9-4033.2 (2) and § 9-4033.3 (4) Utilities, § D9-4033.4 (7) Storage of Possessions, and § 9-4033.5 Responsibilities and Duties of Park Operators. (Amended 3 May 2001)
§ 9-4033.7 Signs.
Refer to Article 8
§ 9-4033.8 Lights.
Refer to Article 6
§ 9-4033.9 General Provisions.
Refer to Article 4
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-53
§ 9-4034 Objective and Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide a voluntary alternative procedure for the rezoning of a property for a specified purpose. A broad range of uses are permitted in each general (i.e., conventional) zoning district. However, there are instances where a general zoning district designation is clearly inappropriate for a certain property, but a specific use permitted under that district and subject to restrictive conditions would be consistent with the spirit and objectives of this Ordinance. Parallel conditional use districts, herein established, are intended to accommodate such situations.
This voluntary procedure is intended for firm development proposals, and is neither intended nor suited for securing early zoning for tentative uses which may not be undertaken for a long period of time.
General Zoning District Parallel Conditional
Use District
RD RD (CD)
R-15 R-15 (CD)
R-10 R-10 (CD)
R-6 R-6 (CD)
CB CB (CD)
NB NB (CD)
HB HB (CD)
MI MI (CD)
CON CON (CD)
MHP MHP (CD)
§ 9-4034.1 Application
Petitions for a zoning map amendment to establish a parallel conditional use district shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The parallel conditional use district classification shall be considered only by application of the owner of the subject property or his duly authorized agent. Such applications shall be accompanied by a written text specifying the use proposed and by a site plan showing the following:
2. The dimensions and acreage of the site and its relation to surrounding properties.
3. The layout of the entire project including the proposed use and location of all buildings.
4. The location and dimension of present and proposed streets and private drives, and pedestrian facilities.
5. The location of points of entry and exit for motor vehicles and the internal vehicular circulation pattern.
6. The location and layout of all off-street parking and loading spaces, including the number of spaces shown and required for each use.
7. The location of existing and proposed plantings and screenings, including the type and size of each plant to be installed.
Part 9 Article 3 Zoning
Parallel Conditional Use District Ordinance
8. The location and size of existing and proposed utility lines, water courses and drainage lines and easements.
9. Title, north arrow, scale, names of owner, developer, surveyor, and the date of preparation of the plan.
10. Proposed phasing, if any, and approximate completion time of the project.
11. Any and all conditions and requirements of this Ordinance.
§ 9-4034.2 Review and Approval
In considering an application for the establishment of a a parallel conditional use district, the Town Broad of Commissioners shall give due regard that the purpose and intent of this Ordinance be served, public health, safety and welfare secured and substantial justice be done. Further, the Town Board of Commissioners shall consider, evaluate and may attach reasonable and appropriate conditions to the location, nature and extent of the proposed use and its relation to surrounding property, proposed support facilities such as parking areas and driveways, pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems, screening and buffer areas, the timing of development, and such other matters as the Town Board of commissioners may find appropriate or the petitioner may propose. The petitioner shall have a reasonable opportunity to consider and respond to such additional requirements prior to final action by the Town Board of Commissioners.
In approving an application for the establishment of a parallel conditional zoning district, the Town Board of Commissioners hall have considered that the proposed district:
5. Is consistent with the spirit and intent of this section; and,
6. Is compatible with existing and probable future adjacent land uses and will contribute to a desirable overall development pattern for the area involved; and,
7. Provides for safe and adequate access to the public street system without causing undue congestion or placing excessive traffic loads on local streets.
§ 9-4034.3 Effect of Approval
If an application is approved, the parallel conditional use district thus established and all conditions attached thereto shall be binding upon the property and all subsequent development and use of the property shall be in accordance with the approved plan and conditions. Since the intent of this type of zoning is to provide for workable uses of property, it is intended that land will be zoned in accordance with firm plans to develop. Therefore, one year from the date of approval, the Planning Board shall examine progress made to develop in accordance with approved plans to determine if active efforts to so develop are proceeding, and a report shall be forwarded to the Town Board of Commissioners which may recommend that action be taken to remove the conditional approval.
Alterations to an approved plan which do not increase either the intensity or density of development and would comply with the spirit and intent of the plan and conditions, may be approved by the Planning Board without a public hearing by the Town Board of Commissioners.
§ 9-4031 through 9-4040 Reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-54
Part 9 Article 3 Zoning
Parallel Conditional Use District Ordinance
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
§ 9-4041 General provisions.
§ 9-4041.1 Uses by right.
All listed uses are permitted by right according to the terms of this Ordinance.
Conditional uses are permitted subject to additional regulations imposed. Any proposed use not listed within this ordinance is prohibited. Any requested changes or uses not listed shall follow the requirements of Article 12 Changes and Amendments.
§ 9-4041.2 Uniformity of regulations.
The regulations established by this Ordinance within each district shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.
§ 9-4041.3 Required yards not to be used by another building.
The minimum yards or other open spaces required by this Ordinance for each and every building hereafter erected, moved, or structurally altered shall not be encroached upon or considered as meeting the yard or open space requirements of any other building.
§ 9-4041.4 Relationship of building to lots.
Every building hereafter erected, moved, or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be accessory buildings on the lot except in the case of a designed complex of institutional, residential, commercial, or industrial building in an appropriate zoning district, school campus, cluster housing, shopping center, research park, etc. more than one principal building and its customary accessory building on a lot except in the following cases:
1. Multi-family dwellings in appropriate zoning districts.
2. An approved planned unit development or complex of residential or commercial buildings in an appropriate zoning district.
3. Institutional or industrial uses such as a school campus, hospital campus, industrial parks, research parks, etc. (Amended on April 7, 2011)
§ 9-4041.5 Maximum lot coverage.
The maximum lot coverage for all development in all Residential zoning districts shall be fifty (50) percent.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-55
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
§ 9-4041.6 Substandard lot of record.
Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance or his successor in title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, such lot may be used as a building site in the district in which it is located; provided, that the lot width and lot area are not more than twenty (20) percent below the minimum specified in this Ordinance. In any case where the lot area and lot width are more than twenty
(20) percent below the minimum specified in this Ordinance or other dimensional requirements cannot be met, the Board of Adjustment may approve, as a special exception, such dimensions as shall conform as closely as possible to the required dimensions.
§ 9-4041.7 Accessory building/structures.
Accessory buildings/structures are restricted to rear and side yards. Only one accessory building/structure shall be permitted on lots less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Larger lots are allowed an extra accessory building/structure for each additional fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. There shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet between the primary structure and any accessory building/structure as well as ten (10) feet between each accessory building/structure. (Amended on February 7, 2013)
Each Accessory structures shall not exceed 40% of the total area of the principal structure. At no time shall the total area of accessory use exceed 25% of the rear yard. (Amended on February 7, 2013)
* Minimum side setback: 8ft 10ft (Amended on February 7, 2013) * Minimum rear setback: 10ft
* Minimum setback from principal structure: 10 ft
* Maximum Building Height shall not exceed 20ft mean roof height (Amended on May 6, 2010)
* Maximum Building Height for accessory structures shall not exceed 20 feet mean roof height with the exception of Schools, Churches, Hospitals, Municipal Facilities, and other such campuses provided that at least one acre comprise the total land area of the development. The maximum height for accessory structures in such instances shall not exceed 35ft (feet) mean roof height. (Amended on May 6, 2010)
The following uses are permitted within accessory buildings in residential areas: ? Parking
? Gazebo
? Pool Houses
? Equipment enclosure ? Workshop
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-56
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
Trash containers, mechanical equipment and minor outdoor storage shall be located only within the rear yard.
Mailboxes, newspaper boxes, wall, fences, birdhouses, flagpoles and pump covers may be placed in any front, side or rear yard. Doghouses may be placed in rear yards only.
All Freestanding Carports shall be located in the side or rear yard of the lot.
Freestanding carports may be placed no closer than five (5) feet to the property line when
placed against principal structure. In addition, the freestanding carport cannot extend into front yard unless it is connected/attached to the principal structure. A maximum of two freestanding carports are allowed except when an accessory building is located on the lot. When an accessory building is located on the lot, only one freestanding carport will be allowed.
§ 9-4041.8 Accessory uses.
1. POOLS
All pools, whether aboveground or in-ground, shall be built only in rear yards. The definition of a pool shall include all structures, and walks or patio areas of cement, stone, or wood at or above grade, built for, and used in conjunction with the pool.
A pool as defined above shall not exceed 45% of a required rear yard.
Pools, as defined above, shall be setback a minimum of 10 ft. from all side and rear
property lines. Patio area at grade have no setback requirements from rear and side lot lines.
Pool shall be enclosed by a privacy fence with a minimum height of (6) feet and a maximum height of eight (8) feet.
Pools located in rear yards on corner lots which are greater then 22,000 sq. ft. shall be located in the rear yard opposite the abutting street, unless the rear yard is screened by a wall or privacy fence.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-57
Part 9
Chapter 4
2. SATELLITE DISHES
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
Satellite dishes less than 20 inches in diameter may be located anywhere on a lot. All other
satellite dishes shall adhere to the following standards:
1. Satellite dishes shall be no larger than eight (8) feet in diameter.
2. The maximum height shall be fifteen (15) feet unless the applicant can prove:
a. a less intrusive location is not possible and,
b. a higher location will improve reception.
3. The dish must be installed and grounded properly.
4. Satellite dishes may not be located in front or side yards and shall meet all
setbacks applicable to accessory structures.
5. Satellite dishes shall be screened from view with dense landscaping materials,
fences, or other solid materials, to the extent that it does not impair reception.
6. Satellite dishes with a reflective surface shall be painted a subdued or natural
color.
7. Satellite dishes shall not be located on a roof.
3. Yard Sale (Amended 3/6/2014)
Yard sales, as defined in this ordinance, are specifically permitted as an accessory use all residential zones and all properties currently used by residential purposes. Such sales may be conducted in the front yard provided sales do not exceed 48 hours (consecutive) in length, with sales only during daylight hours, and no more than 1 per month. No zoning compliance permits required for these sales.
4. ON-PREMISE PRODUCE STANDS (Amended September 5, 2013)
On-premise produce stands requiring a building permit are no longer considered to be temporary and shall only be permissible as an accessory use in the RD (Rural District) only. On-premise produce stands requiring a building permit shall also require a regular zoning permit.
A. Products shall be produced on the premises.
B. All parking shall be accommodated by off-street parking.
C. Shall have reasonable ingress, egress and on-site vehicular travel.
D. Maximum of one sign with a maximum sign area of 36 square feet.
§ 9-4041.9 Street access.
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut a public dedicated street for a distance of at least fifty (50) feet in a R-6 District, seventy-five (75) feet in R-10 and R-15 Districts, and one hundred (100) feet in a Rural District. Cul-de-sacs located in R-6, R-10, and R-15 subdivisions must abut a public dedicated street for a distance of at least forty (40) feet. A building in a designed shopping center in a commercial district or a planned project in a residential district may be erected adjoining a parking area or other dedicated open space used in common with other lots.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-58
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
§ 9-4041.10 Street numbering for structures.
All principal structures shall display their street address clearly on their building to enable emergency vehicles to locate emergency calls. The following standards shall apply:
1. Street numbers shall be a minimum of 3 inches in height.
2. Street numbers shall be a color that contrast with the surface it is mounted on.
3. Street numbers shall be clearly visible from the roadway.
4. The total street numbering area allowed shall be three (3) square feet.
5. Structures that are not visible from the street must have the street numbers placed at the entrance of the driveway that is used to access the structure. The numbers must adhere to the above standards and shall be placed on a mailbox or signpost that is clearly visible from the roadway.
§ 9-4041.11 Exceptions to height regulations.
The height limitations contained in the dimension requirements do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, chimneys, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
§ 9-4041.12 Driveways.
No portions of any entrance driveway leading from a public street shall be closer than
twenty (20) feet to the corner of any intersection as measured from the intersecting right-of-way line.
§ 9-4041.13 Curb cuts giving access to public rights-of-way.
Construction of curb cuts for purposes of ingress or egress to property abutting a public right-of-way shall be approved by the public authority in the town which has jurisdiction over the maintenance of public streets and the North Carolina Department of Transportation, Highway
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-59
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
Commission where said curbs affect access to State Highways. Provision for all access work done on highway rights-of-way is subject to approval by the Highway Commission.
§ 9-4041.14 Nonresidential & residential manufactured home use and temporary buildings.
Temporary buildings, manufactured homes, and modular buildings meeting used for nonresidential and residential purposes may be located in any zoning district, except R-15 district, but only if they are temporary uses (such as construction offices, equipment storage receptacles, temporary residence, pending completion of permanent residence, or temporary offices) and only if temporary building permits are initially obtained from the Building Inspector and renewed every 90 days for a period not to exceed one (1) year. Temporary uses shall comply with all other appropriate provisions of this Ordinance and North Carolina State Building Codes.
§ 9-4041.15 Parking and storage of certain vehicles.
Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed buildings.
s 9-4041.16 Corner visibility.
There shall be no planting, structure, fence, or other obstruction to visibility on any
corner lot between two (2) and ten (10) feet above the level of the centerline of the street in a triangle area bounded by the street right-of-way line on such corner lots and a side line joining points along right-of-way lines twenty-five (25) feet from the intersecting right-of-way corner.
§ 9-4041.17 Issued building permits.
The provisions contained herein shall not affect buildings, structures, and uses for which building permits were issued prior to the passage of this Ordinance providing that the activities for which the outstanding permits were issued are begun within six months of the date this
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-60
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
Ordinance is adopted. Outstanding zoning permits not used within six months shall be null and void. See vested rights for site specific and phased development plans.
§ 9-4041.18 Newly incorporated areas.
All territory which may hereafter be included within the zoning jurisdiction or the Town of Erwin shall be zoned by the Board of Commissioners at the time of such incorporation.
s 9-4041.19 Additional environmental provisions.
In addition to the requirements of this Ordinance, all effluents and emissions into the air or surface or groundwater from new development permitted by this Ordinance must be in conformity with all applicable Federal, State, and County Health and Environmental Quality regulations. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to comply with all applicable regulations, which also include flood plain, and water shed regulations.
Further, all land-disturbing activities shall meet the requirements of the Sedimentation and Pollution Control Act of 1973.
§ 9-4041.20 Junkyards, salvage yards, and other similar uses.
Junkyards, salvage yards, and similar uses as defined herein (refer to definition) shall be permitted as a conditional use exclusively in the M-l industrial district. Junkyards shall not be located in any other district.
In the interest or safety to children and adjacent property, junkyards shall be
encompassed by a wall or fence at least six (6) feet high and shall be screened from view by a buffer strip approved by the Planning Board. (Refer to definition.)
§ 9-4041.21 Fences and walls.
A. Applicability
1.Unless otherwise noted in this ordinance, fences or walls are permitted in the various districts subject to the following regulations:
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-61
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
B. Permitted Fence Types
1. The following fence types are permitted in all zoning districts:
a. Masonry or stone walls;
b. Iron;
c. Chain-link;
d. Wood or similar material;
e. Vinyl;
f. Fences proposed to be constructed of any other materials shall be subject to the approval of the zoning administrator
C. Prohibited Fence Types
1. The following fence types are prohibited; including but not limited to:
a. Fences constructed primarily of barbed or razor wire, except for the purpose of enclosing livestock in prescribed zoning districts and in accordance with Erwin Code;
b. Fences carrying electrical current, except for the purpose of enclosing livestock in prescribed zoning districts and in accordance with Erwin Town Code;
c. Fences constructed in whole or in part of readily flammable material such as paper, cloth or canvas;
d. Fences topped with barbed wire or metal spikes in residential zoning districts, except those fences built in conjunction with electric or gas substations, utility facilities, sewer plants or facilities, radio and television masts, towers and similar structures, municipal water storage facilities, public correctional and mental institutions, or military facilities, or hazardous or radioactive waste, storage, and disposal facilities;
e. Fences constructed of concertina wire;
f. Fences constructed in whole or in part of sheet metal, tin, or tires
D. Maintenance Required
1. Any fence which, through neglect, lack of repair, state of disrepair, type or manner of construction, method of placement or otherwise, constitutes a hazard or endangers any person, animal or property is hereby deemed a nuisance. If such conditions exist, the zoning administrator shall require the owner of the property upon which the fence is located to repair, replace or demolish the fence causing the nuisance, in accordance with the regulations found herein.
E.Maximum Height
1. Fence heights shall not exceed those heights as found in the “Use and Requirement” Charts found in Part F of § 9-4041.21. Uses not explicitly noted in chart shall conform to the most approximate type use noted, which shall be determined by the zoning administrator.
2. Measurement:
a. Fence height shall be measured in the same manner as buildings. Where fences are located on retaining walls or man-made berms, the height of the retaining wall or berm shall not be considered as part of the overall height of the fence.
3. Fence height limitations do not apply to fences built in conjunction with electric or gas substations, utility facilities, sewer plants or facilities, radio and television
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-62
Part 9 Article 4 Zoning
Chapter 4 General Provisions Ordinance
masts, towers and similar structures, municipal water storage facilities, public correctional and mental institutions, or military facilities, or hazardous or radioactive waste, storage, and disposal facilities.
F. Temporary Fences
2.Nothing in this Section shall preclude the installation of temporary fences around construction works, erected or maintained pursuant to the NC State Building Code or other applicable State or Federal requirements.
G. General Fence Requirements
3. Obstruction of View: No fence shall be placed or retained in such a manner as to obstruct vision at any intersection of public or private streets.
4. Fence Prohibited in Rights-of-Way: No fence shall be erected or maintained within or on any State or Town right-of-way.
5. Obstruction of Drainage way: Fence construction shall not alter or impede the natural flow of water in any stream, creek, drainage swale or ditch.
6. Historic District: Fences in Historic Districts shall meet the guidelines for the particular Historic District in which it is located.
7. Orientation of Barbed Wire: On fences topped with barbed wire, the bottom strand must be at least six (6) feet above grade.
8. Placement of Support Boards, Posts, and other Fence Support Materials: Fence shall be build with finished side facing outward toward property line.
9. Location of Fence to Allow Maintenance: No fence shall be erected in any location that prohibits the owner of the property on which said fence is erected from having access, for maintenance purposes, to all sides of such fence.
H. Use and Requirement Chart:
Refer to Appendix D (Amended January 14, 2010)
§ 9-4041.22 Customary Home Occupations.
1. Such business shall not change the character of the dwelling.
2. Such business may not use any portion of an accessory building/structure.
3. Employees are restricted to family members that reside at the home.
4. No outside storage associated with the home occupation is permitted.
5. No more than 25% of the home shall be used in connection with the home occupation.
6. No display or advertising is permitted.
7. No off street parking will be permitted in connection with the home occupation.
8. Animal care services, which may include pet trimming and washing, are expressly prohibited as home occupations. (Ord. of 2/07/02)
9. Activities engaging in the business of conducting a barbershop, beauty salon or parlor, or other cosmetology services as approved by the Governing Board. (Ord. of 2/07/02)
§ 9-4041.23 Outdoors storage.
Outdoor storage of goods, equipment and material shall be prohibited in all districts except the B-2 Highway Business district and the M-I Industrial zoning district as a conditional use as provided within Article 3 - Zoning Map and Districts.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-63
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
All non-conforming outdoor storage existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, which does not conform, to the requirements of this article, shall be removed and/or brought into compliance within thirty-six (36) months from the effective date of this Ordinance.
After the effective date of this ordinance, any new outdoor storage that has not been approved as a conditional use shall be considered in violation of the provisions of this section and shall be removed within thirty days at the Owner’s expense. Failure to comply shall result in a penalty in accordance with Article 9 § 9-4091.8 Penalty.
§ 9-4041.24 Streetscape landscaping.
The intent of this section is to establish a landscape planting area parallel to the right-of- way. This area shall contain plantings of trees and other live vegetation to provide a more pleasing view from the travel ways; to provide a continuity of vegetation throughout the Town; to reduce the amount of impervious surface and reduce storm water runoff; improve environmental conditions; and to preserve existing trees.
For all proposed development (except residential and the residential portion of Planned Neighborhood districts) abutting rights-of-way, one of the following shall be required:
(A) A perimeter planting strip adjacent to the right-of-way (planting area is not to be located in the right-of-way) with a minimum width of six (6) feet, provided each streetscape tree shall have a minimum planting area of a three-foot radius, measured from the trunk of the tree. The strip's total length shall be equal to the total length of the property line adjacent to an existing or proposed right-of-way as determined by the adopted Thoroughfare Plan, exclusive of access drives.
(B) Trees shall be planted, if not existing, within the planting strip according to one (1) of the following requirements:
(1) Large shade trees shall be spaced no greater than seventy-five (75) feet apart with a minimum of one (1) tree planted for every fifty (50) linear feet of perimeter planting strip. Each tree shall be a minimum of two (2) inches caliper, have a minimum height of ten (10) feet from the ground surface, and be planted a minimum of five (5) feet from the right-of-way line.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-64
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
(2) Small size ornamental trees shall be spaced no greater than fifty (50) feet
apart with a minimum of two (2) trees planted for every fifty (50) feet of perimeter planting strip. Each tree shall be a minimum of one (1) inch caliper and have a minimum height of six (6) feet from the ground surface, and be planted a minimum of five (5) feet from the right-of-way line.
(3) A combination of both large shade and small ornamental trees spaced no
greater than seventy-five (75) feet apart for large trees, fifty (50) feet apart for small trees and seventy-five (75) feet apart between large trees and small trees.
(4) A minimum of one (1) large and two (2) small trees per detached sign on the property shall be planted, if not existing, within the perimeter planting strip. Corner lots shall have not less than one (1) tree on each street perimeter-planting strip greater than or equal to fifty (50) linear feet. Credit for such trees shall be applied to meet the minimum tree spacing requirements.
(C) Existing trees in perimeter planting strip. Existing trees planted in the perimeterplanting strip may be accepted if they meet or exceed the requirements of (B); or if the existing trees do not meet the requirements of (B) the existing trees may be combined with additional new trees to meet the requirements of (B).
§ 9-4041.25 Tree size at planting.
(A) Large shade tree: Each tree shall be a minimum of two (2) inches caliper, have a minimum height of ten (10) feet from the ground surface, and not be within the right-of-way. (B) Small size ornamental tree; Each tree shall be a minimum of one (1) inch caliper, have a minimum height of six (6) feet from the ground surface and not be within the right-of- way.
§ 9-4041.26 Visibility.
Any planting on any corner of two (2) streets shall comply with a site triangle clearance as described in Article 4 General Provisions N. Corner Visibility.
§ 9-4041.27 Tree replacement.
Landowners shall be responsible for the installation, preservation and maintenance of all planting and physical features required, satisfying the conditions of this section. Any dead or
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-65
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
missing vegetation shall be replaced within one (1) calendar year, so as to maintain the minimum standards of this Article
§ 9-4041.28 Existing developed properties.
Compliance - Nonresidential properties which were existing and developed prior to the effective date of this Article making improvements expansions, renovations or repairs to interior and exterior features greater than 25% of the gross floor area or at least one-third of the replacement value, or changes in the type of occupancy are not required to comply with the requirements of this Article.
§ 9-4041.29 Designated entrance corridors landscaping.
The intent of this section is to ensure that streetscape trees are provided along
"Designated Entrance Corridors" in order to provide a more pleasing view from the travel ways; to provide a continuity of vegetation throughout the Town; to reduce the amount of impervious surface and reduce storm water runoff; improve environmental conditions; preserve existing trees; and to provide harmony within, and enhance the image of the Town.
Streetscape landscaping shall be required on all proposed development, which abut a right-of-way along Designated Entrance Corridors, as defined below. Existing trees along the Designated Entrance Corridors shall be preserved whenever practical. The Designated Entrance Corridors include, but are not limited to the following streets:
Denim Drive Red Hill Church Road
NC HWY 55 US HWY 421
NC HWY 217 West J Street
NC HWY 82
(A) Designated Entrance Corridor Specifications.
(1) The Streetscape landscaping standards, as set forth in Article IV. V.
Streetscape Landscaping of this ordinance shall be applied for all proposed development abutting rights-of-way along Designated Entrance Corridors.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-66
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
General Provisions Ordinance
(2) In cases where a Designated Entrance Corridor is scheduled to be widened,
the developer shall plant the trees prior to the widening project, provided that the North Carolina
Department of Transportation (NCDOT) has marked the proposed right-of-way.
§ 9-4041.30 Electronic Gaming Operations
1. Days/Hours of operation: Businesses engaging in electronic gaming operations activities may operate from 8:00 am until 10:00 pm each day, Monday through Saturday unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board.
2. The maximum number of machines/terminals/computers for any electronic gaming operations is 20.
3. The machines/terminals must not be prohibited by State or Federal law and must have all applicable permits and licenses.
4. If food or beverage is served the establishment must meet the requirements of the Erwin Zoning Ordinance, the Harnett County Department of Health, and all Local, State, and Federal law requirements.
5. No establishment that operates electronic gaming machines in any capacity may serve alcohol.
6. All establishments engaging in electronic gaming must post restrictions banning it’s patrons from bringing firearms into the facility.
7. The establishment must be a minimum of Five Hundred (500) feet from any residential zoning district.
8. The establishment must be a minimum of Five Hundred (500) feet from any other organization engaged in an electronic gaming operation business.
9. The establishment must be a minimum of Five Hundred (500) feet from any church, synagogue, or temple and associated uses including cemeteries congregate care facility; a public or private daycare center; or any public or private school. The required separation from the above listed uses applies whether the place of worship, school, child day care center, playground, or park is the principal use or an accessory use of the property.
10. The applicant shall submit a current plot plan prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor or engineer depicting the following:
a. Property lines and the structures containing any existing electronic gaming businesses within One Thousand (500) linear feet of the subject property
b. Property lines of any established church, synagogue, or temple and associated uses including cemeteries congregate care facility; a public or private daycare center; or any public or private school that is within Five Hundred (500) feet of the subject property
c. Property lines of any existing residential zoning district within three hundred (500) feet of the subject building.
11. Distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior structure wall of the electronic gaming establishment to the nearest lot line of the religious use, school, residential district or other electronic gaming facility.
12. Establishments will provide at least 25 square feet for each gaming terminal or machine. Furthermore, gaming areas when implemented as an accessory use shall be completely separated from public view by a method which is NC Building Code compliant.
13. No goods or services of any kind may be traded or bartered in return for the use of any portion of the permitted electronic gaming operation.
14. The minimum age of any persons entering an electronic gaming operation shall be 18.
15. All establishments engaging in electronic gaming either as a primary or accessory use are subject to inspection at any time by a representative of the Town of Erwin, or its designee.
16. All existing electronic gaming operations shall be mandated to comply with the above referenced regulations within six (6) months of the adoption of this ordinance. Failure to do so will result in a violation of the Town of Erwin Zoning Ordinance. Furthermore, any permitted electronic gaming business that is not in compliance with the regulations as stated shall receive one (1) written violation describing the nature of the violation and a time period to come into compliance. Should the establishment not come into compliance within the specified time, or is found to be in violation of this ordinance for a second time, The Conditional Permit in question shall be remanded to the Commissioners of The Town of Erwin for a public hearing on its revocation.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-67
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 4 Zoning
Nonconforming Uses Ordinance
§ 9-4042 Other Uses (Adopted May 3, 2012)
§ 9-4042.1 Equine Stables for Commercial or Private Use (Adopted May 3, 2012)
1. Private Equine Stables are those not boarding horses for the public, and/or for hire. There shall not be more than one horse for each one (1) acre of the total site area; furthermore the maximum number of equines shall be limited to ten (10) horses per site. All other Stables boarding horses for the public or for hire will be considered a Commercial Use and subject to additional regulations as outlined within this ordinance. Commercial Stables are allowed one horse for each one (1) acre of the total site with a maximum of twenty (20) animals per site.
2. Such buildings or structures shall be located no closer than forty (40) feet to any right of way or property line, and no closer than fifty (50) feet to any building containing a dwelling unit or accessory living quarters on the same premises.
3. There shall be no open-air storage of manure, compost or similar used or soiled organic materials closer than one hundred (100) feet to any boundary property line or any Institutional, any Commercial or any Improve Upon Property closer than fifty (50) feet to any dwelling unit or accessory living quarters on the same premises.
4. Pasture and grazing lands which abut any property line for any distance it is required that there shall be erected and maintained a fence not less than four (4) feet nor more than six (6) feet in height, and shall be located no closer than twenty (20) feet from any established right of way. Any fence which abuts said property lines shall be installed in accordance with the setbacks which govern accessory structures in each respective zoning district where allowed.
5. Grass areas within the fence line are subject to reasonable mowing requirements.
§ 9-4042.2 Mobile Food Vendors (Amended October 3, 2013)
A. Prior to the issuance of a Zoning Compliance Permit, food vendors shall provide documentation of approval from the County Health Department in which the food vendor’s associated restaurant or commissary is located.
B. Food vendor must obtain
a. Town Zoning compliance Permit
b. Town Privilege License
C. Permits shall be available for inspection
D. Vendors may operate only on private property with written permission from the property owner that the food vendor may operate on his/her private property.
E. Food vendors must cease operations between 11pm and 8pm and are not permitted to remain on-site overnight.
F. Food vendors shall not block emergency access, fire lanes, loading/service areas, drive aisles, or parking spaces required per the zoning ordinance.
G. Food vendors shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from any fire hydrant, any fire department connection, driveway entrance.
H. There is adequate parking for the principal business as well as the food vendor.
I. Shall have reasonable ingress, egress and on-site vehicular travel.
J. A food vendor shall not operate with or as a drive-in window.
K. Temporary connections to potable water are prohibited. All plumbing and electrical connections shall be in accordance with the State Building Code.
L. Grease and wastewater must be contained and disposed of in an approved grease receptacle.
M. Public waste receptacles shall not be used to dispose of the food vendor’s waste.
N. If the food vendor is operating after dark, the food vendor shall provide appropriate lighting.
O. Maximum of one easel sign with a maximum sign area of 12 square feet of display may be placed within the customer waiting area.
P. The Town Manager or Code Administrator may revoke the Zoning Compliance Permit if it is determined that the food vendor’s operations are causing parking, traffic congestion, or litter problems either on or off the property where the use is located or that such use is otherwise creating a danger to the public health or safety.
Q. EXEMPTION:
a. This section shall not apply to food vendors with applicable Health Department permits vending at any parade, festival, or event authorized by the Town.
b. That has been included in a Temporary Zoning Compliance permit for a rally, carnival, religious revivals, and similar temporary uses per Section 9-4091.6.
PART 9 ARTICLE 4 ZONING
CHAPTER 4 NONCONFORMING USES ORDINANCE
§ 9-4051 Nonconforming uses.
After the effective date of this Ordinance, preexisting lots or structure, or uses or lots or structures which would be prohibited under the regulations for the district in which located, shall be considered as nonconforming. Nonconforming lots, structures, or uses may be continued provided they conform to the following provisions:
§ 9-4051.1 Continuance of nonconforming buildings.
The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance shall not be affected by this Ordinance, and such use may be extended throughout the building provided no structural alterations except those required by law, ordinance or ordered by the Administrative Official to secure the safety of the building are made therein, but no such use shall be extended to occupy land outside such building. If such nonconforming building is removed or the nonconforming use of such building is discontinued for a continuous period of more than one hundred and eighty (180) days, every future use of such premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
§ 9-4051.2 Continuance of nonconforming use of land.
The lawful use of “land” existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance, although such use does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance, shall not be affected by this Ordinance provided, however, that no such nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy a greater area of land than occupied by such use at the time of the passage of this Ordinance. If such nonconforming use is discontinued for a continuous period of more than one hundred and eighty (180) days, every future use of said land shall be in conformity with the provision of this Ordinance.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-68
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 5 Zoning
Nonconforming Uses Ordinance
§ 9-4051.3 Extension of nonconforming uses and their buildings.
1. Nonconforming uses and nonconforming portions of buildings shall not hereafter be enlarged or extended in anyway provided, however that a building which is nonconforming solely because of its encroachment is a required yard area may be extended in any lawful manner that does not further encroach in that yard
2. The Board of Commissioners shall determine the following exceptions for owner occupied residents (not renter occupied): Owner occupied residents may extend a nonconforming building up to a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet to be granted on a one time basis for the nonconforming building. If the nonconforming building changes ownership or remains in the same ownership, further nonconforming extensions will not be allowed. In addition, extensions of the nonconforming building will not be granted by the Erwin Board of Commissioners if the existing setbacks cannot be met or if there is any health or safety concern.
§ 9-4051.4 Change of nonconforming issues.
Any nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use, or with the approval of the Board of Adjustment, to any use more in character with the uses permitted in the district. In permitting such change, the Board of Adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
§ 9-4051.5 Cessation of nonconforming uses.
If active operations of a nonconforming use are discontinued for a continuous period of 180 days, such nonconforming use shall thereafter be used only for a conforming use.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-69
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 5 Zoning
Nonconforming Uses Ordinance
§ 9-4051.6 Destruction of nonconforming uses.
If a nonconforming structure or a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than sixty percent (60%) of its assessed valuation at the time of destruction, such structure may not be restored as a nonconforming structure or for a nonconforming use. If destroyed by less than sixty percent (60%) but not restored within twelve (12) months of the time such damage occurred, it may not be restored as a nonconforming structure or for a nonconforming use. Owner occupied residences, which are nonconforming uses may be rebuilt regardless of the extent of the destruction. However, existing setbacks shall be enforced.
§ 4051.7 Repair and alteration of nonconforming uses.
Normal maintenance and repair in a building occupied by a nonconforming use is
permitted provided it does not increase the bulk of the structure nor extend the nonconforming use.
EXCEPTION: Existing Nonconforming Manufactured Homes
a. Purpose: There are a number of existing Manufactured Homes that are
nonconforming because of Type rather than Use in the corporate limits of Erwin and its Exterritorial Jurisdiction. The Erwin Board of Commissioners deems it proper to allow replacement of manufactured homes (residence use) that meet the following criteria:
b. Application For Replacement: The applicant shall deliver a completed application, furnished by the Town, to the Administrative Official. The application will then be forwarded to the Erwin Board of Commissioners for consideration. The application will contain, at minimum, the following statements and information:
1. Owner name, contact number, mailing address, and property address.
2. Name and address of property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the manufactured home lot being considered.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-70
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 5 Zoning
Nonconforming Uses Ordinance
3. A statement that the applicant currently resides in the existing unit and was
owner of the unit and lot prior to 7 September 2000.
4. A statement that applicant will occupy the proposed new unit for at least one
year.
5. A site plan drawn to scale (1 inch = 30 feet maximum) showing lot shape, size, and all dimensions. All structures and improvements, including primary and accessory buildings shall be drawn to scale, positioned on site plan showing the distances from each other and from the front, rear and side yard property lines.
6. A statement that the replacement unit will meet the following criteria:
a. The exterior siding consists predominantly of vinyl or aluminum horizontal
lap siding (whose reflectivity does not exceed that of gloss white paint), wood, or hardboard, comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction.
b. The front entrance to the manufactured home has stairs and a porch, the
porch being at least four feet by six feet in size. Stairs, porches, entrance and exit to and from the home shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code.
c. The manufactured home is set up in accordance with the standards set by
the North Carolina Department of Insurance and a continuous, permanent masonry foundation or masonry curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, is installed under the perimeter of the manufactured home.
d. The moving hitch, wheels, axles, and transporting lights have been
removed.
e. Manufactured home shall comply with the FHA (Federal Housing
Administration) requirements relative to tie downs
c. Fee: The Board of Commissioners shall set a fee, payable to the Town of Erwin, to cover the necessary administrative costs. This set fee shall be posted in the Town Clerk’s office.
d. Action By Board of Commissioners: The Board shall review all applications and determine if newer units may replace existing Manufactured Homes on individual lots. The Board will not grant replacement if zoning district setbacks and lot coverage cannot be met or if
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-71
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 5 Zoning
Nonconforming Uses Ordinance
the Board determines that imposing other conditions cannot adequately protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
e. Intent: It is the intent of this criteria to insure that these manufactured homes, when installed, shall have substantially the appearance of an on site conventionally built single family dwelling, to include landscaping in harmony with surrounding dwellings
f. Expiration: Any replacement of noncompliant or nonconforming Manufactured Homes allowed by ordinance must be applied for and completed within (6) months of the demise or removal of such unit.
§ 9-4052 through 9-4060 reserved
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-72
Part 9
Chapter 4
§ 9-4061 Lighting requirements.
§ 9-4061.1 Purpose.
Article 6 Zoning
Lighting Ordinance
This article sets forth minimum criteria for the installation, use and maintenance of
exterior lighting, the purposes of which are to (1) require lighting in outdoor public places where safety and security are concerns; (2) protect drivers and pedestrians on nearby travel ways from disabling glare from non-vehicular light sources that shine directly into their eyes and thereby impair safe travel; (3) shield neighboring properties from nuisance glare resulting from non- existent or improperly directed or shielded light sources; (4) limit the height of light standards to preclude or lessen light pollution; and (5) promote efficient design and operation with regard to energy conservation.
§ 9-4061.2 Lighting standards: Applicability
1. Lighting facilities shall be required for all off-street parking areas and off-street loading areas and for all driveways providing ingress and egress thereto for all subdivisions and/or land developments for business, commercial, personal service, industrial, multi-family, recreational, institutional and public uses. In the approval of any subdivision or land development plan, the Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to require lighting to be incorporated for other uses or locations where in their reasonable discretion such lighting is warranted. In addition, the provisions of this section shall apply to signs and to architectural and landscape lighting.
§ 9-4061.3 Plan submission.
1. Lighting plans submitted for review and approval for subdivisions and land
developments in connection with any use identified in subparagraph B of this section shall
include a schematic layout of all proposed exterior fixture locations, isofootcandle data, and a
plot demonstrating adequate intensities and uniformities within the limitations established in § D of this section, and manufacturers description of the equipment (catalog cuts), glare-control
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-73
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 6 Zoning
Lighting Ordinance
devices, lamps, mounting heights and means, proposed hours of operation of the lighting, and maintenance schedule. Illumination intensities shall be plotted on a 10 x 10 grid.
2. When requested by the Board of Commissioners, the applicant shall submit a visual impact photometric plan that demonstrates both light coverage and light spillage resulting from the proposed lighting plan and the provision for adequate measures to mitigate nuisance from light pollution and disabling glare, both on the uses or development site and on adjacent properties.
§ 9-4061.4 Design standards and illumination standards.
1. Lighting facilities located on off-street parking areas and loading areas for uses and developments governed by this Section, or in connection with signs and recreational and institutional activities, shall provide an illumination level utilizing the current North America (IESNA) unless otherwise approved by the Planning commission for justifiable cause shown.
2. Illumination, where required by this § 9-4061, shall, as a maximum, have the
intensities and uniformity ration in the Lighting Handbook of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), 8th. Edition, as follows:
Maintained Uniformity
Use/Task Foot-candles Avg.:Min.
(a) Parking, multi-family
Low vehicular/pedestrian activity 0.2 min. 4:1
Medium vehicular/pedestrian activity 0.6 min. 4:1
(b) Parking, industrial/commercial/ institutional municipal
High activity, e.g., regional shipping centers, fast food facilities, major 0.9 min. 4:1
athletic/civic, cultural events
Medium activity, e.g., community shopping centers, office parks, 0.6 min. 4:1
hospitals, commuter lots, cultural/civic/recreational events
Low activity, e.g., neighborhood shopping, industrial employee 0.2 min. 4:1
parking, school, church parking
(c) Non-residential walkways and bikeways 0.5 min. 5:1
(d) Building entrances 5.0 avg -
3. In the application of the above standards, the following regulations shall apply:
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-74
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 6 Zoning
Lighting Ordinance
(a) Illumination levels shall be defined as maintained horizontal foot-candles on the task. For example, the pavement or area surface.
(b) Uniformity ratios dictate that average illumination values shall not exceed
minimum values by more than the product of the minimum value and the specified ratio. For
example, in the case of the commercial parking high activity, the average foot-candles shall not be in excess of 3.6 (0.9 x 4)
(c) In no case shall illumination exceed 0.2 foot-candles measured at the property line; and, the amount of illumination projected onto a residentially zoned property or use from another property shall not exceed 0.1 foot-candle at the property line.
(d) Lighting standards in parking areas shall be located no more than one hundred feet (100) apart.
(e) Lamp types and colors shall be in harmony within the adjacent community, any special circumstances existing on the site, and with surrounding installations. Lamp types and colors shall be consistent with the task and setting, and shall not create a mix of colors unless otherwise approved by the Board of Commissioners for cause shown.
§ 9-4061.5 Glare control.
1. All lighting fixtures shall meet IESNA cutoff criteria. No lighting shall be permitted which shines directly into residential units, or results in glare beyond an angle of thirty (30) degrees from the vertical plane, measured from the light source.
2. Light fixtures, including mounting base, shall not exceed sixteen feet (16) in height above finished grade.
3. All lighting shall be effectively shielded and shall be installed and/or aimed so as to shield nearby public or private streets and neighboring properties from direct glare light radiation, or light pollution which may create a safety hazard or a nuisance.
4. All lighting shall be completely shielded from any public right of way.
5. Illuminated signs shall have an indirect lighting source or shielded source.
6. The Board of Commissioners, as they deem appropriate, may require that lighting be controlled by automatic timing devices to extinguish light sources during specific periods to mitigate the adverse consequences of light pollution.
7. Glare control shall be accomplished primarily through the proper selection and
application of lighting equipment. Only after those means have been exhausted shall vegetation,
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-75
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 6 Zoning
Lighting Ordinance
fences, and similar screening methods be considered acceptable for reducing glare.
8. Fixtures used for architectural lighting, such as façade, feature and landscape
lighting, shall be aimed or directed so as to preclude light projection beyond the immediate
objects intended to be illuminated. All such lighting shall be extinguished between the hours of 11:00 PM prevailing time and dawn.
§ 9-4061.6 Installation and maintenance.
1. The applicant/landowner shall install or cause to be installed all lighting fixtures and facilities at his/its expense. Light fixtures and poles shall be in accordance with a lighting plan approved by the Board of Commissioners upon recommendation of the Planning Board, in compliance with this § 9-4061. The landowner shall be responsible for all costs involved in the maintenance, upkeep and operation of all lighting or parking and loading areas and other areas required by this § 9-4061.
2. Electrical feeds to lighting standards shall be run underground, not overhead.
3. Lighting fixtures shall be maintained by the landowner so as to always meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
§ 9-4061.7 Compliance.
1. Board of Commissioner’s approval of a lighting plan upon the recommendation of the Planning Board, does not relieve the landowner of responsibility should any light standards or light fixtures, after construction, fail to conform or continue to conform to the provision of this § 9-4061. The Town reserves the right to conduct a post-installation nighttime inspection to verify compliance with the requirements of this § 9-4061 and, if applicable, to require remedial action at the expense of the landowner.
2. Authority for determination of correct lighting installation shall rest with the
Administrative Official, with advice form the Town Engineer. If the Administrative Official
determines that any lighting installation creates a safety or personal security hazard due to
insufficient illumination levels or produces unacceptable levels of nuisance glare, light pollution, or skyward light, the landowner or other person/entity then responsible for the use, maintenance and operation of the lighting shall be so notified and required to take timely remedial action at the expense of the landowner or other responsible person.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-76
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 7 Zoning
Parking and Loading Ordinance
§ 9-4071 Off-street parking requirements.
There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area; or before conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another, permanent off-street parking space in the amount specified by this section, together with adequate driveway and maneuvering space. Such parking space may be provided in a parking garage or properly graded open space.
§ 9-4071.1 Certification of Minimum Parking Requirements.
Each application for a zoning permit submitted to the Building Inspector as provided for in this Ordinance shall include information as to the location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading space and the means of ingress and egress to such space. This information shall be in sufficient detail to enable the Building Inspector to determine whether or not the requirements of this section are met.
§ 9-4071.2 Combination Of Required Parking Spaces.
The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use, except that 1/2 of the parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Saturdays and Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night and on Sundays.
§ 9-4071.3 Remote Parking Spaces.
If the off-street parking space required by this Ordinance cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such space may be provided on any land within 500 feet of the main entrance to such principal use, provided such land is in the same ownership as the principal use.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-77
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 7 Zoning
Parking and Loading Ordinance
§ 9-4071.4 Minimum Parking Requirements.
• Minimum length of space 20 feet
• Minimum width of space 8 feet
The following off-street parking spaces shall be required
Residential Uses and Required Parking:
Single Family Dwelling Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit
Multi-Family Dwelling Two and one-half (2.5) parking spaces on the same lot for each dwelling unit
Rooming houses, boarding houses, motels, hotels, bed and breakfast, and tourist homes
One (1) parking space for each bedroom or unit rented plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees
Public and Semi-Public:
Mortuaries and funeral homes One (1) parking space for each three (3) seats in parlor or chapel
Churches, theaters, and auditoriums One (1) parking space for each three (3) seats in principal place of assembly
Schools One (1) space for each staff member and employee, plus one (1) space for each (5) students in grades 10 -12 (spaces should be calculated for the maximum staff and students for which building was designed.
Stadium One (1) parking space for each three (3) seats for spectators
Hospitals, nursing, and rest homes One (1) space for each (2) employees on the largest shift plus one (1) space for each two (2) beds
Day care centers, kindergartens One (1) space for each staff member and employee plus (1) space for each (5) students
Office and Professional Services:
Office buildings, banks, and similar institutions One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area
Medical offices and clinics Four (4) spaces for each doctor, dentist, or other professional
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-78
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 7 Zoning
Parking and Loading Ordinance
practicing at the clinic, plus (1) space for each employee
Services and Retail Business:
Retail business and service establishments One (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle
Shopping centers One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area Service stations Two (2) spaces for each gas pump plus three (3) spaces for each grease rack or other working bay
Auto service and/or sales Four (4) spaces for each maintenance stall plus adequate spaces to accommodate all new and used retail units and customer parking generated by retail sales
Restaurants One (1) space for each three (3) seats, plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees on the largest shift
Pool halls and billiard parlors Two (2) spaces for each table
Bowling alleys Three (3) spaces for each alley plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees
Equine Stables (Commercial Use) One (1) space shall be provided for each stall in said structure plus
one (1) space for each employee. Commercial Stables offering riding lessons to the public shall add
additional two (2) parking spaces.(Adopted May 3, 2012)
Manufacturing, Processing, and Wholesale Trade:
Manufacturing industries
• One (1) space for each employee on the Largest shift plus one (1) space for each company vehicle
• Additional reserved parking space shall be provided for visitors equal to five (5) percent of the employee parking spaces when there are forty (40) or more employees Wholesale, retail, and commercial storage One (1) space for each employee plus one (1) space for each company vehicle stored at the site.
§ 9-4071.5 Surface of Parking Area
All parking areas of public, semi-public, business, and industrial and wholesale uses shall be surfaced with concrete, bituminous, or a minimum of six inches of gravel and shall be maintained in a dust free condition.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-79
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 7 Zoning
Parking and Loading Ordinance
§ 9-4072 Off-street loading requirements.
1. All uses and establishments commenced hereafter shall provide off-street loading space sufficient to allow all loading and unloading of vehicles to take place entirely within the property lines of the premises.
2. Loading berths shall have the following minimum dimensions: width twelve (12) feet; length fifty-five (55) feet; and height clearance fifteen (15) feet.
3. Such berths shall be designed, along with the means of egress to such berths, so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights- of-way.
4. The minimum number of off-street loading berths to be provided by individual establishments shall be according to the following schedule:
a. Retail and Service Establishment - One berth for every 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, or portion thereof; however, two or more adjoining establishments with a total gross floor area of less than specified herein shall be considered as one establishment for the purpose of complying with this provision.
b. Office Buildings, Hotels, and Other Institutional Uses - One berth for every 50,000 square feet of gross floor area or portion thereof.
c. Industrial and Wholesale Establishments - One berth for every 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, or portion thereof, up to 30,000 square feet; one (1) space for every 30,000 square feet of gross floor area, or portion thereof in excess of the first 30,000 square feet of gross floor area.
5. The off-street loading space provided as required by this section shall be permanent space and shall not be used for any other purpose.
§ 9-4073 through 9-4080 reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-80
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 8 Zoning
Sign Regulations Ordinance
§ 9-4081 Sign regulations.
The purpose of these regulations is to promote traffic safety, safeguard public health and comfort, facilitate police and fire protection, prevent adverse community appearance and the overcrowding of land, and protect the character of the area in which the signs are located. The regulations are designed to permit maximum legibility and effectiveness of signs and to prevent their over concentration, improper placement, and excessive height, bulk, and area. Since it is widely recognized that aesthetic value of the total environment does affect economic values of the community and the unrestricted proliferation of signs can and does detract from the economic value of the community, it is the intent of this section to provide limiting controls, where necessary, to preserve community scenic, economic, and aesthetic values.
All signs erected, altered, relocated, or maintained shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 9-4081.1 Signs prohibited.
Signs not to Constitute Traffic Hazards - No sign or advertising structure shall be erected or maintained at the intersection of any streets or roads so as to obstruct free and clear vision or at any location where (by reason of the position, illumination, shape, or color) it may impair, obstruct the view or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device or which makes use of the words "stop,” “look," "drive-in," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
Signs Erected on Public Streets - No sign shall be erected or maintained within any public
street right-of-way nor be allowed to extend over or into any public street provided that this
section shall not apply to public signs necessary in the performance of a governmental function or required to be posted by law.
Obstruction of Ingress or Egress of Building - No sign shall be erected or maintained that obstructs ingress and/or egress to or from any window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or egress to or from any room or building as required by law.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-81
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 8 Zoning
Sign Regulations Ordinance
Obscene Matter Prohibited - No sign shall be erected or maintained which bears or contains statements, words, or pictures of an obscene character.
Signs on Private Property; Consent Required - No sign may be erected by any person on private property of another person without first obtaining the written consent of such owner.
Rotating and Flashing Signs. No rotating, revolving or intermittent lighting devices shall be attached to or made a part of, any sign.
Portable signs. Any portable sign such as a “sandwich” sign or “folding” sign, a sign attached to a trailer, or any other portable sign shall be prohibited, except as approved by the administrative official as part of a temporary certificate of zoning compliance for rallies, carnivals, and religious revivals.
§ 9-4081.2 Signs permitted in all districts.
The following signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts:
Directional and Information Signs erected and maintained by public agencies and
governmental bodies including legal notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic, directional or regulatory signs. (Directional and information signs are exempt from the sign permit requirements.) (Amended January 6, 2011)
Holiday Decorations erected, placed, and maintained in good order as to not constitute public, property, or health nuisance. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Memorial Signs, Cornerstones, Historical Tablets and similar signs that are integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, including signs which denote the building name, date of erection or street number. Where such signs shall be permitted as exemptions when cut into any masonry surface or implanted with a metal plate. (Amended January 6, 2011) 2.) Historic monuments denoting historic information or events associated with the property or area in which the monument is located; where such signs shall be permitted as exemptions when such signs:
1. Are not otherwise specifically prohibited by these regulations
2. Are maintain behind the property or road right-of-way line
3. Do not to exceed 8 feet in height
4. Do not obstruct the line of site for the driving public for the purposes of ingress or egress from or onto any private drive or public road
5. Are primarily constructed of brick, stone, or masonry material; or other materials as provided by the specifications and standards for Historical Markers through the North Carolina Department of Transportation and the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources. (Amended May 5, 2011)
Signs not Visible to the Public provided that such signs cannot be seen from a public street or right of way. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Identification Signs not to exceed six (6) square feet in area that are customarily associated with residential use and that are not of a commercial nature, such as (1) signs giving property identification names or numbers or names of occupants, (2) signs on mailboxes or paper tubes, and (3) signs posted on private property relating to private parking or warning the public against trespassing or danger from animals or other dangers associated with the property upon which the sign is affixed. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Works of Art affixed to the façade of a building provided that such works do not directly serve as an advertising device for the on-premise business or operation and does not serve as an outdoor advertising device as defined in these regulations. Works of Art shall not project beyond one (1) foot from the building wall to which it is affixed. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Off- premises Church Identification Signs may be permitted, provided that each sign does not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and is located off of any public street right-of-way. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Vehicle Signs painted on or otherwise permanently attached to currently licensed motor vehicles and trailers that are not primarily used as signs. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Interior Signs located on the inside of buildings, courts, lobbies, stadiums, or other structures that are not intended to be seen from the exterior of said building or structures. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Ancillary Signs painted or attached to vending machines, gas pumps, ice machines, or similar devices which indicate the contents of the machine, the price, or operating instructions. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Temporary Real Estate Signs not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area displayed on the property proposed for sale or lease and located on private property behind the property line. Such signs may be indirectly illuminated in nonresidential districts (Temporary Real Estate Signs are Exempt from the sign permit requirements.) Amended January 6, 2011)
Bulletin Boards - Churches, schools, community centers, and other public and institutional
uses may erect one (1) sign or bulletin board not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area for the purpose of displaying the name of the institution and related information. Such signs shall be used as wall signs or shall be located a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the street lot line and side lot or property lines. Where side yards are required, no such sign shall be permitted in the required side yards
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-82
PART 9
Chapter 4
Article 8
Sign Regulations
Zoning
Ordinance
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 8 Zoning
Sign Regulations Ordinance
Temporary Construction Signs which denote the architect, engineer, contractor, or builder of the project or which describe the name and proposed use of the project may be placed on the site until construction is completed. (Temporary Construction Signs are exempt from the sign permit requirements.) (Amended January 6, 2011)
Identification Signs not to exceed six square feet in display area bearing only addresses or names of occupants of the premises and located on privately owned property. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Memorial Signs, Cornerstones, Historical Tablets, and similar signs. (Memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical tablets and similar signs are exempt from the sign permitting requirements. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Memorial Plaques, cornerstones, historical tablets, and similar signs. (Memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical tablets, and similar signs are exempt from the sign permit requirements.) (Amended January 6, 2011)
Instructional Signs, erected on private property, not exceeding six square feet in display area, erected strictly for the direction, safety or convenience of the public, including signs which identify restrooms, parking area entrances or exits, and no trespassing signs or similar devices warning of danger. (Instructional signs are exempt from the sign permit requirements.) (Amended January 6, 2011)
Temporary Political Signs, erected on private property during periods of national, state, and local elections provided that they be removed within ten days after the election. (Temporary political signs are exempt from the sign permit requirements). (Amended January 6, 2011)
§ 9-4081.3 Business signs.
Business signs and name signs shall be permitted on the premises of the business in districts in which the principal use is permitted subject to the following limitations:
A. Wall Business signs shall not project more than one foot from any building wall or
Canopy to which the wall sign is attached.. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-83
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 8 Zoning
Sign Regulations Ordinance
B. Projecting signs shall be permitted subject to the following limitations:
(1) One projection sign per separate business establishment may be allowed in any nonresidential district.
(2) No part of a projecting sign may project more than five (5) feet from the building wall.
(3) The bottom edge of a projecting sign must be located at least ten (10) feet above the walking surface for pedestrian movement, except in cases in which such a sign is located underneath an awning or canopy, the bottom edge shall be at least eight (8) feet above the walking surface for pedestrian movement (Amended January 6, 2011)
C. Non-illuminated wall signs and projecting signs have a total sign surface area in square feet no greater than two times the linear frontage in feet of the wall of the building to which the sign is attached, but in no case greater than 100 square feet with exception to the B-2 Highway Business District. The following limitations apply to non-illuminated wall signs in the B-2 Highway Business District:
(1). B-2 Highway Business District
A. Non-illuminated wall signs have a total sign surface area in square feet no greater
Than two times the linear frontage in feet of the wall of the building to which the sign
Is attached.
B. Non-illuminated wall signs within the B-2 Highway Business District which directly
Face land residentially zoned (either abutting directly or separated by any publicly
Maintained road) shall conform to the same dimensional requirement as such signs
In all other zoning districts. (Amended on May 7, 2009)
D. Illuminated wall signs and projecting signs shall have a total sign surface area in square feet no greater than two times the linear frontage in feet of the wall or the building to which the sign is attached, but in no case greater than fifty square feet, with exception to the B-2 Highway Business District. Display lighting shall be shielded so as to prevent a direct view of the light source from a residence in a residential district. No intermittent lighting effects may be utilized except for time and temperature devices and for Motion Picture Theater. The following limitations apply to illuminated wall signs in the B-2 Highway Business District: (Amended January 6, 2011)
(1). B-2 Highway Business District
A. Illuminated wall signs have a total sign surface area in square feet no greater
Than two times the linear frontage in feet of the wall of the building to which the
Sign is attached.
B. Illuminated wall signs within the B-2 Highway Business District which directly face land
Residentially zoned (either abutting directly or separated by any publicly maintained
Road) shall conform to the same dimensional requirement as such signs in all other
Zoning districts. (Amended on May 7, 2009)
Part 9 Article 8 Zoning
Chapter 4 Sign Regulations Ordinance
E. Freestanding signs shall be located no less than twelve (12) feet from the street
right-of-way line or property line, whichever is greater. Behind the setback line, or setback off the street right-of-way line one foot for every one foot in linear height of the freestanding sign whichever is greater. (Amended on October 4, 2011) No freestanding sign shall be located in a required side yard or within ten (10) feet of the side property line. No building shall have more than one freestanding sign except buildings having frontage on more than one public street. In this not more than two freestanding signs shall be permitted. A freestanding sign shall in no case exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet or two hundred (200) square feet in area. (Amended January 6, 2011)
F. Special Provisions for Certain Signs
1. Shopping center signs shall be subject to the following additional limitations:
a. Freestanding - Each shopping center may provide not more than one freestanding sign that displays the name of the shopping center and the tenant businesses. b. Wall - Businesses located in attached buildings may display not more than one wall sign. See Non-illuminated and Illuminated Wall Signs per Article 8 Sign Regulations for sign face area. (Adopted January 9, 2014)
2. Commercial park subdivisions and industrial park subdivisions with multiple tenants shall be subject to the following additional limitations:
a. Commercial and industrial subdivisions may provide not more than one freestanding development entrance sign that displays the name of the subdivision with the tenant businesses. b. Multi-tenant buildings – Wall Signs
1) Front Primary Elevation: Each tenant may display one wall sign that shall not exceed 2 square feet of sign surface area per linear foot of the store/business front.
2) Secondary Elevations (side and rear): The maximum sign surface area permitted on the side and rear elevations of a building shall not exceed 1 square foot of sign surface area per linear foot of primary building frontage. (Amended January 9, 2014)
3. Industrial sites located on 50 or more acres shall be subject to the following additional limitations:
a. Freestanding signs:
1) In addition to paragraph E. above, such industrial sites may have 1 monument sign on 1 side of secondary entrance(s)/driveway(s).
a) Maximum height of 15 feet as measured from ground level at the base of the sign structure.
b) A single side of the sign area face may not exceed 25 square feet.
b. Wall Signs for Multi-tenant buildings:
1) Front Primary Elevation: Each tenant may display one wall sign that shall not exceed 2 square feet of sign surface area per linear foot of the store/business front.
2) Secondary Elevations (side and rear): The maximum sign surface area permitted on the side and rear elevations of a building shall not exceed 1 square foot of sign surface area per linear foot of primary building frontage.(Amended January 9, 2014)
Part 9 Article 8 Zoning
Chapter 4 Sign Regulations Ordinance
G. Changeable copy, electronic reader board, and LED signs are permitted only in the B-2 Highway Business Zoning District under the following conditions. If changeable copy, electronic reader board, or LED (also referred to as “electronic display”) signs are utilized as part of a permitted freestanding sign, then the total electronic display area of such freestanding sign shall be a minimum of 30 percent and a maximum of 50 percent changeable copy, electronic reader board, or LED signage. Electronic reader board or LED signs that display anything other than the time and temperature shall not change messages or images more often than every ten (10) seconds. Electronic display signs shall be comparable in composition, durability, and workmanship to the existing sign. Electronic display sign shall not advertise subjects unrelated to the premises upon which it is located. Display lighting shall be shielded, or dimmed so as to prevent direct rays of light from being cast into a residential area or district and/or vehicles approaching on a public right-of-way from any direction. (Amended January 6, 2011)
(H) No wall or projecting sign shall extend above the height of the building roof line. In case of a flat roof, no sign shall extend above the parapet wall. (Amended January 6, 2011)
(I) No sign may be placed upon any roof surface. (Amended January 6, 2011)
§ 9-4081.4 Outdoor advertising signs.
Outdoor advertising signs are permitted as a conditional use in the M-l Industrial district subject to the following limitations:
A. The maximum size of the display area of outdoor advertising signs shall be 300 square feet for single-face signs and 300 square feet for each face of double face signs.
B. They Such signs must meet all requirements of the district applying to the principal structures(Amended January 6, 2011) with regard to yards, setbacks, and height requirement. Further, the minimum height of the lowest portion of any display surface shall be elevated to a height of eight feet from the ground level. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 8 Zoning
Sign Regulations Ordinance
C. Such signs shall not be located within 100 feet of any residential residentially zoned
district.
D. Such signs shall not be permitted within 300 feet of an existing outdoor advertising sign or structure. Outdoor advertising signs shall be located not less than twelve (12) feet from the street right-of-way line or behind the setback line, whichever is greater. (Amended January 6, 2011)
5. No outdoor advertising sign shall be erected or maintained within 600 feet of the
nearest edge of the right-of-way of interstate or primary highways, except as allowed by the
North Carolina General Statutes. Outdoor advertising signs shall be located not less than twelve
(12) feet from the street right-of-way line or behind the setback line, whichever is greater.
(Amended January 6, 2011)
E. Such signs proposed to be erected upon a lot abutting the right-of-way of an interstate or primary highway shall make application to and receive approval from the North Carolina Department of Transportation prior to final sign permit approval by the Zoning Administrator. (Amended January 6, 2011)
F. Lighting
(1) Display lighting of outdoor advertising signs shall be shielded so as to prevent the direction of such light into any structure used primarily for residential purposes. (2) No rotating, revolving or intermittent lighting devices shall be attached to or made a part of, any outdoor advertising sign.
(3) See Article 6 Lighting for any additional lighting provisions. Nonconforming signs, which are destroyed or damaged by fifty (50) percent or more of their value shall not be rebuilt or repaired except in conformance with this Ordinance.
G. The structural support methods for each such sign shall meet the wind loading design requirements as stated in the state building code. If at any time the North Carolina Department of Transportation standards for outdoor advertising are more stringent or restrictive than this article, it is the responsibility of the sign owner to ensure compliance with state outdoor advertising regulations. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Part 9 Article 8 Zoning
Chapter 4 Sign Regulations Ordinance
§ 9-4081.5 Subdivision, Multifamily Development, and Manufactured Home Park Entrance Signs
At any entrance to a residential subdivision, multifamily development, or manufactured home park, there may be not more than two (2) signs identifying such subdivision or development. A single side of any such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet nor shall the total surface area of all such signs located at a single entrance exceed sixty-four (64) square feet. (Amended January 6, 2011)
9-4081.6 § 9-4081.5 Unsafe and unlawful signs.
If the zoning administrator Zoning Administrator shall find any sign to be unsafe or a menace to the public, he shall give written notice of such condition to the owner. Within fifteen days after receiving the notice, the owner shall take such action as needed to eliminate the unsafe or menacing condition. If the owner of the sign fails to correct the problem within the above-specified time, the administrative officer (at the owner's expense) may order whatever actions that are necessary to correct the problem.
Within thirty days after the termination of business at a particular location, the owner
shall remove or eliminate all signs related to the terminated or relocated business. If the owner of the sign fails to remove the signs within the above specified time, the administrative officer at the owner's expense) may order whatever actions that are necessary to eliminate the sign. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-85
Part 9
Chapter 4
§ 9-4081.7 § 9-4081.6 Permits.
Article 8 Zoning
Sign Regulations Ordinance
No person shall construct, erect, or otherwise maintain any sign except those signs specifically authorized herein, (except for those signs specified in these sign regulations not requiring permits) (except for directional and information signs; temporary real estate signs; memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical tablets, and similar signs; instructional signs; and temporary political signs) without first obtaining a permit from the administrative officer. In addition, no person shall construct or maintain any sign within 600 feet or the nearest edge of the right-of-way of the interstate or primary highway system without first obtaining a permit from the North Carolina Department of Transportation as required by the North Carolina General Statutes. (Amended January 6, 2011)
§ 9-4081.8 § 9-4081.7 Penalties (Amended January 6, 2011)
Refer to Article 9 of this ordinance.
§ 9-4081.9 § 9-4081.8 Sign area computation. (Amended January 6, 2011)
The surface area of signs is computed by measuring the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which will encompass the entire advertising copy area (excluding architectural trim and structural embellishments). In computing the area only one (1) side of a double-face sign structure shall be considered. The surface area of signs with three (3) or more sides is measured as the sum of the areas of any two (2) adjacent sides.
§ 9-4081.10 § 9-4081.9 Nonconforming signs. (Amended January 6, 2011)
Any sign in use at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, which does not comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be deemed to be nonconforming. Whenever any nonconforming sign or part thereof is altered, replaced, converted, or changed, the entire sign must immediately comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. However, nothing in this section shall prevent the ordering maintenance and/or repair of a nonconforming sign.
Nonconforming signs, which are destroyed or damaged by fifty (50) percent or more of their value shall not be rebuilt or repaired except in conformance with this Ordinance
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-86
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 8 Zoning
Sign Regulations Ordinance
§ 9-4081.10 Sign conformance schedule.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or place any sign which does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance. All such signs existing on the effective date of this ordinance (unless otherwise specified) which do not conform to the requirements set forth herein shall be removed or brought into compliance within five (5) years from the effective date of this ordinance, The administrative official may give the owner of the property on which the sign is located and/or the owner of the sign notice of such violation by registered or certified mail. If mail is unclaimed or owner cannot be ascertained, notice of violation may be given by leaving a copy of such notice at owner's place of business or by fixing a copy or such notice to the sign or building. Notice shall contain a brief statement as to violation and manner in which such violation may be remedied. Cost in correcting or removing a sign in violation may be remedied. Cost in correcting or removing a sign in violation of this ordinance shall be at the expense of the owner. (Amended January 6, 2011)
§ 9-4083 § 9-4082 through 9-4090 reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-87
Part 9
Chapter 4
§ 9-4091
§ 9-4091.1
Article 9 Zoning
Administration & Enforcement Ordinance
Administration and enforcement.
Application
No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, except as hereinafter provided in this Ordinance.
§ 9-4091.2 Administrative official.
The Town Manager shall appoint an Administrative Official to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The Administrative Official will keep records of all variances and amendments to this ordinance. The assistance of such other persons may be provided as the Town Board may direct.
If the Administrative Official shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of such violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violations of its provisions.
§ 9-4091.3 Certificate of zoning compliance and building permit required.
No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter erected, structurally altered, or moved or its use changed until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued by the Administrative Official, except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance or except after written order from the Board of Adjustment.
A Building Permit cannot be issued by the Building Inspector unless zoning compliance is certified.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-88
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 9 Zoning
Administration & Enforcement Ordinance
A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Administrative Official and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved.
§ 9-4091.4 Application procedures.
Each application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of plans drawn to an engineering scale, one (1) of which shall be returned to the applicant upon approval. The plan shall show the following:
1. The shape and dimensions of the lot on which the proposed building or use is to be erected or conducted;
2. The location of said lot with respect to adjacent rights-of- way;
3. The shape, dimensions, and location of all buildings, existing and proposed, on the said lot;
4. The nature of the proposed use of the building or land, including the extent and location of the use, on the said lot;
5. The location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading space and the means of ingress and egress to such space;
6. For building construction, the percent of surface that will be built-upon;
7. Approximate location of Town water and sewer lines, if said lot is adjacent to them; and
8. Any other information, which the Administrative Official may deem necessary for consideration in enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance.
A fee, set by the Town Board, shall be charged for the processing of such application. The adopted fee schedule shall be posted in the Town Clerk's Office.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-89
Part 9
Chapter 4
§ 9-4091.5
Article 9 Zoning
Administration & Enforcement Ordinance
Public water & sewer service required within the municipal limits.
Any lot within the municipal limits not connected to the Town water and sewer service
shall be required to connect the principal structure of said lot to the Town water and sewer
system before a certificate of zoning compliance will be issued, unless the applicant has applied for such services in writing, and the Town has, within 30 days of the receipt of such written request for services, not given a written commitment to the applicant to have such services to the lot within 180 days of the original application.
A fee, set by the Town Board, shall be charged to the applicant for connecting to the Town system. The adopted connection fee schedule shall be posted in the Town Clerk's Office.
§ 9-4091.6 Temporary certificate of zoning compliance. (Amended September 5, 2013)
A. The Administrative Official may issue a temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance for
rallies, carnivals, religious revivals, and similar temporary uses. Such certificates shall be issued for a fixed period of time, but not to exceed fifteen (15) days, shall be subject to such limitations as the Administrative Official may impose to protect the character of the district affected, and may be considered for reapplication. A fee set by the Town Board shall be charged for the processing of such application. The adopted fee schedule shall be posted in the Town Clerk’s Office.
B. Mobile produce stands are permissible as a temporary, four (4) days or less a week, use on parcels in the following zoning districts: (Amended September 5, 2013)
1. CB (Central Business),
2. B-1 (Neighborhood Business),
3. B-2 (Highway Business), and
4. M-1 (Industrial)
The Administrative Official shall issue a temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance for mobile produce stands not associated with Section 9-4091.6 A above.
1) Lot shall have an existing fully permitted business.
2)Vendor shall have written permission from property owner and business owner.
3)All parking shall be off-street.
4)Shall have reasonable ingress, egress and on-site vehicular travel.
5) Maximum of one sign with a maximum sign area of 36 square feet.
A fee for Temporary Mobile Produce Stand Zoning Compliance, set by the Town board, shall be charged for the processing of the application. The adopted fee schedule shall be posted in the Town Clerk’s Office.
C. Exception not requiring zoning compliance certification: Temporary On-premise Produce Stands are permissible in all residential districts per the following:
1) No Zoning permit required.
2) All associated methods of display (tables, carts, wagons, etc.) are easily removable and not permanent in any way.
3) All parking shall be accommodated off-street.
4) shall have reasonable ingress, egress and on-site vehicular travel.
5) Maximum of one sign with a maximum sign area of 36 square feet.
6) Permissible only during the “season”.
§ 9-4091.7 Right of appeal.
If the Certificate of Zoning Compliance is denied, the applicant may appeal the action of the Administrative Official to the Board of Adjustment; and that from the decision of the Board of Adjustment, recourse shall be had to courts as provided by law. It is further the intention of this Ordinance that the duties of the Town Board in connection with the Ordinance shall not include the hearing and passing upon disputed questions that may arise in connection with the enforcement thereof, but that the procedure for determining such questions shall be as herein set out in the Ordinance, and that the duties of the Town Board in connection with this Ordinance
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-90
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 9 Zoning
Administration & Enforcement Ordinance
shall be only the duty of considering and passing upon any proposed conditional use, amendment, or repeal of the Ordinance as provided by law.
§ 9-4091.8 Penalty (Adopted March 7, 2013)
The Administrator shall be authorized to use any one (1) or more of the methods described in this Section, or action authorized by law, to insure compliance with or to prevent a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance.
§ 9-4091.8.1 Civil Penalties (Adopted March 7, 2013)
Any person(s), corporation(s), LLC(s), or other entities, who violate any provision of this Ordinance may be subject to assessment of the maximum civil penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation.
§ 9-4091.8.1.1 Civil Citations (Adopted March 7, 2013)
A civil citation shall be issued by the Administrator of the Town of Erwin Planning Department to any person(s), corporation(s), LLC(s), or other entities, failing to take corrective action according to and within the specific compliance period ordered by the Administrator. Each day such violation exists after the expiration of the compliance period shall constitute a separate offense and be charged as a separate violation. Each said violation shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day until such violation has reached compliance. Failure to pay the penalty within 15 days from the receipt of the notice of civil penalty shall subject said person(s), corporation(s), LLC(s), or other entities to a civil action in the nature of debt for the stated penalty plus any additional penalties, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the Court.
§9-4091.8.1.2 Citation Content
A citation issued for a violation of this ordinance shall, among other things:
E.State upon its face the amount of the penalty for the specific violation if the penalty is paid within 15 days from and after issuance of the citation;
F.Notify the offender that a failure to pay the penalty within the prescribed time shall subject the offender to a civil action in the nature of debt for the stated penalty plus any additional penalties, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the Court;
G. Further Provide that the offender may answer the citation by mailing the citation and the stated penalty to Post Office Box 459, Erwin, North Carolina, 28339, or may pay the amount in person at the Town of Erwin; and/or
H. It shall further state that a citation which follows the original notice of violation may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
§ 9-4091.8.1.3 Settlement of Civil Claims
The Town of Erwin is authorized to accept payment in full and final settlement of the claim(s), rights or rights of action which the Town may have to enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt. Acceptance of a penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all claims, or right of action arising out of contended violations, only if the activities or non-activities which gave rise to the violations are abated or otherwise made lawful.
§ 9-4091.8.2 Criminal Prosecution
Violations of this Ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor or infraction penalty and are punishable as provided in NC Gen. Stats. 14-4(b) and the maximum fine, term of imprisonment or infraction penalty allowed by law is hereby authorized.
§ 9-4091.8.3 Injunction
Enforcement may also be achieved by injunction. When a violation occurs the Town may either before or after the institution of any other authorized action or proceeding, apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction commanding the defendant, or in the case of counterclaims the plaintiff, to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of the property.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-91
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 9 Zoning
Administration & Enforcement Ordinance
§ 9-4091.8.4 Order of Abatement
The Town may apply for and the Court may enter an order of abatement. An order of abatement may direct:
D. The buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished, or removed; that fixtures, furniture, or other moveable property be removed;
E.That improvements or repairs be made; or
F.That any other action be taken that is necessary to bring property into compliance with this Ordinance.
Whenever the party is cited for contempt by the Court and the Town has executed the order of abatement the Town shall have a lien, in the nature of a mechanic’s and material man’s on the property for the cost of executing the order of abatement.
§ 9-4091.9 Right of Appeal
Any person aggrieved by the notice of violation has 30 days to appeal the action of the Administrator to the
Board of Adjustment. Beyond the decision of the Board of Adjustment, recourse shall be to the Courts as provided by law.
§ 9-4091.10 Complaints regarding violations.
When a violation of this Ordinance occurs or is alleged to have occurred, a person shall file a written complaint with the administrative official and shall state fully the cause and basis thereof. He shall record properly such complaint, investigate within ten (10) days, and take action as provided in these regulations.
§ 9-4091.11 Cancellation of permits.
The Administrative Official, through the Town of Erwin Inspections department, shall cancel a building or occupancy permit when the method of construction or use violates any provisions contained in these regulations.
§ 9-4092 through 9-4100 reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-92
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 10 Zoning
Board of Adjustment Ordinance
§ 9-4101 Board of adjustment.
§ 9-4101.1 Creating the Board of Adjustment.
Establishment:
A Planning/Board of Adjustment is hereby established consisting of eight (8) members. Six (6) members of the Board of Adjustments shall reside within the corporate limits of Erwin, while the remaining two members must come from the Erwin extraterritorial jurisdiction. It is preferred but not a requirement that each of these members have some type of prior experience in the area of zoning and land use planning while possessing the ability to interpret the regulations governing the Town and its planning jurisdiction concerning the issues of zoning and land use legislation on the local level.
Members of the Planning/Board of Adjustment shall attend all applicable training schools, seminars, or workshops, which are sponsored or provided by the Town. Annual continuing education classes will also be scheduled, and Planning/Board of Adjustment members shall attend these workshops. Planning/Board of Adjustments members may be excused for absences from these schools whenever family emergencies, work, etc. make it impossible to attend in these cases, alternative make up arrangements will be made to provide for the required schooling. Failure on the part of a Planning/Board of Adjustment member to attend the education and training classes offered by the Town and failure to make up the required class(s) will make the affected member ineligible to serve on the Planning/Board of Adjustment. The final determination of eligibility status, as it pertains to these education requirements, will be determined by the Erwin Town Board. Expenses associated with these schools, seminars, or workshops such as meals, travel expenses, registration fees, etc, shall be paid for by the Town of Erwin. (Adopted 2 April 1998)
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4- 93
Part 9
Chapter 4
Appointment:
Article 10 Zoning
Board of Adjustment Ordinance
a. Initial appointment of members shall be as follows: Members shall serve a term of three (3) years. Following the appointment of a member or members to the Planning/Board of
Adjustment and, after the required training has been completed; the new member or members shall take an oath stating their commitment to uphold the zoning laws which the Planning/Board of Adjustment is authorized to interpret
b. Board members may be appointed to succeed themselves once.
Expenses:
Members of the Board of Adjustments shall be compensated at a rate of $25 per
meeting, excluding training sessions. Members failing to attend an official meeting will not
receive compensation when absent. Members of the Board of Adjustment may be reimbursed by the Town for expenses incurred while representing the Board.
Rules of procedure and officers:
The Board of Adjustments shall elect one of the members as Chairperson and another as Vice Chairperson and shall appoint a secretary to keep minutes of its proceedings. The Board shall adopt from time to time rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into affect the provisions of this section.
Voting:
A concurring vote of the four-fifths (4/5) majority of the Board shall be necessary to reverse: any order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrative official or to grant a variance from the provisions of this ordinance.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4- 94
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 10 Zoning
Board of Adjustment Ordinance
§ 9-4101.2 Powers and duties.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance.
2. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in undue hardship, so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done.
A charge shall be made to the appellant according to town policy in order to cover administrative and advertising costs (Subsection (d)).
A public hearing shall be held at which all of the following conditions must be found to
exist:
a. There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district.
b. Granting the variance the requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges denied to other residents of the district in which the property is located.
c. A literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance will deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other residence of the district in which the property is located.
d. The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare.
e. The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant.
f. The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building, or structure.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4- 95
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 10 Zoning
Board of Adjustment Ordinance
In considering all proposed variances from this ordinance the Board shall, before making any finding in a specified case, first determine that the proposed variance will not constitute any change in the zone shown on the zoning map and will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or materially increase the public danger of fire and safety, or materially diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
No permitted use of land in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this ordinance in the district involved, or any expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this ordinance in said district.
In granting a variance the Board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable in furtherance of the purposes of this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance.
§ 9-4101.3 Filing and notice for an appeal.
1. Appeals for the enforcement and interpretation of this ordinance, and requests for variances, shall be filed with the administrative official specifying the grounds thereof, within the times prescribed by the Board of Adjustment by general rule after the decision of Zoning Administrator. The administrative official shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all applications and records pertaining to such appeals and variances.
2. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, giving notice to all participants by registered mail. The Board of Adjustment shall hear the case and make a judgment. The judgment may be favorable to the applicant, or it may be unfavorable to the applicant, in which case he/she is left with three (3) options: Option #1: Drop the case.
Option #2: Drop the case, change the request, and reapply. Option #3: Appeal to the courts.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4- 96
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 10 Zoning
Board of Adjustment Ordinance
3. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the administrative official certifies to the Board Of Adjustment that by reason of facts stated in the record a stay, would in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property, in which case proceedings shall be stayed otherwise than by an order from the County Superior Court. Appeals shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date a decision is rendered by the Board of Adjustment.
4. In all cases the Board of Commissioners reserves the right to appeal any decision of the Board of Adjustment to the courts.
§ 9-4101.4 Fees for variances or appeals.
The Board of Commissioners shall set a fee, payable to the Town, to cover the
necessary administrative costs and advertising of each application for a variance or appeal. The set fee shall be posted in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 9-4102 through 9-4110 reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4- 97
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
§ 9-4111 Conditional Uses.
§ 9-4111.1 Purpose.
The development and execution of this Ordinance is based upon the division of the town into districts within which districts the use of land and buildings, and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land, is substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses which, because of their characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular location. Such conditional uses fall into two categories:
1. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest.
2. Uses entirely private in character, but of such unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
§ 9-4111.2 Application for conditional use.
Initiation of Conditional Use
Any person having freehold interest in land, or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest or an exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable, may file an application to use such land for one or more of the conditional uses provided for in this Ordinance in the zoning district in which the land is located.
Application for Conditional Use Permits
Application for the Conditional Use Permit, signed by the applicant, shall be addressed to the Board of Commissioners and presented to the Administrative Official. Each application
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-98
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
shall contain or be accompanied by such legal descriptions, maps, plans and other information so as to completely describe the proposed use and existing conditions. The application shall be forwarded to the Board of Commissioners and the Administrative Official shall notify the Chairman of the Planning Board of the application.
Fee
The Board of Commissioners shall set a fee, payable to the Town of Erwin, North
Carolina, to cover the necessary administrative costs and advertising of each application for a conditional use permit. The set fee shall be posted in the Town Clerk's Office.
§ 9-4111.3 Public hearing.
The mayor shall schedule a public hearing on the application for a conditional use permit to be held within sixty (60) days after the application is filed. Public notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least once each week for two successive weeks prior to the public hearing. The Administrative Official shall also post notice on the property involved for a period of one week prior to the hearing.
§ 9-4111.4 Action by the planning board.
The Planning Board shall review the application prior to the public hearing and shall
present its recommendations to the Board of Commissioners at the public hearing. The
Planning Board may revise its recommendations following the public hearing and present such recommendations to the Board of Commissioners before the Board of Commissioners takes action.
§ 9-4111.5 Action by the Board of Commissioners.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-99
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
The Board of Commissioners shall approve, modify or deny the application for
Conditional Use Permit following the public hearing. In granting a Conditional Use Permit the
Board of Commissioners shall make written findings that the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located are fulfilled. With due regard to the nature and state of all adjacent structures and uses, the district within which same is located, and official plans for future development, the Board of Commissioners shall also make written findings that the following provisions are fulfilled:
1. The use requested is listed among the conditional uses in the district for which application is made;
2. The requested use is essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare;
3. The requested use will not impair the integrity or character of the surroundings or adjoining districts, nor be detrimental to the health, morals, or welfare;
4. The requested use will be in conformity with the Land Development Plan;
5. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, sanitation and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
6. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and
7. That the conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may, in each
instance, be modified by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to the recommendations of the Planning Board.
§ 9-4111.6 Conditions and guarantees.
Prior to the granting of any conditional use, the Planning Board may recommend, and the Board of Commissioners may stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of the conditional use as it is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in § 9-4111.5 above. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the Board of Commissioners shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-100
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
1. Such conditions may include a time limitation;
2. Conditions may be imposed which require that one or more things be done before the use requested can be initiated. (For example, "that a solid board fence be erected around the site to a height of 6 feet before the use requested is initiated");
3. Conditions of a continuing nature may be imposed. (For example, "exterior loud speakers shall not be used between hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.")
§ 9-4111.7 General provisions in granting conditional use permits.
Compliance with Other Codes: Granting of a Conditional Use Permit does not exempt
applicant from complying with all of the requirements of building codes and other ordinances.
Revocation: In any case where the conditions of a Conditional Use Permit have not been or are not being complied with, the Building Inspector shall give the permitted notice of intention to revoke such permit at least ten (10) days prior to a Board of Commissions review thereof. After conclusion of the review, the Board of Commissioners may revoke such permit.
Expiration: In any case where a Conditional Use Permit has not been exercised within the time limit set by the Board of Commissioners, or within one year if no specific time limit has been set, then without further action, the permit shall be null and void. "Exercised" as set forth in this section shall mean that binding contracts for the construction of the main building have been let; or in the absence of contracts that the main building is under construction to a substantial degree; or that pre-requisite conditions involving substantial investment are contracted for, in substantial development, or completed (sewerage, drainage, etc.). When construction is not a part of the use, "exercised" shall mean that the use is in operation in compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit.
Duration: Duration of a conditional use and any conditions attached shall be perpetually binding to the property unless it is expressly limited.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-101
Part 9
Chapter 4
§ 9-4111.8
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
Conditions for planned unit developments, condominiums and town homes.
(1) Approved by:
Conditional use permits for planned unit developments, condominiums, and town homes shall be approved by the Town Commissioners.
The same conditions for planned unit developments also apply to condominium and town home developments.
(2) Permitted districts and uses:
The intent of the planned unit development regulations is to permit greater flexibility and, consequently, more creative and imaginative design for the development of residential areas than generally is possible under conventional zoning regulations. It is further intended that such regulations should achieve the following objectives:
a. To preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing features and amenities and to utilize such features in a harmonious fashion;
b. To provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities and other public and common facilities that would otherwise be provided under conventional land development procedures;
c. To combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms and building relationships within the planned unit developments; and
d. To insure a quality of construction commensurate with other developments within
the town.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-102
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
Planned unit developments are conditional uses in the R-10 and R-6 Zoning Districts.
Those uses set forth in the Zoning Ordinance for the district in which the planned unit development is to be located shall be permitted with the following exceptions:
a. Open space reservations may be considered for building density increases.
b. Permitted types of dwelling units may include single-family detached, semi-
detached, attached dwellings and two-family and multi-family dwellings in the R-10 and R-6 Zoning Districts.
c. Condominium, Town home, cooperative, individual, municipal or other type of ownership is hereby permitted.
Dimensional Requirements:
Minimum lot area, width and setback requirements of the zoning district within which the planned unit development is located may be waived for individual dwelling units, provided that the spirit and intent of this section are complied with in the development plan, as determined by the Planning Board and Town Commissioners.
Maximum Building Height:
Thirty-five (35) feet and two and one-half (2 ½) stories.
Site Development Standards:
All planned unit developments shall conform to the following site development standards:
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-103
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
a. Density - Development area density shall be no greater than that normally
permitted for the zoning district in which the planned unit development is located, except as provided under the bonus provisions. Development area density shall be computed by subtracting sixteen percent (16%) of the gross area (as allowance for street rights-of-way and private drives), plus areas designated for nonresidential purposes (such as schools, churches, etc.) from the gross area, and dividing the remaining area by the minimum conventional lot area requirements for the zoning district in which the development is located. Should the development fall into more than one zoning district, the density shall be the combined proportion of each district.
A density bonus not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the number of dwelling units permitted under the standard applicable zoning district regulations may be approved by the Town Commissioners in accordance with the following ratio of residential area to common open space.
% of Residential Area to % of Residential Area to
be Common Open % Density Bonus be Common Open % Density Bonus
Space Space
10-19 4 50-59 18
20-29 8 60-69 22
30-39 11 70 or more 25
40-49 15
If the Planning Board and Town Commissioners find that any of the following conditions would be created by an increase in density, they may either deny and application for such increase or limit to increase in density by an amount sufficient to avoid the creation of those conditions:
1. Inconvenient or unsafe access to the development.
2. Traffic congestion in streets adjoining the development.
3. An excessive burden imposed on parks, recreational areas, schools, or other public facilities, which serve or are proposed to serve the development.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-104
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
b. Common Open Space - Common open space is a parcel or parcels of land reserved primarily for the leisure and recreation use of all the planned unit development residents buy may, in certain instances, serve a larger residential area. Such common open space shall be integrated throughout the project and made easily accessible to all the residents.
Common open space shall comprise at least ten percent (10%) of the net development area of the planned unit development area shall be determined by subtracting sixteen percent (16%) of the gross area (as allowance for street rights-of-way and private drives), plus areas designated for nonresidential purposes (such as schools, churches, etc.) from the gross area.
Common open space includes:
1. Land area of the site not covered by buildings, parking structures and areas, or accessory structures except recreational structures.
2. Land, which is accessible and available to all occupants of dwelling units for whose use the space in intended.
Common open space does not include:
1. Public and/or private streets and street rights-of-way.
2. Open parking areas and driveways for dwellings.
3. Nonresidential areas, and the buildings, accessory buildings, parking and loading facilities for such areas.
The Planning Board and Town Commissioners may determine that all or part of stream areas, bodies or water, and slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%) may be included as open
space. In making such determination, the Planning Board and Town Commissioners shall be guided by the following factors:
1. The extent of these areas in relation to the area of the planned residential development.
2. The degree to which these areas contribute to the quality, livability and amenity of the development.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-105
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
Common open space shall be used only for recreational (active or passive) purposes or for the preservation of natural amenities, which would add value to the planned unit development or the community as a whole. The recreational uses provided must be clearly of a nonprofit nature. However, this does not preclude a monetary charge for recreational purposes, such as a golf, swimming or tennis club, when such uses are primarily for the residents of the planned unit development.
All common open space and other facilities including streets, access drives and offstreet parking areas must be shown on the development plan which must be recorded in the Harnett County Register of Deeds Office.
All land shown on the development plan as common open space and other facilities,
including streets, access drives and off-street parking areas must be conveyed under one of the following options:
1. It may be conveyed to the town of Erwin as municipally owned and maintained. Where areas are to be conveyed to the Town, such conveyance shall be subject to acceptance by the Town Commissioners
2. It may be conveyed to the trustees provided in an indenture establishing an association of homeowners. The common open space must be conveyed to the trustees subject to covenants and easements to be approved by the Planning Board and Town Commissioners which restrict the common open space to the uses specified on the development plan and which provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which assures its continuing use for its intended purpose.
If the common open space is deeded to a homeowners’ association, the developer shall file a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the association, to be submitted with the application for preliminary approval. The provisions shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. The homeowners’ association must be set up before the homes are sold.
2. Membership shall be mandatory for each homebuyer, and any successive buyer.
3. The open space restrictions must be permanent, not just for a period of years.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-106
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
4. The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of common open spaces and other facilities, including private streets, access drives and off-street parking areas.
5. The homeowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost, and any assessments levied by the homeowners’ association that remain unpaid shall become a lien on the individual property.
6. The homeowner’s association shall be able to adjust the assessment to meet change needs.
c. Perimeter Standards - Structures located on the perimeter of a planned unit
development must be set back in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
controlling the area within which the planned unit development is situated. In addition, the
perimeter of the planned unit development must be planned and developed in accordance with the character of any existing residential development located on adjoining property. To this end, the perimeter of the planned unit development must reflect the minimum conventional requirements for the zoning district in which the existing adjacent residential development is located.
d. Nonresidential Development - The layout of parking areas, service areas,
entrances, exits, yards, courts and landscaping of nonresidential uses, and the control of signs, lighting, noise or other potentially adverse influences shall be such as to protect the residential character within the planned unit development and that of any adjoining residential district.
Nonresidential uses shall be so located and designed as to provide direct access to major streets and highways without creating congestion or traffic hazards on any local residential street.
e. Traffic Circulation - Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to permit smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Minor streets within planned unit developments shall not be connected to streets outside the development in such a way as to encourage their use by through traffic.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-107
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
A part of every residential building shall not be farther than sixty (60) feet from an access roadway or drive providing vehicular access from a public street, and not farther than five hundred (500) feet, measured along the route of vehicular access, from a public street.
The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be insulated completely and as reasonably as possible from the vehicular street system in order to provide separation of pedestrian and vehicular movement. This shall include, when deemed necessary by the Planning Board and Town Commissioners, pedestrian underpass or overpass in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, local shopping areas and other neighborhood uses, which generate a considerable amount of pedestrian traffic.
f. Parking Standards - Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided in accordance with § 8 of this Ordinance.
In addition, the minimum requirements as set forth below shall govern the design of parking and loading areas:
1. All parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length. All access or backup aisles shall conform to the following dimensions:
Parking Angle Aisle Dimensions
90º 24 feet
60º 18 feet
45º 14 feet
30º 12 feet
0º 12 feet
2. Parking areas shall be arranged so as to prevent through traffic to other parking
areas.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-108
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
3. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent structures, roads and traffic arteries with hedges, planting, earth berms, and changes in grade or walls.
4. No more than ten (10) parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by landscaping.
5. All streets and any off-street parking and loading areas shall be paved, and the design thereof approved by the Planning Board and Town Commissioners. All areas shall be marked so as to provide for orderly and safe loading, parking and storage.
6. All parking areas shall be adequately lighted. All such lighting shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from adjoining residences.
7. All parking areas and off-street loading areas shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water without erosion, flooding and other inconveniences.
8. All parking areas shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any building or
structure unless the building or structure is designed to provide sheltered parking areas for the convenience of the occupants.
g. Street Design - Streets in a planned unit development may be dedicated to public use or retained under private ownership. They shall be constructed in accordance with standards required by the Town of Erwin, as amended, or as otherwise specified in the conditional use permit. The Planning Board may recommend, and the Town Commissioners may approve, modifications of the standards required by the Subdivision Regulations only if it is found that such standards are not required in the interest of the residents of the planned unit development and that the modifications of such standards are consistent with the interests of the entire community.
h. Landscaping - In addition to any requirements imposed by this section,
landscaping and buffers shall be provided in accordance with Article 4. § 4041.24 through 4041.29 of this Ordinance.
i. Building Spacing Requirements - Each planned unit development shall provide reasonable visual and acoustical privacy for dwelling units. Fences, insulation, walks, barriers and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the enhancement and protection of property and the privacy of its occupants, screening of objectionable uses or views, and reduction of noise. In any event, the spacing between structures shall be at least 20 feet.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-109
Part 9
Chapter 4
Subdivision Coordination:
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
It is the intent of this section that subdivision review under the Subdivision Ordinance be carried out simultaneously with the review of a planned unit development. The development plans for a planned unit development must be submitted in a form which will satisfy the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance for preliminary and final plats.
All condominium projects developed under the provisions of this section shall comply
with the requirements of the Unit Ownership Act - Chapter 47A of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
Utility Requirements:
Storm sewers for all planned unit developments shall be approved by the Director of Public Works and shall be designed by a registered engineer or registered surveyor. Sanitary sewer and water systems shall be approved by the Director of Public Works and shall be designed by a registered engineer. Storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water systems shall be installed in accordance with Town specifications and standards. Should private water and sewerage systems be provided, such shall meet the requirements of § 4.7 of this Ordinance. Where utilities are to be dedicated to the Town, as-built drawings of the facilities shall be presented to the Town upon completion.
Electric, cablevision and telephone wires shall be installed underground in all planned
unit developments except that the Town Commissioners, upon recommendation of the planning Board, may waive this requirement in cases where the Council shall determine that the installation of underground service will result in practical difficulty or hardship.
Approval Procedures:
An application for approval of a planned unit development may be filed by a person
having an interest in the property to be included in the development. However the applications
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-110
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
may be filed by holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property. The applicant, in any case, shall evidence a full ownership interest in the land (by legal title or the execution of a binding sales agreement) before final approval of the plan, and provided further, the project shall be in single ownership by the time the development plan is approved. When the property on which a planned residential development is to be constructed or developed is owned by or under the control of a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers of the corporation shall be
submitted as part of the initial application.
Before submitting any planned residential development applications, each applicant shall confer with the Administrative Official in connection with the preparation of the application. The general outlines of the proposal evidenced schematically by sketch plans, are to be considered before submission of the planned residential development application. Thereafter, the Administrative Official shall furnish the applicant with his written comments regarding such conference including appropriate recommendations to inform and assist the applicant prior to his preparing the components of the planned residential development application.
Following the pre-application conference, the applicant shall be governed by the procedures contained in of this Ordinance.
Following approval of the planned unit development by the Planning Board and Town Commissioners, minor changes may be authorized by the Administrative Official without additional public hearings if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the plan was approved. No change authorized by this subsection may cause any of the following:
• A change in the use or character of the development.
• An increase in overall coverage of structure.
• An increase in the intensity of use.
• An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public utilities.
• A reduction in approved open space.
• A reduction of off-street parking and loading space.
• A reduction in required pavement width.
• A change in the location of buildings as shown on the development plan.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-111
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
The Planning Board may recommend and the Town Commissioners may impose as a condition of approval, a time schedule within which the construction of the planned unit development shall commence. In no event, shall the time so established be greater than six (6) months. If no development has occurred pursuant to the approved time schedule, the conditional use permit shall thereupon become void and of no effect.
If the sequence of construction of various portions of the development is to occur in
stages, then the open space and/or recreational facilities shall be developed, or committed
thereto, in proportion to the number of dwelling units intended to be developed during any given stage of construction. Furthermore, at no time during the construction of the project shall the number of constructed dwelling units per acre of developed land exceed the overall density per acre established by the conditional use permit.
Submission Requirements:
Each applicant shall submit the following written documents to the Administrative Official and Town Attorney for their review and approval.
a. A legal description of the total site proposed for development, including a statement of the present and proposed ownership and present and proposed zoning. The description shall also include a list of the names and addresses of all owners of adjacent property.
b. A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the planned unit development through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant.
c. A development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the planned unit development or stages of the planned unit development can be expected to begin and be completed.
d. Quantitative data for the following: total number and type of dwelling units, parcel size; proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures; approximate gross and net residential densities; total amount of open space (including a separate figure for usable open space); total
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-112
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
amount of nonresidential construction; economic feasibility studies or market analysis where necessary.
e. The proposed protective covenants whereby the owner proposes to regulate the land use in the proposed developments.
f. The incorporation agreement and the by-laws or easement declarations concerning the maintenance of common open spaces and other facilities, including private streets, access drives and off-street parking areas.
Each applicant shall also provide a site plan drawn at a scale of at least one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet and showing the following information:
a. The existing site conditions including contours at five (5) foot intervals, watercourses, flood plains, unique natural features, and forest cover.
b. Proposed lot lines and plot designs.
c. The location and floor area size of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements including maximum heights, types of dwelling units, density per type, and nonresidential structures.
d. The location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved as common spaces, public parks, recreational areas, school sites, and similar public and semi-public uses.
e. The existing and proposed circulation system of streets including off-street parking areas, service areas, loading areas, and major points of access to public rights-of-way (including major points of ingress and egress to the development). Notations of proposed ownership - public or private should be included where appropriate.
f. The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system, including its
interrelationships with the vehicular circulation system indicating proposed treatments of points of conflict.
g. The existing and proposed utility systems including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water, electric, gas and telephone lines.
h. A general landscape plan indicating the treatment of materials used for public, private and common open space.
i. Enough information on land areas adjacent to the proposed planned unit
development to indicate the relationships between the proposed adjacent areas, including land
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-113
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 11 Zoning
Conditional Uses Ordinance
uses, zoning classifications, densities, circulation systems, public facilities, and unique natural features of the landscape.
j. The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the planned unit development, including materials and techniques used such as screens, fences, and walls.
The required site plan shall be prepared by a licensed architect, landscape architect, professional land planning consultant, or registered surveyor.
Each applicant shall provide building plans prepared by a licensed architect and drawn at a scale of at least one-eight (1/8) inch equals one (1) foot which shall show the following:
a. Floor plans of each proposed dwelling unit type showing the dimensions and use of each room within.
b. Detailed elevations of each proposed dwelling unit type showing the nature and extent of building materials to be used in the construction of said units.
§ 9-4112 through 9-4120 Reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 4-114
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 12 Zoning
Changes & Amendments Ordinance
§ 9-4121 Changes and amendments.
The Board of Commissioners may change the text regulations and zoning district lines according to the following procedures.
§ 9-4121.1 Action by the applicant.
The following actions shall be taken by the applicant:
Initiation of Amendments: Proposed changes or amendments may be initiated by the Board of Commissioners, Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, or by the owner(s), or their agent, of property within the area proposed to be changed.
Application: Application for any change or amendment shall be filed with the Administrative
Official at least twenty-five (25) days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the
application is to be considered. The application shall contain a description of the proposed
amendment and the names and addresses of property owners directly effected by the proposed change.
Fee: The Board of Commissioners shall set a fee payable to the Town of Erwin, North Carolina, to cover the necessary administrative costs and advertising of each application for a change or amendment. The set fee shall be posted in the Town Clerk's Office.
Notice of Public Hearing Letters: When a change in the zoning classification of a piece of property is requested, the applicant shall provide to the Administrative Official a list of names and addresses, as obtained from the county tax listings and tax abstracts of all adjacent property owners, and all owners of property within the area under consideration for rezoning. The list shall be submitted at least eight (8) working days prior to the public hearing. The Zoning Administrator shall then mail notices of the public hearing to each person on the list and shall certify that fact to the Board of Commissioners. Such certification shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
4-115
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 12 Zoning
Changes & Amendments Ordinance
§ 9-4121.2 Action by the board.
The Planning Board shall consider and make recommendations to the Board of
Commissioners concerning each proposed zoning amendment. The following policy guidelines shall be followed by the Planning Board concerning zoning amendments and no proposed zoning amendment will receive favorable recommendation unless:
The proposal will place all property similarly situated in the area in the same category, or in appropriate complementary categories.
• There is convincing demonstration that all uses permitted under the proposed district classification would be in the general public interest and not merely in the interest of an individual or small group.
• There is convincing demonstration that all uses permitted under the proposed district
classification would be appropriate in the area included in the proposed change. (When a new district designation is assigned, any use permitted in the district is allowable, so long as it meets district requirements, and not merely uses which applicants state they intend to make of the property involved.)
• There is convincing demonstration that the character of the neighborhood will not be materially and adversely affected by any use permitted in the proposed change.
• The proposed change is in accord with the Land Development Plan and sound planning principles.
§ 9-4121.3 Action by the Board of Commissioners.
Notice and Public Hearing: No amendment shall be adopted by the Board of Commissioners until after public notice and hearing. Notice of a public hearing shall be given once a week for two successive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Erwin, said notice to be published the first time not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty-five (25) days prior to the date fixed for said hearing. In addition to the newspaper notice, notice shall also be made by posting the property concerned with a poster indicating the proposed change and date of hearing when the application is for a change to a district boundary.
Refer to GS 160A-84 for expanded public notice options.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
4-116
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article 12 Zoning
Changes & Amendments Ordinance
Board of commissioner’s action:
Before taking such lawful action, as it may deem advisable, the Town Board shall
consider the Planning Board's recommendation on each proposed zoning amendment. If no
recommendation is received from the Planning Board within thirty (30) days after public hearing by the Town Board, the proposed amendment shall be deemed to have been approved by the Planning Board.
Protests:
1. In case, however, of a protest against such change signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more (either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or of those immediately adjacent thereto, either in the rear thereof or on either side thereof, extending one hundred feet from those directly opposite thereto extending one hundred (100) feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots), such amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the Town Board.
2. No protest petition shall be valid unless it is.
a. Written on a form furnished by the Town;
b. Bears the actual signatures of the requisite number of property owners and
states that they protest the proposed amendment; and is received by the Municipal Clerk in time to allow at least two (2) normal working days (excluding weekends and legal holidays) prior to the public hearing on the amendment, so as to allow time for municipal personnel to check the accuracy and sufficiency of the petition.
c. Reconsideration; one-year limitation. Whenever an application requesting an
amendment has been acted on and denied by the Planning Board and the Town Board, such
application, or one substantially similar, shall not be reconsidered sooner than one year after the previous denial.
§ 9-4122 through 9-4130 reserved.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances
4-117
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 4
Chapter 6
Table of Contents
Public Water
Supply
Watershed Protection
§ 9-6001 Watershed overlay district.
§ 9-6002 Definitions.
§ 9-6003 Watershed classification (Overlay district).
ARTICLE A § 9-6004 General requirements.
§ 9-6005 Watershed and drainage way buffers.
Public Water Supply § 9-6006 Setback from buffer.
Watershed Protection § 9-6007 Existing development.
§ 9-6008 Administration.
§ 9-6009 Changes and amendments.
§ 9-6010 Variances.
ess 6 - 1
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article A
Water Supply Watershed
Public Water
Supply
Watershed Protection
§ 9-6001 Watershed Overlay District
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of the Water Supply
Watershed Protection Act (N.C. G.S. 143-214.5) within the zoning jurisdiction of the Town of Erwin. The provision of this article are applicable to all property located within the designated water supply watershed as shown on the official zoning map of the Town and shall be in addition to all other requirements of the zoning ordinance. Whenever there is a conflict between this article and a provision of the zoning ordinance, the stricter requirement shall apply.
§ 9-6002 Definitions.
The following definitions apply only to enforcement to enforcement of this article:
Agriculture Use. The use of waters for stock watering, irrigation, and other farm purposes.
Best Management Practices (BMP). A structural or non-structural management-based
practice used singularly or in combination to reduce non-point source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals.
Buffer. An area of natural or planted vegetation through which stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the run off and filtering of pollutants. The buffer is measured landward from the flood pool elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams or rivers.
Built Upon Area. Built upon areas shall include that portion of a development project that is
covered by impervious or partially impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel areas recreation facilities, etc.
Critical Area. That portion of the protective watershed that lies within one half mile of a surface water intake
ess 6 - 2
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article A
Water Supply Watershed
Public Water
Supply
Watershed Protection
Curb Outlet System. Curb and gutter installed in a development which meets the low density
criteria of this ordinance with breaks in the curb used to direct stormwater runoff to grass swales or other natural or vegetated area.
Development. Any land disturbing activity which adds to or changes the amount of impervious or partially impervious cover on a land area or which otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil.
Existing Development. Those projects that are built or those projects that at a minimum have established a vested right under North Carolina zoning law as of the effective date of this article based on at least one of the following criteria:
1) substantial expenditures or resources (time, labor, money) based on a good faith
reliance upon having received a valid local government approval to proceed with the project, or
2) having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by the General Statutes
(G.S. 160A-385.1), or
3) having an approved site specific or phased development plan as authorized by
the General Statutes (G.S. 160A-385. 1)
4) having a subdivision plat recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds prior to
the adoption of this ordinance.
Major Variance. A variance from the minimum statewide watershed protection rules that results in the relaxation, by a factor greater that five (5%) percent of any buffer, density or built-upon area requirement; or relaxation by a factor greater that ten (10%) percent of any management requirement under the low-density option.
Minor Variance. A variance from the minimum statewide watershed protection rules that results in the relaxation, by a factor of up to five (5%) percent of any buffer; or the relaxation by a factor of up to ten (I 0%) percent of any management requirement under the low-density option.
Non-residential Development. All development other than residential development, and agricultural.
ess 6 - 3
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article A
Water Supply Watershed
Public Water
Supply
Watershed Protection
Residential Development. Buildings for residence such as detached single-family dwellings, apartment complexes, condominiums, townhouses, cottages, etc. and their associated outbuildings such as garages, storage buildings, gazebos, etc. and customary home occupations.
Variance. A permission to develop or use property granted by the Watershed Review Board relaxing or waiving a water supply watershed management requirement adopted by the Environmental Management Commission that is incorporated into this ordinance. Water Dependent Structure, Any structure for which the use requires access to or proximity to or siting within surface waters to fulfill its basic purpose, such as boat ramps, boathouses, docks and bulkheads. Ancillary facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat supplies, parking lots and commercial boat storage areas are not water dependent structures.
Watershed. The entire land area contributing surface drainage to a specific point (the water supply intake).
§ 9-6003 Watershed Classification (Overlay District).
(1) WS-IV Critical Area Watershed Overlay District: In order to maintain a low to
moderate land use intensity pattern, development activities must be limited to a single family detached dwelling with maximum of two (2) single family detached dwelling units per acre or a 20, 000 square foot lot excluding road frontage on a project by project basis (provided that underlying zoning regulations permit such development).
§ 9-6004 General requirements.
All development shall, to the maximum extent practicable, minimize impervious or partially pervious surface coverage, direct stormwater away from surface water, incorporate Best Management Practices (BMP's) to minimize water quality impacts, and transport stormwater runoff from the development by vegetated conveyances.
ess 6 - 4
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article A
Water Supply Watershed
Public Water
Supply
Watershed Protection
§ 9-6005 Watershed and Drainageway Buffers.
(a) Purpose. Watershed and drainageway buffers provide strips of natural vegetation that serve to remove pollutants from stormwater runoff before they can reach a water supply source, or a watercourse that drains to the water supply source. They do so by allowing infiltration of runoff and filtration of pollutants through the ground and soil, slowing down runoff flow to allow settling and deposition of pollutants, and providing vegetation that absorbs pollutants through the roots. The provision of vegetated, undisturbed buffers within water supply watersheds, therefore, serves as an important and effective method of maintaining the quality of public water supply sources and protecting those sources from the potential polluting activities associated with development within the watershed.
(b) Required Watershed Buffers.
1) 100-foot-wide watershed buffers shall be maintained around water supply impoundments or intakes, measured perpendicular to the shoreline of the water supply impoundment. Watershed buffers shall extend one hundred (100) feet from the flood pool elevation of the water supply impoundment, inside the watershed draining into that impoundment.
2) 50-foot-wide watershed buffers shall be maintained around water impoundments or intakes, other than water supply impoundments or intakes, with a drainage area of twenty-five
(25) or more acres. Watershed buffers shall be measured perpendicular to the shoreline and shall extend fifty (50) feet from the normal pool elevation of the water impoundment, inside the watershed draining into that impoundment.
3) 50-foot-wide watershed buffers shall be maintained on each side of a stream that as a perennial stream on the most recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or has a drainage of twenty-five (25) or more acres. Watershed buffers shall be measured perpendicular to the stream bank, and shall extend fifty (50) feet on each side from the stream bank, inside the watershed draining into the stream.
(c) Required Drainage way Buffers.
1) 35-foot-wide drainage way buffers shall be maintained along each side of a
watercourse, channel, ditch, or similar physiographic feature draining at least five (5) acres, but less than twenty-five (25) acres. Buffers shall be measured perpendicular to the drainage way and shall extend thirty (30) feet on each side of the natural drainage flow line, inside the drainage area of the drainage way.
ess 6 - 5
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article A
Water Supply Watershed
Public Water
Supply
Watershed Protection
2) 30-foot-wide drainage way buffers shall be maintained around water
impoundments or intakes draining at least five (5) acres, but less than twenty-five (25) acres. Buffers shall be measured perpendicular to the shoreline and shall extend thirty (30) feet from the normal pool elevation of the water impoundment, inside the watershed draining into that impoundment.
(d) Use and Development of Buffers. Vegetation within watershed and drainage way buffers shall remain undisturbed except as may be necessary t accommodate any of the following uses:
1) Water dependent structures.
2) Public projects such as road crossings, greenways, utility or drainage facilities, and erosion control measures, subject to the following:
a) Such public projects are permitted in watershed buffers only if no
practical alternative to their use and location within the buffer exists and they maximize the use of Best Management Practices (BMP's) to minimize water quality impacts.
b) Where a road or other ground disturbing public project is to cross a
buffer, it shall cross the buffer at an angle as close to ninety (90) degrees as practicable.
c) Where a greenway is to be located within a buffer, any pedestrian path
within It shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the impoundment, stream, or drainage way, and shall not exceed a width of ten (10) feet.
§ 9-6006 Setback from buffer.
All buildings shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the edge of any
drainage way or watershed buffer. Where the setback from a buffer area results in a greater
setback from a building lot line than that required elsewhere in § 1-1-37, the requirements of the Paragraph shall control.
§ 9-6007 Existing development.
Any existing development as defined in this ordinance may be continued and maintained
subject to the provisions provided herein. Expansions to structures classified as existing
development must meet the requirements of this article and other applicable sections of this
ess 6 - 6
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article A
Water Supply Watershed
Public Water
Supply
Watershed Protection
ordinance. Any existing building or built upon area not in conformance with the restrictions of
this article that has been damaged or removed may be repaired and/or reconstructed, provided the total amount of space devoted to built upon area may not be increased unless storm water control that equals or exceeds the previous development is provided However, these restrictions do no apply to existing single-family residential development.
§ 9-6008 Administration.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to administer and enforce the provisions of this section as follows:
(1) The Zoning shall issue Watershed Protection Permits for all applicable
development within the Watershed Overlay District A record of all permits shall be kept on file and shall be available for public inspection.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall keep records of all amendments to the Watershed Overlay District section of this ordinance and shall provide copies of all amendments to the Division of Water Quality receiving a variance and the reasons for granting
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall keep a record of variances in the Watershed
Overlay District section of this ordinance. This record shall be submitted to the Division of Water Quality on an annual basis by January 1, and shall provide a description of each project granted the variance
§ 9-6009 Changes and Amendments.
(1) The Erwin Board of Commissioners on its own motion or petition, may amend, supplement, change or modify the watershed regulations and restrictions as described in this article.
(2) Under no circumstance shall the Town Commissioners adopt such amendments, supplements or changes that would cause this ordinance to violate the watershed protection rules as adopted by the Division of Water Quality. All amendments must be filed with the Division of Water Quality.
ess 6 - 7
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article A
Water Supply Watershed
Public Water
Supply
Watershed Protection
§ 9-6010 Variances.
(1) Variances to this article maybe granted under procedures outlined in Article X of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Requests for variances shall be reviewed and considered by the Erwin Board of Adjustment If the application calls for the granting of a major variance, and if the Zoning Board of Adjustment decides in favor of granting the variance, the Board shall prepare a preliminary record of the hearing with all deliberate speed The preliminary record of the hewing shall include:
• the variance application
• the heating notices
• the evidence presented
• motions, offer of proof, objections to evidence, and rulings on them
• proposed findings and exceptions; and
• the proposed decision, including all conditions proposed to be added to the permit.
The preliminary record shall be sent to the Division of Water Quality for its review as follows:
(a) If the Commission concludes from the preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that
1) the property owner can secure no reasonable return from, nor make an practical use of the y property unless the proposed valiance is granted, and
2) the valiance, if granted, will not result in a serious threat to the water supply,
then the Commission shall approve the valiance as proposed or approve the proposed valiance with conditions and stipulations. The Commission shall prepare a Commission decision and send it to the Zoning Board of Adjustment If the Commission approves the valiance with conditions and stipulations, the board shall prepare a final decision, including suck conditions and stipulations, granting the proposed variance.
(b) If the Commission concludes from the preliminary record that the Valiance qualifies as a major valiance and that
1) the property owner can secure a reasonable return from of make a practical use of the property without the valiance, or
2) the valiance, if granted, will result in a serious threat to the water supply, then the Commission shall deny approval of the variance as proposed The Commission shall prepare
ess 6 - 8
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 4
Article A
Water Supply Watershed
Public Water
Supply
Watershed Protection
a Commission decision and send it to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The board shall prepare a final decision denying the variance as proposed.
Now therefore be it further resolved, that those water supply watershed protection
standards adopted on the 28th day of September, 1999 shall remain in effect in their current form, and that the additional language included herein shall be effective immediately. (Ordinance of 12/6/99)
ess 6 - 9
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
SECTION 9-5001. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Erwin, North Carolina does ordain as follows:
SECTION 9-5002.FINDINGS OF FACT.
1) The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the Town of Erwin are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2)These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
SECTION 9-5003. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
(1)restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
(2)require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3)control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4)control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may increase erosion or flood damage; and
(5)prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
SECTION 9-5004OBJECTIVES.
The objectives of this ordinance are to:
(1)protect human life, safety, and health;
(2)minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3)minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4)minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
(5)minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that are located in flood prone areas;
(6)help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas; and
(7)ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a Special Flood Hazard Area.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
ARTICLE 2.
SECTION 9-5011DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
“Accessory Structure (Appurtenant Structure)” means a structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
“Addition (to an existing building)” means an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure.
“Appeal” means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance.
“Area of Shallow Flooding” means a designated Zone AO on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one (1) to three (3) feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
“Area of Special Flood Hazard” see “Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)”.
“Base Flood” means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
“Base Flood Elevation (BFE)” means a determination of the water surface elevations of the base flood as published in the Flood Insurance Study. When the BFE has not been provided in a “Special Flood Hazard Area”, it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a Federal, State, or other source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the “Freeboard”, establishes the “Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation”.
“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
“Building” see “Structure”.
“Chemical Storage Facility” means a building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products.
“Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
“Development Activity” means any activity defined as Development which will necessitate a Floodplain Development Permit.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
“Disposal” means, as defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters.
“Elevated Building” means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
“Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
“Existing Manufactured Home Park or Manufactured Home Subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
“Flood” or “Flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1)the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
(2)the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
“Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)” means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas have been defined as Zone A.
“Flood Insurance” means the insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program.
“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
“Flood Insurance Study (FIS)” means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Flood Insurance Study report includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if published.
“Flood Prone Area” see “Floodplain”
“Flood Zone” means a geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
“Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
“Floodplain Administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
“Floodplain Development Permit” means any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, prior to the commencement of any development activity.
“Floodplain Management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.
“Floodplain Management Regulations” means this ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term describes Federal, State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures, and their contents.
“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
“Floodway encroachment analysis” means an engineering analysis of the impact a proposed encroachment into a floodway or non-encroachment area is expected to have on the floodway boundaries, base flood elevations, and floodway surcharge elevations. The evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified North Carolina licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models.
“Floor” means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e. top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
“Freeboard” means the height added to the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) to account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the “Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation”.
“Functionally Dependent Facility” means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
“Hazardous Waste Management Facility” means, as defined in NCGS 130A, Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
“Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG)” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the structure.
“Historic Structure” means any structure that is:
(a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(c) individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in communities with a “Certified Local Government (CLG) Program”; or
(d) certified as contributing to the historical significance of a historic district designated by a community with a “Certified Local Government (CLG) Program”.
Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the US Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in 1980.
“Letter of Map Change (LOMC)” mean an official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include:
(a) Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area.
(b)Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features.
(c) Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
(d)Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
“Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG)” means the elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the building.
“Lowest Floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
“Manufactured Home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
“Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
“Market Value” means the building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (Actual Cash Value); or adjusted tax assessed values.
“Mean Sea Level” means, for purposes of this ordinance, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used.
“New Construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
“New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is completed on or after February 6, 1997.
“Non-Encroachment Area” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
“Post-FIRM” means construction or other development for which the “start of construction” occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.
“Pre-FIRM” means construction or other development for which the “start of construction” occurred before the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
“Principally Above Ground” means that at least 51% of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground.
“Public Safety” and/or “Nuisance” means anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
“Recreational Vehicle (RV)” means a vehicle, which is:
(a)built on a single chassis;
(b)400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(c)designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(d)designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
“Reference Level” is the top of the lowest floor for structures within Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zone A-1, A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.
(Alternative acceptable language for “reference level”) “Reference Level” is the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the lowest floor, excluding the foundation system, for structures within all Special Flood Hazard Areas.
“Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation” means the “Base Flood Elevation” plus the “Freeboard”. In “Special Flood Hazard Areas” where Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two (2) feet of freeboard. In “Special Flood Hazard Areas” where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
“Remedy a Violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State and community floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
“Salvage Yard” means any non-residential property used for the storage, collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
“Solid Waste Disposal Facility” means any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste, as defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(35).
“Solid Waste Disposal Site” means, as defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
“Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)” means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in Article 3, Section B of this ordinance.
“Start of Construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
“Structure” means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas, liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
“Substantial Damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. See definition of “substantial improvement”. Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
“Substantial Improvement” means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(a) any correction of existing violations of State or community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(b) any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to Article 4 Section E Section 9-5035 Variance Procedures of this ordinance.
“Variance” is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance.
“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Articles 4 and 5 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
“Water Surface Elevation (WSE)” means the height, in relation to mean sea level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
“Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SECTION 9-5021.LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES.
This ordinance shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the jurisdiction, including Extra-Territorial Jurisdictions (ETJs), of the Town of Erwin.
SECTION 9-5022.BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
The Special Flood Hazard Areas are those identified under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in its FIS dated October 3, 2006 for Harnett County and associated DFIRM panels (0586J, 0596J, 0597J, 0598J, 1506J), including any digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study, which are adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance. Future revisions to the FIS and DFIRM panels that do not change flood hazard data within the jurisdictional authority of the Town of Erwin are also adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance.
SECTION 9-5023.ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in accordance with the provisions of Article 3, Section 9-5022 of this ordinance.
SECTION 9-5024.COMPLIANCE.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
SECTION 9-5025.ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
SECTION 5026 .INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:
(a)considered as minimum requirements;
(b)liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(c)deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
SECTION 9-5027.WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Erwin or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
SECTION 5-5028.PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $50.00 or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Erwin from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
ARTICLE 4. ADMINISTRATION.
SECTION 9-5031.DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
The Town Manager, or his/her designee, hereinafter referred to as the “Floodplain administrator”, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 9-5032.FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
(1) Application Requirements. Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities located within Special Flood Hazard Areas. The following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit:
(a) A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain development:
(h) the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other development;
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(ii) the boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Article 3, Section 9-5022, or a statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard Area;
(iii) flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Article 3, Section 9-5022;
(iv) the boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as determined in Article 3, Section B;
(v) the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in Article 3, Section 9-5022; Article 4, Section 9-5033; or Article 5, Section 9-5044;
(vi)the old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
(vii) the certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer.
(b)Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a Special Flood Hazard Area including but not limited to:
(i) elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;
(ii) elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be floodproofed; and
(iii)elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
(c)If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34 (7/12)) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
(d)A Foundation Plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this ordinance are met. These details include but are not limited to:
(i) the proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
(ii) openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with Article 5, Section 9-5042(4) Elevated buildings (c) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30.
(e)Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
(f) Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(g)Certification that all other Local, State and Federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
h) Documentation for placement of Recreational Vehicles and/or Temporary Structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of Article 5, Section 9-5042, subsections (6) and (7) of this ordinance are met.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(i) A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
(2)Permit Requirements. The Floodplain Development Permit shall include, but not be limited to:
(a)A description of the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit.
(b)The Special Flood Hazard Area determination for the proposed development in accordance with available data specified in Article 3, Section 9-5023.
(c)The Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities.
(d)The Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation required for the protection of all public utilities.
(e)All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
(f) A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as applicable.
(g)The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE or A1-30.
(h) Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if applicable). (I.e., parking, building access and limited storage only). (OPTIONAL)
(3)Certification Requirements.
(a) Elevation Certificates
(i) An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33 (7/12)) is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(ii) An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33 (7/12)) is required after the reference level is established. Within seven (7) calendar days of establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done within the seven (7) day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
(iii) A final as-built Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33 (7/12)) is required after construction is completed and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy. (THE USE OF THE FEMA ELEVATION CERTIFICATE IS REQUIRED FOR THE PURCHASE OF FLOOD INSURANCE, AND MANDATORY FOR CRS PARTICIPATION.)
(b) Floodproofing Certificate
If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation requirements, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34 (7/12)), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a Floodplain Development Permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(c) If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, or AE and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of Article 5, Section 9-5042 (3) Manufactured Homes (b).
(d)If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
(e) Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located within Zone A, AO, or AE are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in items (a) and (b) of this subsection:
(i)recreational vehicles meeting requirements of Article 5, Section 9-5042 (6)(a);
(ii) temporary structures meeting requirements of Article 5, Section 9-5042 (7); and
(iii)accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting requirements of Article 5, Section 9-5042 (8).
(4) Determinations for existing buildings and structures. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall:
(a) Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made;
(b) Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure;
(c) Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
(d)Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the NC Building Code and this ordinance is required.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
SECTION 9-5033.DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following duties:
(1) Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to assure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
(2) Review all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to assure that all necessary Local, State and Federal permits have been received, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
(3) Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(4) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
(5) Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of Article 5, Section 9-5035 are met.
(6) Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Section 9-5032 (3) Certification Requirements.
(7) Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Section 9-5032 (3) Certification Requirements.
(8) Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Section 9-5032 (3) Certification Requirements.
(9) When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Section 9-5032 (3) Certification Requirements and Article 5, Section 9-5042 Specific Standards (2) Non-Residential.
(10) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(11) When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions of Article 3, Section 9-5022, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway or non-encroachment area data available from a Federal, State, or other source, including data developed pursuant to Article 5, Section 9-5044 Standards for Floodplains Without Established BFE (2)(b), in order to administer the provisions of this ordinance.
(12)When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of Article 3, Section 9-5022, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a Federal, State, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this ordinance.
(13)When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a Special Flood Hazard Area is above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of the option to apply for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.
(14) Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this ordinance and make these records available for public inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended.
(15)Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
(16) Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
(17) Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or local law may also be revoked.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(18)Make periodic inspections throughout the Special Flood Hazard Areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
(19) Follow through with corrective procedures of Article 4, Section 9-5034.
(20) Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
(21)Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in accordance with the provisions of Article 3, Section 9-5022 of this ordinance, including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify State and FEMA of mapping needs.
(22) Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
SECTION 9-5034.CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
(1)Violations to be Corrected: When the Floodplain Administrator finds violations of applicable State and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such notification.
(2)Actions in Event of Failure to Take Corrective Action: If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service, stating:
(a)that the building or property is in violation of the floodplain management regulations;
(b)that a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
(c)that following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as applicable.
(3)Order to Take Corrective Action: If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than (90) calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(4)Appeal: Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
(5)Failure to Comply with Order: If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the discretion of the court.
SECTION 9-5035.VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
(1)The Board of Adjustment as established by the Town of Erwin, hereinafter referred to as the “appeal board”, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
(2)Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision to the Court, as provided in Chapter 7A of the North Carolina General Statutes.
(3)Variances may be issued for:
(a)the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure;
(b)functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the definition as stated in Article 2 of this ordinance, provided provisions of Article 4, Section 9-5035 (9) (b), (c), and (e) have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety; or
(c)any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of this Section.
(4)In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and:
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(a)the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(b)the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(c)the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(d)the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(e)the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined under Article 2 of this ordinance as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
(f) the availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(g)the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(h)the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
(i) the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k)the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(5)A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be submitted with the application for a variance.
(6)Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this ordinance.
(7)Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
(8)The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State of North Carolina upon request.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(9)Conditions for Variances:
(a)Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other Federal, State, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances.
(b)Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.
(c)Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(d)Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval.
(e)Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) a showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
(iii)a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(10) A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas provided that all of the following conditions are met.
(a)The use serves a critical need in the community.
(b)No feasible location exists for the use outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
(c)The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at least the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
(d)The use complies with all other applicable Federal, State and local laws.
(e)The Town of Erwin has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina Department of Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the variance.
ARTICLE 5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
SECTION 9-5041.GENERAL STANDARDS.
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following provisions are required:
(1)All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.
(2)All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(3)All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(4)Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
(5)All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(6)New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
(7)On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(8)Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this ordinance.
(9)Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this ordinance and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this ordinance.
(10) New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted, except by variance as specified in Article 4, Section E(10). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Section 9-5032 (3).
(11) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(12) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(13) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(14) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
(15) When a structure is partially located in a Special Flood Hazard Area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial improvements.
(16) When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest Base Flood Elevation (BFE) shall apply.
SECTION 9-5042. SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in Article 3, Section 9-5022, or Article 5, Section 9-5044, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of Article 5, Section 9-5041, are required:
(1)Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in Article 2 of this ordinance.
(2)Non-Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in Article 2 of this ordinance. Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with Article 5, Section 9-5047(2). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Article 4, Section 9-5032(3), along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance plan.
(3)Manufactured Homes.
(a) New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in Article 2 of this ordinance.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(b) Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to NCGS 143-143.15. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or
engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height, an engineering certification is required.
(c) All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of Article 5, Section 9-5042(4).
(d) An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the local Emergency Management Coordinator.
(4) Elevated Buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:
(a) Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;
(b) Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation; and
(c) Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:
(i) a minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding;
(ii) the total net area of all flood openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(iii) if a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit;
(iv) the bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade;
(v)flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(vi)enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
(5)Additions/Improvements.
(a)Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are:
(i) not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-conforming than the existing structure.
(ii) a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction.
(b)Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
(c)Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are:
(i) not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction.
(ii) a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction.
(d)Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a 3 year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started must comply with the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the 3 year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The requirement does not, however, include either:
(i) any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions.
(ii) any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
(6)Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
(a)Temporary Placement
(i) be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions)
(b)Permanent Placement. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the limitations of Temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new construction.
(7)Temporary Non-Residential Structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
(a)a specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted. Time specified may not exceed three (3) months, renewable up to one (1) year;
(b)the name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
(c)the time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification);
(d)a copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
(e)designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the Special Flood Hazard Area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
(8)Accessory Structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the following criteria shall be met:
(a)Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
(b)Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
(c)Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential;
(d)Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
(e)Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the provisions of Article 5, Section 9-5041(1);
(f)All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of Article 5, Section 9-5041(4); and
(g)Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation in conformance with the provisions of Article 5, Section 9-5042B(4)(c).
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet or that is a minimal investment of $3,000 or less and satisfies the criteria outlined above is not required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards of Article 5, Section 9-5042 (2). Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance with Article 4, Section 9-5032(3).
(9)Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the following criteria shall be met:
(a)Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty;
(b)Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
(c)Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of Section B (2) of this ordinance shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
(d)Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
(i) at or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and
(ii) anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood.
(10) Other Development. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
(a) Fences in regulated floodways and NEAs that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of Article 5, Section 9-5046 of this ordinance.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(b) Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways and NEAs. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Article 5, Section 9-5046 of this ordinance
(c) Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways and NEAs. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Article 5, Section 9-5046 of this ordinance.
SECTION 9-5043.RESERVED.
SECTION 9-5044. STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
Within the Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Approximate Zone A and established in Article 3, Section 9-5022, where no Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of Article 5, Section 9-5041, shall apply:
(1) No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of twenty (20) feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) The BFE used in determining the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria:
(a) When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in Article 5, Sections 9-5041 and 9-5042.
(b) When floodway or non-encroachment data is available from a Federal, State, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway and non-encroachment areas shall also comply with the requirements of Article 5, Sections 9-5042 and 9-5046.
(c) All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development proposals shall provide Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data if development is greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home sites. Such Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with Article 3, Section 9-5022 and utilized in implementing this ordinance.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(d) When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not available from a Federal, State, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated or flood proofed (nonresidential) to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in Article 2. All other applicable provisions of Article 5, Section 9-5042 shall also apply.
SECTION 9-5045. STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
Along rivers and streams where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
(1)Standards of Article 5, Sections 9-5041 and 9-5042; and
(2)Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community.
SECTION 9-5046.FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Article 3, Section 9-5022. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in Article 5, Sections 9-5041 and 9-5042, shall apply to all development within such areas:
(1)No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
(a)it is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit, or
(b)a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
(2)If Article 5, Section 9-5046(1) is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this ordinance.
(3)Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following provisions are met:
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
(a)the anchoring and the elevation standards of Article 5, Section 9-5042(3); and
(b)the encroachment standards of Article 5, Section 9-5046(1).
SECTION 9-5047. STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO).
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Article 3, Section 9-5022, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to Article 5, Sections 9-5041 and 9-5042, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a freeboard of two (2) feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
(2)Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed to the same level as required in Article 5, Section G(1) so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with Article 4, Section 9-5032(3) and Article 5, Section 9-5042(2).
(3)Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
SECTION 9-5048.Reserved
ARTICLE 6. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS.
SECTION 9-5049.EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
This ordinance in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted February 6, 1997 as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this ordinance shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of Town of Erwin enacted on February 6, 1997, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.
Part 9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 5
SECTION 9-5050.EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of this ordinance; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of six (6) months subsequent to the date of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 9-5051. SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of the Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 9-5060.EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall become effective January 9, 2014.
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
ARTICLE A
Purpose, Authority, Separability and
Definitions
Chapter 7
Table of Contents
§ 9-7001 Purpose and authority.
§ 9-7002 Separability.
§ 9-7003 Definitions
Water and
Sewage Systems
ARTICLE B
Public Systems and
Construction of
Improvements
ARTICLE C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
EXHIBIT I
§ 9-7004 Public systems (apartment complexes and
shopping centers).
§ 9-7005 Public systems (public property).
§ 9-7006 Construction of improvements.
§ 9-7007 Technical specifications for installation.
§ 9-7008 Technical specifications for water.
§ 9-7009 Technical specifications for sewer.
§ 9-7010 Testing of water mains.
§ 9-7011 Testing of sanitary sewer lines.
Exhibit I
Request to connect water and/or sewer mains to the Erwin, N.C. Municipal System.
ess 7-1
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Chapter 7
Table of Contents
ess
Water and
Sewage Systems
7-2
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article A
Purpose, Authority,
Separability, and Definitions
Water and
Sewage Systems
§ 9-7001 Purpose and authority.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to provide for more orderly and
uniform water distribution and sewage collection systems. The regulations will provide a guide for any developer or contractor who may engage in the business of installing any water distribution or sewage collection systems to be maintained by the Town. (b) Authority. These regulations are adopted under the authority granted in Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina. They will supercede and replace any previous water and/or sewage regulations of the Town.
(c) These regulations shall be incorporated into all specifications for water and sewer projects within the Town planning jurisdiction, and supplemented with additional specifications and procedures as necessary to complete the project. (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
§ 9-7002 Separability.
If for any reason one or more sections of this chapter are ruled invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
§ 9-7003 Definitions.
The meanings of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows.
(1) Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Erwin.
(2) Department of Public Works. The Public Works Department of the Town of Erwin.
(3) Easement. A grant by the property owner for use by the public, a corporation, or person(s) of a strip of land for specified purposes.
(4) Public works director. The public works director of the Town of Erwin.
(5) Shall. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(6) Subdivision ordinance. The subdivision ordinance of the Town of Erwin.
(7) Town. The Town of Erwin.
(8) Town manager. The Town manager of the Town of Erwin. (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
ess 7-3
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article B Water and
Public Systems and Sewage Systems
Construction of Improvements
§ 9-7004 Public systems (apartment complexes and shopping centers).
These are privately constructed systems that are to be developed on private property to serve areas such as apartment complexes and shopping centers.
(1) Agreement by Town to accept the proposed facilities.
a. An "agreement form" (See Exhibit I) should be completed by the developer and submitted to the Town manager's office.
b . The "agreement form" should be accompanied by a map showing the area to be developed, the location where water and/or sewer facilities are proposed to be constructed, the point or points of connection to the existing water/sewer system, and a description of the users (i.e. number of apartments, restaurants, offices, etc.) within the area to be served.
(2) Construction and acceptance procedures. Upon the Town's approval of the
agreement, the developer should follow the procedures applicable to systems constructed on public property. Plans for systems in private property will not be forwarded for State approval until the agreement has been properly executed. (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
§ 9-7005 Public systems (public property).
These are privately constructed systems in public property such as subdivisions and extensions within existing streets to serve new developments.
(1) Prior to approval of the subdivision preliminary plat, approval documents as enumerated in (3) below should be submitted to the Town manager's office.
a. Plans and specifications.
b. Permits or approval applications.
c. Highway encroachment applications.
(2) If the improvements are to serve an area not subject to Town subdivision
regulations then one (1) set of detailed plans and specifications should be submitted to the Town manager's office for review. Upon determination that the plans and specifications are consistent with Town policies as outlined in the subdivision ordinance and meet Town standards, the developer will be advised by the Town manager to submit approval documents as enumerated in (3) below.
(3) Submission of documents for State Regulatory Approval.
ess 7-4
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article B Water and
Public Systems and Sewage Systems
Construction of Improvements
a. For sewer improvements.
1. Two (2) complete sets of plans and specifications.
2. Two (2) applications for a non-discharge permit from the Environmental
Management Commission.
b. For water improvements.
1. Three (3) complete sets of plans and specifications.
2. Three (3) applications to the Department of Human Resources for
approval of the water improvements.
c. In the event both water and sewer improvements are included in the plans and specifications, then a total of only six (6) sets of plans and specifications need be submitted.
d. The applications for approval permit should be prepared in the name of the Town with the Town manager being the responsible official to sign the application.
e. If an encroachment upon a State road or railroad is required for a portion of the work, the encroachment should be obtained by the developer in the name of the Town. Required copies of the encroachment application and supporting documentation should be submitted with the plans and specifications.
f. The transmittal letter to the appropriate State agency(ies) will be prepared by the Town and the Town will transmit the documents for approval. A copy to the developer and his engineer will be included in the transmittal procedure.
(4) The developer/engineer must satisfy any requirements of the State regulatory agencies. If correspondence is made by the State agency to the Town without developer/engineer copy, the Town will advise the developer/engineer of the particular requirement. Resubmittal of particular information may be made by the developer/engineer to the State. (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
§ 9-7006 Construction of the improvements.
(a) Notification. Upon issuance of the State approval or permit, the Town will so advise the developer (if no notification was given him by the State) and construction may be begun. The Department of Public Works should be given at least one day's notice prior to starting construction so that the Town inspection may be carried out.
ess 7-5
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article B Water and
Public Systems and Sewage Systems
Construction of Improvements
(b) Inspection procedures. It is the intent of the Town that all water and sewer construction to be maintained by the Town be installed in accordance with practices recommended by the material manufacturers and standards of the industry.
(1) An inspector will be provided by the engineer, in addition a roving Town
inspector will make spot check inspections of work in progress. Any work not installed according to the plans and specifications unless a written deviation is obtained from the Public Works Department (in advance), will not be accepted by the Town as a part of its system, and the contractor will be directed to correct the defect(s).
(2) In order to assure proper installation, the Town inspector may request that certain portions of the work not be covered up until the inspector has had reasonable opportunity to observe the construction. The Public Works Department will try to work with contractors in such instances. Four (4) hours is considered a reasonable time to allow such inspection before work is covered up.
(3) The developer/contractor will sample the chlorinated water in newly
constructed water lines to assure that the required residual has been attained, and supply a copy of the results to the Town; this will be verified by the Town Public Works Department.
(4) The developer/contractor will make a bacteriological examination of the water in newly constructed water mains to determine that they are sanitary, and supply a copy of the results to the Town; test to be taken under supervision of the Town Public Works Department.
(5) The Town will observe pressure testing of newly constructed water mains.
(6) The Town will observe "go-no-go" deflection testing of sewer mains constructed of flexible and semi-rigid materials.
(7) The Town will make visual observations of sewer line infiltration/inflow, of water and sewer appurtenances to determine that they are properly adjusted, and of service connections to determine that they work properly.
(c) Interim approval by Town. A developer may request a preliminary inspection; obtain interim approval of the initial phases of the work, and temporary water service when the following conditions have been met:
(1) The developer must pay water deposits and meter charges on water meters in
the section.
(2) Construction materials and installation practices have been satisfactory.
(3) Water lines have been satisfactorily chlorinated.
(4) Water lines have been bacteriologically tested with satisfactory results verified.
ess 7-6
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article B Water and
Public Systems and Sewage Systems
Construction of Improvements
(5) Water lines have been pressure tested with satisfactory results.
(6) Sewer mains appear to be properly aligned and on uniform grade.
(7) There is no observable infiltration or inflow in sewer lines, service connections, or manholes.
(d) Final inspection and acceptance by Town.
(1) Upon completion of the project (i.e. after street paving has been completed, shoulders have been dressed, and final grading done) a final inspection shall be requested by the developer. The Public Works Department will inspect the water and sewer improvements and will recommend acceptance of the improvements for municipal ownership and maintenance, provided:
a. Water valves operate properly, are accessible to be operated, and the
valve boxes set to final grade.
b. Manhole covers are set to final grade.
c. Fire hydrants operate properly, are plumb, and set to final grade.
d. Four (4) sets of satisfactory "as-built" drawings (one Mylar reproducible)
have been received by the Public Works Department.
e. Any easement shown on the plans have been satisfactorily recorded.
f. Service connections have been installed to approximate grade.
(3) Meter boxes and clean out plugs are to be set to final grade by the developer
before water service will be initiated to any individual lot, and the Town's acceptance will not
include service connections until such time as service is initiated. The Town will not accept or be responsible for any piping outside the right-of-way or easement unless by approval of the Town Board of Commissioners.
(4) The acceptance of improvements for ownership and maintenance must be
approved by the Town manager. The town will formally advise the developer regarding
acceptance of the improvements and, if they are not satisfactory, what must be done to obtain acceptance.
(Ordinance of 10/3/85)
ess 7-7
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
Water and
Sewage Systems
§ 9-7007 Technical Specifications for installation.
(a) Installation of mains pipe.
(1) Prior to trenching, the pavement shall be cut or scored to straight edges, six (6) inches outside each edge of the proposed trench to avoid unnecessary damage to the remainder of the paving, Edges of the existing pavement shall be recut and trimmed to square, straight edges after the pipe system has been installed and prior to placement of the new base and pavement.
(2) If trench boxes or sheeting are used, care shall be taken that pipe and
embedment materials are not disturbed. No backfilling except for securing pipe in place shall be allowed until the Town's inspector or his representative has had an opportunity to make an inspection of the joints, alignment and grade. Such inspection shall not relieve the contractor of further liability in case of defective material, misalignment or other deficiencies. (b) Installation of service connections.
(1) Water service connections.
a. Tapping of mains. Cast and ductile iron mains may be tapped direct for
taps two (2) inches or less in size. All other taps shall be made using an AWWA approved tapping saddle and corporation stop. (Unless a written deviation is obtained form the Public Works Department in advance.)
b. Service taps (two (2) inches and smaller) shall be made such that the
outlet is at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees above horizontal.
c. Tapping of cast or ductile iron mains shall be done in accordance with
recommendations of the tapping machine manufacturer. All service connections larger than two
(2) inches shall be made using tapping sleeve and valve or a main fitting and valve.
(2) Installing service line. Attention shall be given to embedment for the service
line in the area of the corporation stop and main trench. Firm bedding with at least eighteen (18) inches of cover shall be provided from the corporation to near the yoke box. A gentle bend or gooseneck shall be provided in the service line as it leaves the corporation stop (in order to provide for expansion/contraction of the line). No coupling shall be placed in the service line between the corporation stop and yoke box and -no sharp bend of the service line shall be permitted. Backfill shall be free of rocks or large objects that could crimp or damage the line.
ess 7-8
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
Water and
Sewage Systems
Service line trenches in traffic areas shall be tamped so as to achieve ninety percent (90%)
proctor density. In landscape areas, the surface shall be left smooth and uniform with adjacent surface.
(3) Installing meter yoke box.
a. The yoke box shall be set to grade. The yoke box shall be adequately
supported on bricks and six (6) inch washed gravel and the top shall be set flush with finished grade.
b. Sewer service connections. The locations of service connections shall be
designated by the director of public works. All service connections unless otherwise indicated, shall I be four (4) inch or six (6) inch PVC pipe. Connection to the sewer main shall use either way or tee fittings or sewer service saddles. Sewer service saddles shall be as recommended by the pipe manufacturer.
c. Attachment of the saddle to the main shall be as recommended by the
manufacturer. All fittings or saddles shall be positioned such that the service pipe enters the main at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees from the vertical. Service saddles shall be fully encased with crushed stone and special attention shall be given to embedment of the service pipe from the saddle through the lateral trench.
d. For service connections to deep sewers with confined trenches, the
service shall extend from the connection upward at forty-rive (45) degrees to a point near the trench wall, shall bend forty-rive (45) degrees to a riser which shall parallel the vertical trench wall to a point not less than thirty (30) inches below finish grade and shall turn using two (2) consecutive forty-five degree bends to provide a lateral service to match the grade and slope of the building sewer. For all other service connections, the service shall extend from the connection upward at forty-five (45) degrees to a point where it shall bend forty-rive (45) degrees to match the grade and slope of the building sewer. Minimum service line slope shall be two (2) feet per one hundred (100) feet except where elevations are critical, minimum slope shall be one (1) foot per one hundred (100) feet.
e. The tapping of service connections into manholes will not be permitted
except at the end of collector lines. Such connections, when required at deep manholes, shall be provided with a standard drop connection. The invert of a manhole service connections shall be located such that a pipe half-diameter formed through in the bench shall be required. A clean out shall be installed at the terminum of the service connection as shown in the standard details.
ess 7-9
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
Water and
Sewage Systems
The clean out shall be installed to surface grade and both the clean out and the service lateral shall be capped or plugged to exclude entry of water or earth. Concrete same as water valve requirements in § 9-5008(b).
(c) Separation from other pipe systems. There shall be a minimum clearance as
follows:
(1) Lateral separation from sewer lines. Water mains shall be separated at least ten (10) feet laterally unless:
a. The mains are in separate trenches with the elevation of the bottom of the
water main at least eighteen (18) inches higher than the elevation of the top of the sewer.
b. The water main is located on bench of undisturbed earth of the sewer
trench and with the elevation of the bottom of the water main at least eighteen (18) inches higher in elevation than the top of the sewer.
(2) Crossing separation from sewer lines.
a. Water mains crossing over a sewer shall be (bottom of water main to top
of sewer) separated by at least eighteen (18) inches unless local conditions or barriers prevent an eighteen (18) inch vertical separation in which case both water and sewer mains shall be constructed of ferrous materials with joints meeting water main standards for a distance of at least ten (10) feet on each side of the point of crossing.
b. When water mains cross under a sewer, both mains shall be constructed
of ferrous materials and with joints equivalent to water main standards for a distance of ten (10) feet on each side of the point of crossing. Additionally, a section of water main pipe shall be centered at the point of crossing.
(d) Installation of tracer tape. All nonmetallic water mains shall have a metallic warning tape installed in the ditch over the main twelve (12) inches to eighteen (18) inches below the finished grade.
(e) Pavement replacement. All pavement shall be reconstructed to the original lines and grades and pavement shall be placed in such manner that all surfaces shall be in fully as good or better condition than that which existed prior to water/sewer installation. Concrete and/or aggregate base course for the paving shall be placed as shown on the plans. Base course for the paving shall be dense graded aggregate base course.
ess 7-10
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
Water and
Sewage Systems
(f) Settlement of trenches. Whenever water lines are in or cross driveways, paved areas or streets the contractor shall be responsible for any trench settlement which occurs within one (1) year from the time of final acceptance.
(g) Inspection. The Public Works Department will inspect the work periodically while in progress. These inspections will be made primarily to:
(1) Assure that materials acquired are as specified.
(2) Assure that construction methods are as specified.
(3) Verify amounts of construction and materials used.
(4) Verify tests for chlorination, pressure, deflection of sewer, infiltration, bacteriological analysis.
(5) Assure that valves, services, hydrants and other appurtenances are operable and are properly set to final grade.
(h) As-built drawings/intersection sketches.
(1) Upon completion of construction of the improvements, the contractor shall deliver information on the location of taps and water valves to the Town.
(2) The exact station number of all tape ( + 0. 1 ft.) and their length shall be
recorded during construction and the information shall be made available to the Town. In
addition, a rough, readable field sketch of the location of all water main valves installed under the contract shall be prepared and submitted to the Town.
(i) Guarantee. Any leakage, defects in materials or workmanship or settlement of
trench within twelve (12) months following acceptance by the Town shall be repaired or restored by the developer at his own expense. (Also see Subdivision Regulation Guarantees) (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
§ 9-7008 Technical specifications for water.
(a) Pipe materials.
(1) Ductile iron pipe. Ductile iron pipe shall be of the class and size called for on the drawings and shall conform to ANSI Specification A21.51, latest designation. Pipe shall have mechanical joints or push-on joints conforming to ANSI Specifications A21.11, latest designation. The use of other materials (other than those specified) for special connections must be approved by the public works director. Pipes shall have an exterior coat of coal tar
ess 7-11
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
Water and
Sewage Systems
varnish and an interior cement mortar lining with bituminous seal coat conforming to ANSI
Specification A21.1971. Pipes shall be furnished complete with rings, gaskets, and bolts. Each pipe shall bear a mark denoting the class to which it belongs.
(2) Polyvinyl chloride pipe for four (4) inch through twelve (12) inch water mains.
a. Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC) shall conform to AWWA Specification
C-900-75, Class 150 and shall bear the seal of the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) for
potable water pipe. All pipe shall be marked with the manufacturers' name, nominal size, type of plastic and pressure rating. Pipe O.D. shall be equivalent to cast iron pipe of the same nominal size. Pipe joints shall include elastomeric gaskets and shall be integral bell type coupling.
b. Lubricant and gaskets are to be supplied with the pipe by the
manufacturer of the pipe.
(3) Polyvinyl chloride pipe for two (2) inch water mains shall conform to ASTM
Standard D-2241, PVC 1120 pipe, SDR 21, 200 psi pressure rating, with integral bell and spigot end. Pipe shall be furnished complete with elastomeric gaskets.
(b) Appurtenances.
(1) Valves.
a. Valves for sixteen (16) inch and larger mains shall be iron body, horizontal
gate valves, bronze mounted, double disc, parallel seat, enclosed gearing, four (4) inch by-pass, "0" ring seals, open CCW and shall comply with AWWA Specification C500-71 for underground service. All valves shall be furnished with two (2) inch operating nut.
b. Valves two (2) inch through twelve (12) inch mains shall be iron body,
vertical gate valves, bronze mounted, double disc, non-rising stem for underground service, "0" ring seals, open CCW. All valves shall be furnished with two (2) inch operating nut and shall be Mueller, M & H or approved equal.
c. Valves for blow-off connections two (2) inch and smaller shall be curb
stops, Mueller Oriseal Mark 11 or approved equal.
(2) Valve boxes. Valve boxes shall be cast iron of the Roadway Extension type of proper length and base size with suitable detachable cover and shall be located inside: and out with asphaltum paint.
(3) Fire hydrants.
a. Fire hydrants shall be traffic model, four and one-half (4-1/2) inch valve
opening, two (2) two and one-half (21/2) inch and one (1) four and one-half (4-1/2) inch outlets
ess 7-12
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
Water and
Sewage Systems
with National Standard threads, six (6) inch mechanical joint shoe connection, National
Standard Pentagon (one and one-half (1-1/2) inch point to flat) operating nut, open CCW, dry top, sealed lubrication reservoir, seat ring to show shall be bronze to bronze. Hydrants shall be equipped with outlet nozzle caps with chains. All hydrants shall meet or exceed AWWA Standard C504-64. All hydrants shall be Mueller Centurion, or approved equal.
b. All fire hydrants must be installed to meet the proposed grades. To
achieve this, the contractor may use fire hydrant extensions, or may order the proper bury depth hydrant. In either case, ordering the materials required to meet the proposed grade shall be the contractor's responsibility, and shall be included in his bid price.
(c) Fittings and other materials.
(1) Specials. Specials shall be short body Class 250 cast iron or ductile iron
conforming to ANSI Specification A21.1 and A21.10. Cast iron fittings shall be cement lined. Ductile iron fittings shall be epoxy resin lined. All Fittings shall have an exterior coating of asphalt. Mechanical joint fittings; shall conform with ANSI Specification A21.11. Bell and spigot cast iron specials meeting AWWA Specifications for Class D fittings may be furnished for special connections when approved by the public works director. All fittings and specials shall be furnished complete with rings, bolts, and gaskets for joints.
(2) Tapping sleeves, crosses and valves. All tapping sleeves, crosses and valves shall conform to Federal Specification WW-P-421 and AWWA Standard C500. All tapping sleeves, crosses and valves shall be Mueller, M & H or approved equal.
(3) Tracer tape. Metallized warning tape shall be installed over all non-metallic water mains. Two (2) inch wide metallized warning tape, color blue, marked "Caution -Water Line Below" shall be installed in the ditch over the pipe and twelve (12) inches to eighteen (18) inches below finished grade. Metallized tape shall be Terra Tape D as manufactured by Reef Industries, Inc., Houston, Texas, or approved equal.
(d) Service materials.
(1) Water service tubing. Water service tubing shall be either Type K copper or polyethylene municipal service tubing. Polyethylene tubing shall meet the requirements of AWWA Standard C901-78, PE 3406, copper tube OD equivalent, DR 9, 160 psi working pressure. If copper tubing is used, flared connections may be used in lieu of compression connections.
ess 7-13
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
Water and
Sewage Systems
(2) Polyethylene service tube stiffness. A stainless steel insert shall be installed with each compression connection made with plastic tubing.
(3) Meter boxes. Meter boxes shall be as specified by the public works director.
(4) Meter yokes. Meter yokes shall be as specified by the public works director.
(5) Other materials. All other water service line materials shall be of brass
materials, as specified by the public works director, and installed as specified by the public works director.
(e) Meters.
(1) All meters are to be furnished and installed by the developer with the exception of 5/8" x 3/4" and 1" meters which shall be furnished by the developer but installed by the Town.
(2) The model shall be as specified by the public works director. (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
§ 9-7009 Technical specifications for sewer.
(a) Pipe materials and manholes. The type of pipe to be used shall be as shown on the plans. Pipe used shall meet the following minimum standards:
(1) ABS composite sewer pipe. Sewer pipe and fittings shall conform to the
requirements of STM D2680-79a, type SC and shall I be Truss Pipe or an approved pipe equal in strength, quality and utility. MEK primer and cement for joints shall comply with STM D2680-79a.
(2) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. PVC pipe shall have integral wall bell and spigot push-on joints and shall meet the requirement of ASTM D3034, Type PSM, SDR 35.
(3) Ductile iron pipe. Ductile iron pipe shall meet the requirements of ANSI A21.50, thickness class 50 with push-on joints.
(4) Pipe or service connections. Pipe for four (4) inch and six (6) inch service connections shall meet the requirements as set forth by the public works director.
(5) Steel casing pipe. Steel casing pipe shall have plain end, unwrapped steel pipe, conforming to ASTM A252, Grade 2 or ASTM A 139 without hydrostatic tests. The pipe shall have welded joints and be in at least eighteen (18) foot lengths.
(b) Manholes (general requirements).
ess 7-14
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
Water and
Sewage Systems
(1) At the option of the contractor, manholes may be constructed of pre-cast
concrete components or brick. All manholes shall be constructed upon a foundation consisting of no less than eight (8) inches of crushed #67 stone. Manhole bases shall be either extended base pre-cast concrete with a minimum dimension across the extended base of seventy-two
(72) inches, or cast-in-place, reinforced concrete with a minimum twenty-eight (28) day
compressive strength of 3,000 psi. Manholes shall be of the form and internal dimension as shown in the project specifications.
(2) The excavation shall be kept free of water throughout construction and shall NOT be backfilled until inspected by the director.
(c) Pipe connections. Pipe connections shall be made into manholes, as specified by the public works director. Three methods are available: precast manholes, brick manholes, and "doghouse" manholes with poured bottoms; details for these methods shall be as specified by the public works director.
(d) Connection to existing sewers.
(1) Where required or shown on the plans, connection to existing sewer shall be made in a manner which will maintain existing sewage flow on a continuous basis. Where now cannot be maintained, interruption of service shall be minimized such that no by-pass of sanitary sewage to any natural waterway or storm drain occurs nor shall such interruption create a public health hazard by sewage back-up or overflows.
(2) Connection to existing sewers shall be made at manholes. For connection of encased pipe, the casing shall be flush with the inside wall and shall be encased with at least eight (8) inches of concrete on the outside of the manhole. Connection of sewer pipe shall be made into a manhole using a water stop and no-shrinking mortar. Existing manholes to which connections are made shall be rehabilitated to the degree necessary to correct any apparent signs of infiltration.
(3) Upon completion of the connection to existing sewers, existing lines no longer needed shall be sealed or plugged and the invert rebuilt to reflect new flow patterns.
(e) Other appurtenances. Other appurtenances (i.e., steps, manhole covers, etc.) shall be those as specified by the public works director. (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
ess 7-15
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
Water and
Sewage Systems
§ 9-7010 Testing of water mains.
(a) Disinfection of water mains.
(1) After each line between valves has been tested and all necessary repairs
made, and the lines flushed clean, water containing not less than fifty (50) parts per million
chlorine shall be placed in the line and allowed to stand twenty-four (24) hours, after which the line shall be flushed and samples taken at various points.
(2) The chlorinating agent may be a chlorine gas-water mixture, calcium
hypochlorite or chlorinated lime of known chlorine content in water and shall be fed through a
suitable solution feed device located at or near the point from which the main is to be filled. Flow of both water and chlorine solution shall be at a slow rate and in such proportion that the required chlorine content is evenly distributed in the main. Air pockets shall be eliminated and system pressure applied. Following chlorination, all water shall be flushed from the lines until the replacement water has a chlorine content not more than 0.1 ppm in excess of the residual in the water from the supplying main.
(b) Bacteriological testing. Water samples for bacteriological examination shall be taken. The lines shall not be placed in service or pressure tested until a negative bacteriological report is received by the Town.
(c) Pressure testing of mains. The contractor shall perform a pressure test of completed water mains. The public works director shall be notified of the test at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance and will observe the test. The test shall be conducted for a period of two (2) hours at 150 psi pressure.
(d) Connection to existing mains and turning water on. The contractor shall make connection to existing water mains in the manner shown on the plans or otherwise in a manner which is satisfactory to the public works director. Except in an emergency, valves on the existing water distribution system shall only be operated by the Public Works Department or on authorization for the operation of specific valves by the Public Works Department. Records will be kept of any valves closed during an emergency and the Public Works Department will be notified of the specific valves closed at the earliest reasonable time following such valve closure. (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
ess 7-16
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Article C
Technical Specifications and Testing of Lines
Water and
Sewage Systems
§ 9-7011 Testing of sanitary sewer lines.
(a) Preparation for testing. Prior to testing of sanitary sewer lines, the lines shall be
thoroughly cleaned, using appropriate tools, and the line shall be visually inspected for line and grade, apparent obstructions, leaks, deformities or other defects. Any deficiencies noted shall be repaired or replaced at no expense to the Town.
(b) Infiltration limits. Infiltration shall be measured by the contractor in the presence of the director and shall not exceed one hundred (100) gallons per inch diameter per mile per day. (c) Pipe deflection testing. Deflection testing shall be performed for all semi-rigid and flexible pipe eight (8) inches or larger. Deflection shall not exceed five percent (5%) (ninety-five percent (95%) of the ASTM base inside diameter). Testing shall be conducted in the presence of the director and shall utilize a mandrel go-no-go gauge complete with proving ring. Mandrel shall be approved by the director for this test. Arm mandrels shall have a minimum of nine (9) arms.
(d) Air testing. Air testing shall be required if, in the opinion of the director, conditions are such that infiltration measurements may be inconclusive. The test shall be conducted in the presence of the director and shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) Test pressure shall be 3.5 psi increased by the ground water pressure above the top of the sewer.
(2) Pressure loss from 3.5 to 3.0 psi shall not exceed 0.5 psi during the required
testing time.
(3) Testing time in minutes shall I be calculated as 0.625 x nominal pipe size
(inches). (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
ess 7-17
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Exhibit 1
Request to Connect Water and Or Sewer Mains to Erwin System
Water and
Sewage Systems
Request to connect water and/or sewer mains to the Erwin, N.C. Municipal System.
It is requested that the Town of Erwin, North Carolina accept the ?water ?sewer lines at __________________________________________________________ (name of project)
as a part of the municipal system. If approved the town will allow connection of the line subject to the following agreements:
(A) Development Owner Responsibilities
(1) The design, materials, and construction methods must meet town standards and pass the towns standard inspection procedures. All pipes, valves, hydrants, manholes, fittings, service connections, water meters and other appurtenances will be furnished by the developer. Water meters sized 1 inch and below will be installed by the town when a deposit is paid by the water customer. Installation of all meters larger than 1 inch will be the responsibility of the developer.
(2) The developer must obtain any required permits from state agencies, such as the Department of Human Resources and Division of Environmental Management.
(3) The Developer must dedicate to the town adequate easement of not less than 15 feet width per main, over all portions of water and sewer mains, and will have the right to require larger easements which it may seem necessary.
(4) Ownership of the mains and appurtenances is hereby granted in fee simple to
the town.
(5) The owner must pay normal system access charges (tap fees) to the town if
required.
(6) The developer must provide "as-built" drawings of the completed facilities prior to town acceptance.
(7) Any transfers of ownership shall only be made conditional upon acceptance of the terms of this agreement by subsequent owners.
(8) This agreement shall constitute a grant of access (easement) to the town for any service connections not covered by specific descriptions and dedications.
ess 7-18
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 7
Exhibit 1
Request to Connect Water and Or Sewer Mains to Erwin System
Water and
Sewage Systems
(B) Town Responsibilities
If the conditions set forth above are met and construction carried out in accordance with the approval plans and specifications, the Town of Erwin will
(1) Allow connections and additions of the water and sewer facilities to the Municipal System, furnishing water and accepting wastewater for treatment under standard service policies.
(2) Accept and maintain the lines as part of its system.
Accepted and agreed by owner:
OWNER_________________________________
AUTHORIZED SIGNATURE_____________________________
NAME PRINTED _________________________
DATE___________________________________
APPROVED BY TOWN OF ERWIN ________________________________________ Town Manager
DATE___________________________________ (Ordinance of 10/3/85)
ess 7-19
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 8
§ 9-8001
§ 9-8002
CHAPTER § 9-8003
8 § 9-8004
§ 9-8005
TREES § 9-8006
§ 9-8007
§ 9-8008
§ 9-8009
§ 9-8010
§ 9-8011
§ 9-8012
§ 9-8013
§ 9-8014
§ 9-8015
§ 9-8016
§ 9-8017
§ 9-8018
§ 9-8019
§ 9-8020
§ 9-8021
§ 9-8022
§ 9-8023
Chapter 8 Trees
Trees
Purpose.
Enactment.
Conflicting ordinances.
Separability.
Definitions.
Creation and establishment of the Erwin Tree Board.
Organization of Tree Board.
Operation.
Duties and responsibilities.
Tree species to be planted.
Spacing.
Distance from curb and sidewalk. Distance from street corners and fireplugs Utilities.
Public tree care.
Tree topping.
Pruning, corner clearance.
Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
Removal of stumps.
Interference with Tree Board.
Arborists license and bond.
Review by Board of Commissioners. Penalties.
ess 8-1
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 8
§ 9-8001 Purpose.
Chapter 8 Trees
Trees
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage well planned, coordinated tree
planting improvements for the Town of Erwin, North Carolina, to improve the welfare and looks of the Town and its residents. To this end, this chapter seeks to set up a Tree Committee, to regulate tree planting and establish guidelines for the same. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8002 Enactment.
For the purposes cited above, and for promoting the general welfare of the Town and its residents, the Board of Commissioners for the Town does hereby ordain, adopt and enact this chapter in its entirety, which shall be known as the "Erwin Tree Ordinance." This chapter shall apply to all public territory and rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the Town. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8003 Conflicting ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter or inconsistent with its provisions or amendments thereto, are hereby repealed or superceded to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8004 Separability.
Should any provision of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect this chapter as a whole or any part hereof except that specific provision which was the subject of the declaration. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8005 Definitions.
The meanings of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows.
ess 8-2
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 8
Chapter 8 Trees
Trees
Park trees. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the Town or to which the public has free access as a park.
Street trees. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying
between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the Town. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8006 Creation and establishment of the Erwin Tree Board.
There is hereby created and established a Tree Board for the Town which shall consist of nine (9) members, citizens and residents of this Town, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the Board of Commissioners. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8007 Organization of Tree Board.
The Erwin Tree Board shall be organized and established in conformance with Part 2 Chapter 7 of the Code of Ordinances for the Town of Erwin. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8008 Operation.
The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transactions of business. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8009 Duties and responsibilities.
It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate, counsel and
develop and/or update annually and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the Board of Commissioners and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive Town tree plan for the Town. The Board when requested by the Board of
ess 8-3
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 8
Chapter 8 Trees
Trees
Commissioners, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8010 Tree species to be planted.
It shall be the responsibility of the Erwin Tree Board to form a list of tree species that may be planted. No other species than those specified on this list will be planted on public property without written permission from the Erwin Tree Board. Distinctive categories shall be made for said list regarding small, medium and large trees. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8011 Spacing.
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size
classes listed in section 9-6010 of this chapter and no trees may be planted closer
together than the following: small trees, thirty (30) feet; medium trees, forty (40) feet; and large trees, fifty (50) feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8012 Distance from curb and sidewalk.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 9-6010 of this chapter and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two (2) feet; medium trees, three (3) feet; and large trees, four (4) feet. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8013 Distance from street corners and fireplugs.
No street tree shall be planted closer than thirty-five (35) feet of any street
corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree
shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet of any fireplug. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
ess 8-4
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 8
§ 9-8014 Utilities.
Chapter 8 Trees
Trees
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in accordance with section 9-6010 of this chapter may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8015 Public tree care.
(a) The Town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
(b) The Tree Board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with sections 9-6010 through 9-6014 of this chapter. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8016 Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or corporation to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the Tree Board. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
ess 8-5
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 8
§ 9-8017
Chapter 8 Trees
Trees
Pruning, corner clearance.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the Town shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight (8) feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The Town shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light
along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8018 Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
The Town shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the town when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the Town. The Tree Board will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within sixty (60) days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the Town shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owners' property tax notice. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8019 Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
(Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8020 Interference with Tree Board.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the Tree
Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating,
ess 8-6
T
Toow
wnnooff
fEErr
rw
wii
in
nCCo
odde
eooff
fOOrr
rd
dii
in
naan
ncce
Part 9
Chapter 8
Chapter 8 Trees
Trees
mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8021 Arborists license and bond.
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the Town without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25) annually in advance; provided however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or Town employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) property damage indemnifying the Town or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8022 Review by Board of Commissioners.
The Board of Commissioners shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Tree Board to the Board of Commissioners who may hear the matter and make final decision. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
§ 9-8023 Penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be, upon conviction or a
plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50) or thirty (30) days in jail,
for each offense. (Ordinance of 3/25/86)
ess 8-7
PART 9 PLANNING AND REGULATIONS OF DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 9 - Mobile Homes
Incorporated into Chapter 4 - Zoning
Part 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 10
Table of Contents
§ 9-10001 Finding; purpose; Authority.
§ 9-10002 Scope.
§ 9-10003 Definitions.
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
MINIMUM
AND
ABANDONED HOUSING
§ 9-10004 Office of Housing Inspector Created; Powers and Duties.
§ 9-10005 Inspections.
§ 9-10006 Preliminary Investigations; Notices; Hearings.
§ 9-10007 Dwelling Unfit for Human Habitation.
§ 9-10008 Dwellings Not in Compliance But Not Unfit for Human Habitations.
§ 9-10009 Procedure After Hearing; Order.
§ 9-10010 Failure to Comply with Order.
§ 9-10011 Service of Complaints and Orders.
§ 9-10012 Appeals.
§ 9-10013 Alternative Remedies.
§ 9-10014 Conflict with Other Provisions.
§ 9-10015 Violations.
§ 9-10016 Repeal and Reenactment of Existing Housing Code.
§ 9-10017 Validity.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 10- 1
Part 9
Chapter 10
9-10001
Finding, Purpose
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
§ 9-10001 Finding; Purpose; Authority. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
Pursuant to Section 160A-441 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, it is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Town and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other calamities, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, and due to other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe and unsanitary, and dangerous and detrimental to the health, safety and morals, and otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Town and its extraterritorial jurisdictions.
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, as authorized by Part 6 of Article 19, Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina, it is the purpose of this Chapter to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, as expressly authorized by Section 160A-444 of the General Statues of North Carolina.
In addition, it is hereby found and declared, under the authority of North Carolina General Statutes 160A-174, that there exist in the Town dwellings which, although not meeting the classification as unfit for human habitation, fail to fully comply with all the minimum standards for housing fitness as established herein and therefor have present one or more conditions which are inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare. Such conditions, if not corrected can lead to deterioration and dilapidation of dwellings which render them unfit for human habitation.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 10- 2
Part 9
Chapter 10
§ 9-10002 Scope. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
9-10002
Definitions
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
(b) This Chapter is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof which are public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings, apartment houses, rooming houses or buildings, structures or premises used or intended for use as such.
(c) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all existing housing and to all housing hereafter constructed within the Town and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction. Portable, mobile or demountable buildings or structures, including trailers, manufactured homes and mobile homes when used or intended for use for housing within the jurisdiction, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this Chapter. This Chapter establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy of all building s used for human habitation and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings, equipment or facilities except as provided in this Chapter.
(d) The provisions of this Chapter shall also apply to abandoned structures which are found by the Board of Commissioners to be a health or safety hazard as a result of the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary conditions.
§ 9-10003 Definitions. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance:
(1) Abandoned Housing. Any structure, whether designed and intended for residential or other uses, which has been vacant or not in active use, regardless of purpose or reason, for the past two-year period and which is determined by the Housing Inspector to be unfit for human habitation or occupancy based upon the standards as set forth in this Chapter.
(2) Basement. A portion of a building which is located partly underground, having access to light and air from windows located above the level of the adjoining ground.
(3) Cellar. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground having inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.
(4) Deteriorated. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and can be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this Chapter, at a
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 10- 3
Part 9
Chapter 10
9-10002
Definitions
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
cost not in excess of fifty percent of its value, as determined by finding of the Housing Inspector
(5) Dilapidated. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and cannot be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this Chapter at a cost not in excess of fifty percent of its value, as determined by finding of the Housing Inspector.
(6) Dwelling. Any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and includes any accessory buildings and structures and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, except that it does not include any manufactured home or mobile home, which is used solely for a seasonal vacation purpose.
(7) Dwelling unit. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
(8) Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Housing Inspector.
(9) Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
(10) Habitable room. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces.
(11) Housing Inspector. The person appointed by the Town Manager to carry out the administration and enforcement of this Chapter.
(12) Infestation. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or the public.
(13) Manufactured Home (Mobile Home). A structure as defined in G.S. 143-145 (7)
(14) Multiple dwelling. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
(15) Occupant. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit.
(16) Operator. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling unit or rooming units are let.
(17) Owner. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgage of record.
Town of Erwin Code of Ordinances 10- 4
Part 9
Chapter 10
9-10002
Definitions
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
(18) Party or parties in interest. All individuals, associations and corporation who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession thereof.
(19) Public authority. Any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the Town, County, or State relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning dwellings in the Town.
(20) Rooming house. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or
more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or brother of the owner or operator.
(21) Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
(22) Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials except garbage and ashes, and the term shall include, but not be limited to, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.
(23) Supplied. Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under the control of, the owner or
operator.
Part 9Chapter 10 9-10002Definitions Minimum and Abandoned Housing
Code
(Whenever the words "dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, premises" are used in this Chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof.” (Ordinance passed 11-3-88) (Ordinance of 11/20/00) (Ordinance of 4-07-2005)
§ 9-10004 Office of Housing Inspector Created; Powers and Duties. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
For the purposes of Administering and enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, the office of Housing Inspector is hereby created. The Housing Inspector shall be appointed by the Town Manager, and shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Chapter, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, in addition to others herein granted, the following powers;
i. Investigations
To investigate the dwelling and building conditions in the Town in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation and dangerous, being guided in such examination of dwellings and buildings by the requirements set forth in this Chapter.
ii.Oaths, witnesses, etc.
To administer oaths and affirmations and to examine witnesses and receive evidence.
iii. Right of Entry
To enter upon and within premises and dwellings for the purpose of making examinations and investigations; provided, that such entries shall be make in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
iv. Warrants; Citations, etc.
To swear criminal warrants, issue civil citations and to take such other actions as may be necessary to carry out the enforcement procedures of this Chapter.
v. Delegation of functions, etc.
To delegate any of his functions and powers under this Chapter to such officers and agents as he may designate.
Part 9Chapter 10 9-10002Definitions Minimum and Abandoned Housing
Code
§ 9-10005 Inspections. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Chapter, the Housing Inspector, upon proper identification, is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey all dwelling, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units an premises, including abandoned structures. The owners or occupants or every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or rooming house, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Housing Inspector free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alternations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 9-10006 Preliminary Investigations; Notices; Hearing. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
Whenever a petition is filed with the Housing Inspector by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the Town charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the Housing Inspector (on his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the Housing Inspector sall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest in such dwellings a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Housing Inspector (or his designated agent) at a place within the Town therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Housing Inspector.
Upon the issuance of a complaint and notice of hearing pursuant to this Section, the Inspector may cause the filing of a notice of lis pendens, with a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing attached thereto, in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of the County, to be indexed and cross-indexed in accordance with the indexing procedures of the North Carolina General Statutes. The Inspector shall cause a copy of the notice of lis pendens to be served upon the owners and parties in interest in the dwelling at the time of filing in accordance with Section 160A-445 of the North Carolina General Statutes, as applicable. Upon compliance with the requirements of any order issued based upon such complaint and hearing, the Inspector shall direct the Clerk of Superior Court to cancel the notice of lis pendens.
§ 9-10007 Dwelling Unfit for Human Habitation. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
The Housing Inspector shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that any one of the following conditions exist in such dwelling:
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
(a) Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list, lean or buckle to such an extent as to render the dwelling unsafe.
(b) Supporting member or members which show thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration, or non-supporting, enclosing or outside walls or covering which shows fifty (50) percent or more of damage or deterioration.
(c) Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
(d) Such damage by fire, wind or other causes as to render the dwelling unsafe.
(e) Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions or disrepair which is dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or other people in the Town or jurisdiction.
(f) Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic.
(g) Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities.
(h) Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the occupants or other residents of the Town
(i) Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing facilities required by this Chapter which constitutes a definite health or safety hazard.
(j) Lack of connection to a potable water supply and/or to the public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system, the lack of either one of which renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation. For the purposes of this standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water supply if the water supply has been “cut off” because of nonpayment of the water bill or otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a flow of potable water to the tap.
In addition to the ten (10) conditions stated above, any one of which renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation, the Housing Inspector shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that a dwelling fails to fully comply with seven (7) or more of the following enumerated standards of dwelling fitness:
STRUCTUAL STANDARDS (Ord. 4/07/2005)
Structural Integrity
(1)Walls, partitions, supporting members, sills, joists, rafters or other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, shall not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks which might admit rodents.
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
Support
(2) Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
Foundations
(3) Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged.
Steps
(4) Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fail or collapse.
Egress
(5) Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be provided.
Interior Materials
(6) Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways shall be furnished of suitable materials which will, by use of reasonable household methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained in such a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between various spaces.
Weatherization
(7) The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall beconstructed and maintained so as to beweather and watertight.
Chimneys
(8) There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are defective, deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in such condition or location asto constitute a firehazard.
Floors
(9) There shall be no use of the ground for floors or wood floors on the ground.
PLUMBING STANDARDS (Ord.4/07/2005)
Facilities
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
(10) Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen, sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, and an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply. For the purposes of this standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water supply if the water supply has been “cut off” because of non-payment of the water bill or otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a flow of potable water to the tap.
Maintenance
All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the Town Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working order.
Accessible
(12) All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling and be accessible to the occupants of the same. The water closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording privacy to the use.
HEATING STANDARDS
Generally
(13)Every dwelling shall have facilities for providing heat in accordance with either paragraph (a) or (b) below. Such facilities shall be maintained in a state of good repair and good working order.
(a) Central and electrical heating systems. Every central or electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling to which it is connected with a minimum temperature of seventy
(70) degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three feet above the floor during average winter conditions.
(b)Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating system is not provided, each dwelling shall be provided with sufficient electrical receptacles, fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents whereby heating appliances may be connected so as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments with a minimum temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit measured three feet above, the floor during average winter conditions.
(c) Portable kerosene heaters are not acceptable as a permanent source of heat as required by this section, but may be used as a supplementary source in single-family dwellings and duplex units. An owner who has complied with subsection (a) or (b) shall not be held in violation of this section where an occupant of a dwelling unit uses a kerosene heater as a primary source of heat.
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
Wiring
(14) Every dwelling shall be wired for electric lights and convenience receptacles . Every habitable room shall contain at least two floor or wall type electrical convenience receptacles, connected in such manner as determined by the Town Electric Code. There shall be installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. In the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, then each such habitable room shall contain at least three floor or wall type
Electric convenience receptacles.
Hall Light
(15) Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when natural light is not sufficient.
Maintenance
(16) All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed in accordance with the Town Electric Code.
VENTILATION STANDARDS
Generally
(17) Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room and such light obstructions are located less than five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type window in the top of such a room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least fifteen percent of the total floor area of such room.
Habitable rooms
(18) Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area inevery habitable room shall be equal to at least forty-five percent of the minimum, window area size or minimum skylight type window size as required, or shall have other approved equivalent ventilation. ·
Bathroom andwater closet room
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
(19)Every bathroom equipped with more than one water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms.
SPACE, USE AND LOCATION STANDARDS
Room sizes
(20)Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in each habitable room as required by the Town Residential Building Code. (floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling may count for not more than ten percent of the required habitable floor area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than four and one-half feet shall not be considered as a part of the floor area in computing the total area of the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least one hundred (100) square feet of additional habitable area for each of the next three (3) occupants, and at least seventy-five (75) square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant. In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant twelve (12) years of age and over, and at least thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area for each occupant under twelve (12) years of age.
CeilingHeight
(21) At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and six inches.
(22) No cellar shall be used for living purposes unless:
(a) the floor and walls are substantially watertight;
(b) the total window area, total openable window area and ceiling height are equal to those required for a habitable room;
(c) the required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the windows face a stairwell, window well or accessory.
SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
Exterior foundation. walls and roofs
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
(23) Every foundation wall, exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weather tight and rodent proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be capable of affording privacy; shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to prevent the entrance of penetration ofmoisture or the weather.
Interior floors.walls and ceilings
(24) Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
Windows and doors
(25) Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weather tight, watertight and rodent proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
Stairs porches and appurtenances
(26) Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenances thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept insound condition and good repair.
Bathroom and kitchen floors
(27) Every bathroom and kitchen floor surface and water closet compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and "so as to permit such floor to be easily kept insound condition and good repair.
Supplied facilities
(28) Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this Chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained insatisfactory working condition.
Drainage
(29) Every yard shall be properly ·graded so as to obtain thorough drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
SmokeDetector Systems
(30) Every dwelling unit shall be provided with an approved listed smoke detector installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. When activated, the detector
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
shall provide an audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in accordance with and meet the requirements of UL 217, Single and Multiple Station SmokeDetectors.
INSECT, RODENT AND INFESTATION CONTROL STANDARDS
Screens
(31) For protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects ever, dwelling shall have:
(a) Supplied and installed screens on every door opening leading directly from the dwelling to outdoor space. Except, that sliding doors, doors with self-closing devices, doors on mobile homes with self-closing devices and doors that open into rooms of living spaces that are artificially ventilated or air conditioned are exempt from this provision.
(b) Supplied and installed screens on every window or other device with an opening to outdoor space, except that this requirement shall not apply for any room or rooms of a dwelling that are ventilated year round with an operable and installed heating and air conditioning system.
Rodent control
(32) Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens installed or such other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
Infestation
(33) Every dwelling shall be maintained in a manner to be free of any infestation of insects, rodents or other pests. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Rubbish storage and disposal
(34) Every dwelling shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish as required by Town ordinances, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for theremoval of rubbish.
Garbage storage and disposal
(35) Every dwelling shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling unit or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the Inspector, in the structure for the use of the
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage container as required by Town ordinances.
ROOMING HOUSE STANDARDS
All of the provisions of this Chapter, and all of the minimum standards and requirements of this Chapter, shall be applicable to rooming houses and to every person who operates a rooming house or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except as provided in the following Subsections:
Water closet hand lavatory and bath facilities
(36) At least one water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house wherever such facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located within the residence building served, shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall not be more than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes
(37) Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least seventy
(70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant twelve (12) years of age and over and at least thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area for each occupant under twelve (12) years of age.
Sanitary conditions
(38) The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other ·part of the rooming house; and shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
Sanitary facilities
(39) Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by Subsection (36) of this Section shall be located within the rooming house and within a room or rooms which afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms, and which are accessible from a common hall and without going outside the rooming house or through any other room therein.
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
[Note: Full compliance with a standard means that if any part of the stated standard is not complied with by a particular dwelling then that dwelling has failed to fully comply with the enumerated standard. For example, in regard to standard #10, if all standards are met in a dwelling except that a supply of hot water is not provided then the dwelling fails to fully comply
with standard #IO.] (Ord. 4/07/2005)
Section 9-10008 Dwellings Not inCompliance But Not Unfit for Human Habitation.
(Ord. of 4/7/2005)
In any case where the Housing Inspector determines that a dwelling fails to fully comply with one or more but less than seven (7) of the above enumerated standards of dwelling fitness, such dwelling shall not be found to be unfit for human habitation and shall not be subject to the procedures and remedies as provided for in this Ordinance for dwellings unfit for human habitation. Each such failure or noncompliance, however, shall constitute a violation of the terms of this Ordinance and shall subject the violator to the penalties and enforcement procedures, civil or criminal or both, of Section 1-1005 of this Code. In making the determination as described in this Section, the Housing Inspector shall not be required to make notice and hold the hearing as called for in Section 9-10006, but the Housing Inspector may do so if the determination of the severity and classification of dwelling fitness is not clear to the Housing Inspector upon preliminary investigation.
Section 9-10009 Procedure After Hearing; Order. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
If, after notice and hearing, the Housing Inspector determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation in accordance with the standards set forth above, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order:
(a) If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a cost of less than fifty (50) percent of the value of the dwelling, requiring the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation, based upon the HousingInspector'sstandardsforclosingdwellings;
OR
(b) If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made at a cost of less than fifty (50) percent of the value of the dwelling, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to remove or demolish such dwelling.
If, after notice and hearing the Housing Inspector determines that the dwelling under consideration is not unfit for human habitation but is not in full compliance with one or more standards of dwelling fitness as set forth above, he may proceed with the enforcement procedures of Section 1-1005 of this Code, civil or criminal or both.
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
Whenever a determination is made pursuant to this Section that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished, under the provisions of the Section, notice of the order shall be given by first-class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum period of fortyfive (45) days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal or demolition by action of the Inspector, to allow the opportunity for any organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease, or purchase the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The Inspector shall certify the mailing of the notices, and the certifications shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written request for such notices may raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order requiring the Inspector to wait forty-five (45) days before causing removal or demolition.
(Amended November 7, 2013)
At the discretion of the town manager, where a dwelling has been declared dilapidated or deteriorated by the Housing Inspector, a monetary incentive may be offered to the property owner to have the dwelling demolished and removed under the following conditions:
1. The monetary incentive may not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), and is only payable after all demolition work has been satisfactorily completed;
2. All demolition and lot clearing activities must be satisfactorily completed within thirty days of the Housing Inspector’s determination that the dwelling is dilapidated or deteriorated. Failure to satisfactorily complete the activity within the allotted time will void any eligibility for a monetary incentive, and authorizes the town to continue abatement proceedings as necessary.
3. The property owner is responsible for all applicable demolition work, and shall be liable for any expenses incurred;
4. The monetary incentive will only be provided for demolition activities and not for rehabilitation or reconstruction.
Section 9-10010 Failure to Complywith Order. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
(a)Ifthe owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and closethedwelling, theHousing Inspectormay:
(1) Cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed.
(2) Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any such dwelling, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful ." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute aviolation of this Chapter.
(b) If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, or improve or remove or demolishthe dwelling, theHousing Inspectormay:
(1) Cause such dwelling to be vacated and removed or demolished.
(2) Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any such dwelling, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute aviolation of thisChapter.
(c)The duties of the Housing Inspector set forth in Subsections (a) and (b) shall not be exercised until the Board of Commissioners shall have by ordinance ordered the Housing Inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this Chapter with respect to the particular property or properties which the Housing Inspector shall have found to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with the Housing Code. For the purposes of this subsection a period of ninety (90) day following the date of the Housing Inspector's order shall constitute a reasonable opportunity. This ordinance shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
(d) The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the Housing Inspector shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the Housing Inspector, he shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixture or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Housing Inspector shall be secured in a manner directed by the Court, and shall be disbursed by the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order of the decree ofthe Court.
(e) If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate dwelling, the Housing Inspector may file a civil action in the name of the Town to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any persons occupying such dwelling. The Clerk of Superior Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before amagistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed 10 days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the hearing the Housing Inspector produces the certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to Subsection (c) authorizing the Housing Inspector to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as thejudgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30.An appeal fromanyjudgment entered hereunder by the magistratemaybetaken asprovided inG.S. 7A-228, and the execution of suchjudgment maybe stayed as provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the ownermay not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this paragraph unless such occupant was served with notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that the Board of Commissioners has ordered the Housing Inspector to proceed to exercise his duties under Subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this Section to vacate and close or remove and demolishthedwelling.
(f)If the Board of Commissioners shall have adopted an ordinance, or the Housing Inspector shall have issued an order, ordering a dwelling to be repaired or vacated and closed, as provided in Section 9-10009(a), and if the owner has vacated and closed such dwelling and kept such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of one year pursuant to the ordinance or order, then if the Board of Commissioners shall find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, moral, and welfare of the Town in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
The Town, then in such circumstances, the Board of Commissioners may, after the expiration of such one year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following:
(1) Ifit is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days; or
(2) If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
This ordinance shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with this ordinance, the Housing Inspector shall effect the purpose of the ordinance.
Section 9-10011 Service of Complaints and Orders. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
Complaints or orders issued by the Housing Inspector pursuant to an ordinance adopted under this Chapter, except those being prosecuted under Section 1-1005 of this Code, shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the. registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted ina conspicuous place on the premises affected.
If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Housing Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Housing Inspector makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the unknown owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under the provisions of this Chapter. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.
Section 9-lOO12 Appeals. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
(a) the Board of Adjustment is hereby appointed as the Housing Appeals Board to which appeals from any decision or order of the Housing Inspector may be taken. Except where this Chapter provides for different rules or procedures, the Board of Adjustment acting as the Housing Appeals Board shall follow its rules of procedure, which may be amended to provide specifically for this function.
Part 9
Chapter 10
Minimum Standards of Fitness For Dwelling and Dwelling Units
Minimum and
Abandoned Housing
Code
(b)An appeal from any decision or order of the Housing Inspector may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or commission of the Town. Any appeal from the Housing Inspector shall be taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order by filing with the Housing Inspector and with the Board a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Housing Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the Housing Inspector refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any such act, his decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the Housing Inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board, unless the Housing Inspector certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that because of facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension of his requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one day's written notice to the Housing Inspector, by the Board, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to Subsection (e) of this Section.
(c) The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, shall give due notice to the parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make any decision and order that in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers of the Housing Inspector, but the concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the Housing Inspector. The Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter .of the Chapter, to adapt the application of the Chapter to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the Chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
(d) Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari institutedwithin 15 days of the decision of the Board, but not otherwise.
(e)Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Housing Inspector or a decision rendered by the Board may petition the Superior Court for an injunction, restraining the Housing Inspector from carrying out the order or decision and the Court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the Housing Inspector pending a final disposition of the cause. The petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be had by the Court on a petition within 20 days, and shall be given preference . over other matters on the Court's calendar. The Court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require. It shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this Subsection.
Section 9-10013 AlternativeRemedies. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
Part 9 Minimum and
Chapter 10 Minimum Standards of Fitness Abandoned
For Dwelling and Dwelling Units Housing Code
Nothing in this Chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise nor shall enforcement of one remedy provided herein prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws. In addition to the remedies provided for herein, any violation of the terms of this Chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties and remedies, either criminal or civil or both, as set forth inSection 1-1005 of the Code of the Town of Erwin.
No dwelling shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved, or changed in occupancy without a Certificate of Occupancy. In any case where the Housing Inspector, after notice and hearing as required herein, finds that a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he shall withhold issuance of a Certificate of Occupari.cy for such dwelling or dwelling unit until such time that he determines that it is fit for human habitation. In addition, in any case where the Housing Inspector, after preliminary investigation as provided for herein, concludes, based upon that investigation, that a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation and believes that the occupancy of such dwelling or dwelling unit could cause imminent peril to life or property from fire or other hazards, he shall withhold issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for such dwelling or dwelling unit until such time that he determines that it is fit for human habitation.
Ifany dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained, or used in violation of this Chapter or of any valid order or decision of the Housing Inspector or Board made pursuant to any ordinance or code adopted under authority of this Chapter, the Housing Inspector may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or occupancy, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, to prevent the occupancy of the dwellings, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about the premises of the dwelling.
Section 9-10014 Conflict with Other Provisions. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this Chapter is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the Town, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the residents of the Town's jurisdiction shall prevail The North Carolina Building Code, current edition, shall serve as the standard for all alterations, repairs, additions, removals, demolitions and other acts of building made or required pursuant to this Chapter.
Section 9-10015 Violations. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
In addition to the conditions, acts or failures to act that constitute violations specified in this Chapter above, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to vacate and close or vacate and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Inspector duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to Section 9-10009, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacation and closing, or vacation and removal ordemolition.
Part 9 Minimum and
Chapter 10 Minimum Standards of Fitness Abandoned
For Dwelling and Dwelling Units Housing
Code
Section 9-10016 Repeal and Reenactment of Existing Housing Code.
(Ord. of 4/7/2005)
The rewriting of this Chapter in part carries forth by reenactment some of the provisions of the existing Housing Code of the Town of Erwin and it is not intended to repeal but rather to reenact and continue in force such existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have been accrued are preserved and may be enforced. All provisions of the Housing Code which are not reenacted herein are hereby repealed. All suits at law or in equity and/or all prosecutions resulting from the violation of the Housing Code in effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of this State or of the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of this Chapter, but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if this Chapter had not been adopted; and any and all violations of the existing Chapter, prosecutions for which have
not been instituted may be filed and prosecuted; and nothing in this Chapter shall be so construed as to abandon, abate, or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending and/or which may have been instituted or prosecuted.
Section 9-10017 Validity. (Ord. of 4/7/2005)
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The Board of Commissioners hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance and each section, subsection, clause, and phrase thereof: irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid."
Part Ill. All ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
PART 9 PLANNING AND REGULATIONS OF DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 11 - Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Boundary Map
Incorporated into Chapter 4 - Zoning
101 Appendix
APPENDIX I
Traffic
Section 102
Section 101 Parking prohibited at all times
except on Sundays on the
following streets (See Section 7-
1183)
Street Location Side
East H Street From 10th to 8th streets North
East H Street In front of the two North
new wings of the
hospital where the
sidewalk juts out
onto the edge of the
street
Fourteenth Between C Street and West
Street B Street for a distance
of 330 feet
Lucas Street Beginning at the South
intersection of Lucas
Street and Masonic
Road and traveling in
a southeasterly
direction for a
distance of 405 feet
A-1
Parking prohibited between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. upon any of the streets or portions of streets as follows (See Section 7-1154)
103 Appendix
Section 103 Parking limited to two hours Section 104
between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on any day except
Sundays and public holidays
within the district or upon any of
the streets as follows (See Section
7-1187):
A-2
Parking limited to one hour between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m. on any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district upon any of the streets as follows (See Section 7- 1184):
105 Appendix
Section 105 Parking limited to five minutes Section 106
(See Section 7-1184):
A-3
The following streets or portion of streets shall be reserved as stands for the specific purpose and at the exact location described in the following (See Section 7-1174):
107 Appendix A-4
Section 107 Diagonal parking. All vehicles Section 108 Through streets (See Section 7-
shall be parked within the lines 1081):
drawn for parking on the following streets or portions thereof (See Section 7-1142):
109
Section 109 Intersections at which "stop"
is required before entering
(See Section 7-1083):
Stop Street Through Street Direction
(1) South 18th St. West E Street North
(2) South l8th St. West E Street South
(3) South 17th St. West B Street North
(4) South 17th St. West C Street North
(5) South l7th St. West C Street North
(6) South 17th St. West D Street North
(7) South l7th St. West E Street North
(8) South 17th St. West J Street North
(9) South 17th St. West J. Street South
(10) South 17th St. West E Street South
(11) South 17th St. West D Street South
(12) South 17th St. West C Street South
(13) South 17th St. West B Street South
(14) South 17th St. West A Street South
(15) South 16th St. West A Street North
(16) South 16th St. West B Street North
(17) South 16th St. West C Street North
(18) South 16th St. West D Street North
(19) South 16th St. West E Street North
(20) South 16th St. West E. Street South
(21) South 16th St. West D Street South
(22) South 16th St. West C Street South
(23) South 16th St. West B Street South
(24) South 16th St. West A Street South
(25) South 15th St. West A Street North
(26) South 15th St. West B Street North
(27) South 15th St. West C Street North
(28) South 15th St. West D Street North
(29) South 15th St. West E Street North
(30) South 15th St. West F Street North
(3 1) South 15th St. West F Street South
(32) South 15th St. West E Street South
(33) South 15th St. West D Street South
(34) South 15th St. West C Street South
(35) South 15th St. West B Street South
(36) South 15th St. West A Street South
(37) South 14th St. West B Street North
(38) South 14th St. West C Street North
(39) South 14th St. West D Street North
(40) South 14th St. West E Street North
(41) South 14th St. West F Street North
(42) South 14th St. West E Street South
(44) South 14th St. West D Street South
(45) South 14th St. West C Street South
(46) South 14th St. West B Street South
(47) South 14th St. Old Post Rd. Ext. South
(48) Rosemary St. Old Post Road North
(49) South 12th St. Old Post Road North
(50) South 12th St. Denim Drive North
(5 1) South 12th St. I Street North
(52) South 12th St. K Street North
(53) South 12th St. K Street South
(54) South 12th St. I Street South
(55) South 12th St. Denim Drive South
(56) South 12th St. Old Post Road South
(57) Holmes St. Old Post Road North
(58) South 11th St. Denim Drive North
(59) South 11th St. East H Street North
Appendix
Stop Street
(60) South 11th St.
(61) South 11th St.
(62) South 10th St.
(63) South 10th St.
(64) South 10th St.
(65) South 10th St.
(66) South 10th St.
(67) South 10th St.
(68) South 8th St.
(69) South 8th St.
(70) South 8th St.
(7 1) Warren Road
(72) South 7th St.
(73) South 7th St.
(74) McKay St.
(75) McKay St.
(76) McKay St.
(77) Warren Road
(78) South 6th St.
(79) South 6th St.
(80) South 6th St.
(81) South 6th St.
(83) Masonic Road
(84) Masonic Road
(85) Masonic Road
(86) Masonic Road
(87) Masonic Road
(88) South 8th St.
(89) South 8th St.
(90) North 9th St.
(91) North 9th St.
(92) North 9th St.
(93) North I Ith St.
(94) North I Ith St.
(95) North I 1th St.
(96) North 11th St.
(97) North 14th St.
(98) North 14th St.
(99) North 15th St.
(100) North 15th St.
(101) North 15th St.
(102) North 16th St.
(103) North 16th St.
(104) North 16th St.
(105) Old Post Road
(106) Old Post Road
(107) A Street
(108) B Street
(109) B Street
(110) B Street
(111) B Street
(112) C Street
(113) C Street
(114) C Street
(115) C Street
(116) C Street
(117) C Street
(118) D Street
A-5
Through Street Direction
Denim Drive South
Old Post Road South
Denim Drive North
East I Street North
Highway 421 North
East I Street South
Denim Drive South
Old Post Road South
Denim Drive North
Denim Drive South
Old Post Road South
Old Post Road South
Denim Drive North
Old Post Road South
Warren Road West
Old Post Road East
McKay Street South
Old Post Road North
Old Post Road North
Denim Drive North
Lucas Road North
Denim Drive South
421 (2) North
421 Island (2) North
421 (2) South
421 Island (2) South
Denim Drive South
East I Street North
East I Street South
East I Street North
East I Street South
East H Street South
East I Street North
East K Street South
East I Street South
East H Street South
West N. Street North
West J Street South
West N Street North
West K Street North
West J Street South
West J Street North
West K Street North
West J Street South
Denim Drive East
South 13th Street West
South 14th Street East
South 13th Street East
South 12th Street East
South 13th Street West
South 18th Street West
South 13th Street East
South 12th Street East
South 11th Street East
South 12th Street West
South 13th Street West
South 18th Street West
South 13th Street East
109
Stop Street Through Street Direction
(119) D Street South 12th Street East
(120) North 11th St. East K Street
(121) North 11th St. North 12th St.
(120) D Street South 11th Street East
(121) D Street South 10th Street East
(122) D Street South 8th Street East
(123) D Street South 7th Street East
(124) D Street South 8th Street West
(125) D Street South 10th Street West
(126) D Street South 11th Street West
(127) D Street South 12th Street West
(128) D Street South 13th Street West
(129) D Street South 18th Street West
(130) E Street South 13th Street East
(13 1) E Street South 12th Street East
(132) E Street South 11th Street East
(133) E Street South 10th Street East
(134) E Street South 7th Street West
(135) E Street South 8th Street West
(136) E Street South 11th Street West
(137) E Street South 12th Street West
(138) E Street South 13th Street West
(139) F Street South 17th Street East
(140) F Street South 13th Street East
(141) F Street South 12th Street East
(142) F Street South 11th Street East
(143) F Street South 10th Street East
(144) F Street South 11th Street West
(145) F Street South 12th Street West
(146) F Street South 13th Street West
(147) F Street South 17th Street West
(148) F Street South 18th Street West
(149) H Street South 12th Street (2)East
(150) H Street South 10th Street East
(151) H Street 6th Street East
(152) H Street Masonic Road East
(153) H Street Masonic Road West
(154) H Street South 6th Street West
(155) H Street South 10th Street West
(156) H Street South 12th Street West
(157) H Street South 13th Street West
(158) H Street South 12th Street East
(159) H Street South 10th Street East
(160) H Street South 10th Street West
(161) H Street South 12th Street West
(162) H Street (West) South 17th Street West
(163) 1 Street 421 Highway East
(164) 1 Street North 13th Street West
(165) 1 Street (West) North 16th Street East
(166) 1 Street North 17th Street West
(167) K Street North 14th Street East
(168) K Street North 13th Street East
(169) K Street North 10th Street East
(170) K Street North 9th Street East
(171) K Street North 10th Street West
(172) K Street North 13th Street West
(173) K Street North 14th Street West
(174) J Street North 13th Street East
(175) J Street North 12th Street East
(176) J Street North 11th Street East
(177) J Street North 10th Street East
(178) J Street North 9th Street East
(179) J Street North 8th Street East
Appendix A-6
Stop Street Through Street Direction
(180) J Street North 9th Street West
(181) J Street North 10th Street West
(182) J Street North 11th Street West
(183) J Street North 12th Street West
(184) J Street North 13th Street West
(185) L Street North 14th Street East
(186) M Street 14th Street East
(187) M Street North 13th Street East
(188) M Street North 14th Street West
(189) Cut through 421 Highway East
(190) Cut through Highway 421 West
(191) Cut through North 13th Street West
(192) N Street North 13th Street East
(193) N Street North 16th Street West
(194) Lucas Road Masonic Road East
(195) Lucas Road Masonic Road West
110 Appendix
Section 110 One-way streets (See Section 7- Section 111
1072):
A-7
Left turns to be made to the left of the center of the following intersections (See Section 7-
1063):
112 Appendix A-8
Section 112 No left turns at following Section 113 No right turns at following
intersections (See Section 7- intersections (See Section 7-
1063): 1063):
114 Appendix A-9
Section 114 No complete or “U” turns at Section 115 Twenty mile per hour speed limit
following intersection (See on the following streets (See
Section 7-1063): Section 7-1052 (a) (1)):
13th Street (NC 82-217), from a point 0.05 mile south of SR 1718 to a point 0.05 mile north of “H” Street.
116 Appendix A-10
Section 116 Twenty-five mile per hour speed Section 117 Thirty mile per hour speed limit
limit on the following streets (See on the following streets (See
Section 7-1052 (a) (2)): Section 7-1052 (a) (3)):
118 Appendix
Section 118 Forty mile per hour speed limit on Section 119
the following streets (See Section
7-1052 (a) (4)):
13th Street
A-11
Forty-five mile per hour speed limit on the following streets (See Section 7-1053 (a) (5)):
(NC 82-217) from “K” Street to the
northern corporate limit (at US 421-NC 55).
NC 82 from the new corporate limit, a point 0.07 mile west of S.R. 1735, to a point 0.22 mile south of S.R. 1775.
US 421-NC 55 from the southern corporate limits of Erwin, a point 0.38 mile south of S.R. 1889, northward to SR 1703, in Erwin.
Along US 421-NC 55 from SR 1703 northward to the northern corporate limit of Erwin, a point 0.25 mile north of NC 82-NC 55.
(Ord. of 10/8/93)
120 Appendix A-12
Section 120 Fifty mile per hour speed limit on Section 121 Fifty-five mile per hour speed
the following streets (See Section limit on the following streets (See
7-1052 (a) (6)): Section 1052(a) (7)):
122 Appendix A-13
Section 122 Twenty mile pr hour speed limit Section 123 Twenty-five mile per hour speed
on the following streets (See limit on the following streets (See
Section 7-1052 (b) (1)): Section 7-1052 (b) (2)):
Street Street
Maple Street in Forest Hills Subdivision Walnut Drive in Forest Hills Subdivision
Don Ron Road
St. Matthews Road from southern intersection of Denim Drive and St. Matthews Road to northern intersection of East Jackson Blvd. (Hwy 421) and St. Matthews Road (Adopted August 2, 2012)
124 Appendix A-14
Section 124 Thirty mile per hour speed limit Section 125 Forty mile per hour speed limit on
on the following streets (See the following streets (See Section
Section 7-1052 (b) (3)): 7-1052 (b) (4)):
126 Appendix A-15
Section 126 Forty-five mile per hour speed Section 127 Fifty mile per hour speed limit on
limit on the following streets (See the following streets (See Section
Section 7-1052 (b) (5)): 7-1053 (b) (6)):
128 Appendix
Section 128 Fifty-five mile per hour speed Section 129
limit on the following streets (See
Section 7-1052 (b) (7)):
A-16
The following streets or portions thereof, are designated as
passenger loading and unloading zones (See Section 7-1172):
130 Appendix
Section 130 The following streets or portions Section 131
thereof, are designated as
commercial loading and
unloading zones (See Section 7-
1173):
A-17
Vehicles may turn right on red lights after coming to a complete stop on the following streets (See Section 7-1034 (3) a.):
132 Appendix A-18
Section 132 Yield right-of-way signs shall be Section 133 Thirty-five mile per hour speed
posted at the following locations limit on the following streets:
(See Section 7-1043):
US 421- NC 82 to the eastern corporate limit,
Yield Street Location Direction of Travel approximately 0.06 mile east of
S.R. 1703.
(1) South 14th St. G Street North
(2) North 13th St. Highway 421 North
(3) North 13th St. 55 Highway South
(4) North 13th St. 421 Highway South
(5) South 8th St. H Street North
(6) Masonic Road 421 Highway North
(7) Masonic Road Highway 421 South
(8) East I St. Highway 421 East
134 Appendix A-19
Section 134 (Reserved) Section 135 Traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following locations (See Section 7-1034):
136 Appendix
Section 136 Resident Parking Only signs shall Section 137
be posted at the following
locations (See Section 7-1188):
Street Location
“A” Street Abutting City Park
A-20
Flashing yellow caution signal lights shall be installed at the following locations (See Section
7-1036):
136 Appendix A-20
Section 138 The following locations are
designated as handicapped
parking spaces:
Area beginning 149.7 feet east of southeast corner of intersection of North Burlington Avenue and East “H” Street, extending 21 feet in an easterly direction.
App. A
APPENDIX II
Personnel
APPENDIX A
160A-168
GENERAL STATUTES OF NORTH
CAROLINA
ARTICLE 7
Administrative Offices
Part 4. Personnel
Appendix A-22
medical disability, mental or physical, that a
prudent physician would not divulge to his patient.
(2) A licensed physician designated in writing
by the employee may examine the employee's
medical record.
(3) A Town employee having supervisory
authority over the employee may examine all
material in the employee's personnel file.
(4) By order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, any person may examine such portion
of an employee's personnel file as may be ordered
by the court.
(5) An official of an agency of the State or
G.S. 160A-168. Privacy of employee personnel
records.
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 132-6 or any other general law or local act concerning access to public records, personnel files maintained by a city are subject to inspection and may be disclosed only as provided by this section. (b) The following information with respect to each Town employee is a matter of public record: name; age; date of original employment or appointment to the service; current position title; current salary; date of the most recent promotion, demotion, transfer, suspension, separation, or other change in position classification; and the office to which the employee is currently assigned. The Town council shall determine in what form and by whom this information will be maintained. Any person may have access to this information for the purpose of inspection, examination, and copying, during regular business hours, subject only to such rules and regulations for the safekeeping of public records as the Town council may have adopted.
Any person denied access to this information may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for an order compelling disclosure, and the court shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders.
(c) All information contained in a Town employee's personnel file, other than the information made public by division (b) of this appendix, is confidential and shall be open to inspection only in the following instances:
(1) The employee or his duly authorized agent may examine all portions of his personnel file except letters of reference solicited prior to employment and information concerning a
Federal government, or any political subdivision
of the State, may inspect any portion of a personnel file when such inspection is deemed by the official having custody of such records to be inspected to be necessary and essential to the pursuance of a proper function of the inspecting agency, but no information shall be divulged for the purpose of assisting in a criminal prosecution (of the employee), or for the purpose of assisting in an investigation of (the employee's) tax liability. (d) The Town council of a Town that maintains personnel files containing information other than the information mentioned in division (b) of this appendix shall establish procedures whereby an employee who objects to material in his file on grounds that it is inaccurate or misleading may seek to have the material removed from the file or may place in the file a statement relating to the material.
(e) Any public official or employee who knowingly and willfully permits any person to have access to any confidential information contained in any employee personnel file, except as expressly authorized by this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(f) Any person, not specifically authorized by this section to have access to a personnel file designated as confidential, who shall knowingly and willfully examine in it official filing place, remove or copy any portion of a confidential personnel file shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in the discretion of the court, but not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00). (1975,c701,s.2)
App. B Appendix A-23
APPENDIX B
EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
(See reverse side for instructions) Last Name First MI Account
TO THE SUPERVISOR
In the chart below, record your evaluation by Position Title Code
placing an (X) at a point along the scale
between (50) and (100) that best reflects Date Employed:__________________________
this employee’s work performance. Anniversary Date for Evaluation:____________
Do this for each Performance Factor and write Current: Range_____, Step_____, $__________
in the column to the right the numerical rating Potential: Range_____, Step_____, $_________
that is nearest to your (X).
100 90 80 70 60 50
95 85 75 65 55
Performance Numerical
Factor Rating
Superior Good Average Fair Poor
Work Quality Work Quantity Dependability Attitude
Attendance and Punctuality
1. Number of days taken during past 12 months of sick leave without pay:_________________________________
2. Employee is late starting to work _____Almost Never _____ Seldom _____ Sometimes _____ Often
3. Supervisor’s Comments : (Name the one or two aspects of performance that is in greatest need to improve.)
Signature of Supervisor Date Signature of Department Head Date
FOR THE EMPLOYEE:
My Supervisor has discussed my work progress with me ___________________________________
Signature of Employee Date
App. B
EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE
EVALUATION
(a) This form is provided to help you keep the employee aware of his or her work progress or lack of progress. Evaluating and guiding worker performance is a practice that the supervisor engages in continually.
The evaluation shall be completed and sent to the manager's office at the end of six (6) month's
probationary period for new and promoted employees, and once a year thereafter for as long as the individual remains a permanent full-time employee.
(b) The supervisor shall evaluate performance during this rating period by considering the following factors:
(1) Work quality. Judge whether the work has been thorough and precise, or incomplete and careless, or whether it has fallen somewhere in between. Determine whether vehicles and property have been well cared for or have been excessively damaged or abused.
(2) Work quantity. Judge whether assignments have been completed very promptly or have been slow and incomplete, or whether work completed has fallen somewhere in between.
(3) Dependability. Judge whether you have been totally confident that the worker has observed all safety rules and has been reliant and responsible, or that he has been indifferent and undependable, or if he has been somewhere in between.
(4) Attitude. Judge whether the employee has been industrious, helpful and cooperative, or if he has been lazy and a continual complainer and agitator, or if his attitude has been somewhere in between.
(5) Attendance. Determine whether the
employee has always started to work on time and has never abused the sick leave privilege, or whether the employee seldom arrives at work on time and obviously abuses sick leave privileges, or whether attendance and punctuality have fallen somewhere in between.
(c) The most important aspect of this employee performance evaluation process is that it forces the supervisor to sit down and talk to the employee about how the interest of the Town can best be served.
(d) Use the reverse side as your discussion outline when you explain your evaluation to the employee. Judge the employee only on the above
Appendix A-24
performance factors and do not allow your evaluation to be distorted by influences that do not relate to job performance during this rating period.
Tell the employee why you judged his or her work as you did and when necessary tell the employee why and how performance needs to improve.
Encourage the employee to participate in the evaluation discussion.
App. C Appendix A-25
APPENDIX C Of
NORTH CAROLINA
POSITION REVIEW REQUEST Date:________
TO: ____________________ Manager
FROM:_____________________, ______________________
Name Department
_____________________, ______________________
Division Budget Account
Check the type of request:
(A) _____ RECLASSIFICATION (Existing Classification with significant changes in duties, responsibility
and/or working conditions).
(B) _____ NEW CLASSIFICATION (Duties, responsibilities have never before been described or classified).
(C) _____ PAY ADJUSTMENT (Although the duties have not changed, the Pay Range is considered too low
or too high in relationship to current Labor Market conditions and to other Position Classes).
(1) Present Class Title: _______________ Pay Range: _______________
(2) Proposed Classification Title: _______________ Pay Range: _______________
(3) Name and title of Immediate Supervisor of the Classification to be reviewed:
EXPLANATION: (Describe change of duties, responsibilities, working conditions and/or other basis for this request).
DESCRIPTION OF WORK: (List clearly and fully the duties and responsibilities in descending order of importance).
App. C Appendix A-25
EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE: (Your estimation of minimum education and experience required. If no experience is required, then so state).
Signature of Official Submitting this Request Date
DEPARTMENT HEAD COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Reviewed and approved by _________________________________, _______________
Signature of Department Head Date
Adapted as Revision to Position Classification Plan:
__________________________________, _______________
Manager Date
App. D Appendix A-26
APPENDIX D
Maximums
Requirement A
Requirement B
Front Yard
4’
6’
Side Yard
6’
6’
Rear Yard
6’
6’
Use
Requirement Type
Residential
Single Family Dwellings (including modular homes)
A
Manufactured Home Parks
A
Manufactured Homes on Individual Parcels
A
Condominium Developments
A
Multi-family Dwelling (three or more dwelling units on individual parcel)
A
Townhome Development
A
Two-family Dwelling (duplex on individual parcel)
A
Group Residential
Family Care Facilities
A
Group Care Facilities
A
Educational and Institutional
Continuing Care Retirement Community
A
Religious Structures
A
Cemetery or Mausoleum, Commercial Use
A
Cemetery or Mausoleum, Private Use
A
Funeral Home or Mortuary
A
Adult Daycare
A
Childcare Facility
A
Educational Institution: Colleges, Universities, and Trade Schools
A
School: Elementary, Middle, and High
A
Financial Institutions: Banks, Credit Agencies, Investment Companies, etc.
A
Health Services
Emergency Services (Police, Fire, Rescue, Ambulance Service)
A
Health Care Services: Medical and Dental Clinic and Lab, Blood Bank, etc.
A
Hospital
A
Social Institutions
Community and Civic Centers
A
Social Halls, Lodges, Fraternal Organizations, Clubs, and similar activities
A
Commercial
Animal Services: Kennels, Boarding Stables, Veterinarian Service, and other similar regulated land uses
A
Eating and Drinking Places: Restaurant, Bar or Tavern
A
Lodging Services: Bed and Breakfast, Boarding House, Hotel or Motel, Homeless Shelter
A
Offices, General: Governmental, Business, and Professional
A
Retail Services: Convenience Store; Convenience-type Business Establishments; Grocery Store; Flea Market and Second Hand Sales and Activities; Retail Nursery; Retail Sales, Shops, Stores, and Service Establishments (entirely within an enclosed building)
A
Vehicle Sales, Leasing, and Services:
Automobile Service Station
A
Manufactured Home, Modular Home, and Recreational Vehicle Sales, including related repair activates and sale of parts
A
Outdoor Display, Storage, or Sale of Vehicles or Other Equipment
A
Repossession Storage Facility (Repot Lot)
B
Industrial
Manufacturing, General and Light
A
Warehousing and Freight Hauling
Assembling, Processing Industries, Wholesale, Warehouse, and Transfer Activities
B
Storage of Recreational Vehicle and Travel Trailer
B
Storage, Self Mini-warehouse
B
Wholesale Trade
Wholesale Storage of Gasoline or Bulk Terminal Plants
B
Waste-Related
Junkyards (see “Junkyards, salvage yards, and other similar uses”)
B
Recycling Collection Centers
B
Recycling Plant
B
Solid Waste Disposal, Land Application of Sludge, or Petroleum-contaminated soil
B
Chapter A Ordinance Disposition Table O-1
TABLE OF ORDINANCES
Location Subject Disposition
Chapter A General Administration ……………………………………………………………...……Pt. 2 generally
Article I Legislative……………………………………………………………….…..Pt.2, Ch.1, Art. B Article II Ordinances……………………………………………………………….….Pt.2, Ch.1, Art. C Article III Officers and Employees………………………………………………….…Pt.2, Ch.2, Art. A Article IV Finance; Purchasing……………………………………………………...…Pt.2, Ch.4, Art. A
Chapter B Police…………………………………………………………………………………...Pt.3, Ch.1, Art. A
Chapter C Fire Protection and Prevention…………………………………………………………………Pt.3, Ch.2
Article I Fire Department…………………………………………………..…Pt.3, Ch.2, Art. A
Article II Fire Hazards………………………………………..S. by F.S. Code Pt.3, Ch.2, Art. B
Article III Fire Limits…………………………………………………………..Pt.3, Ch.2, Art. C
Chapter D Streets and Sidewalks…………………………………………………………………..………Pt.4, Ch.1
Article I Damaging Streets and Sidewalks…………………………...……….Pt.4, Ch.1, Art. B
Article II Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks……………………………S. by Pt.6, Ch.2, Art. A
Article III Use and Cleanliness…………………………………………………Pt.6, Ch.2, Art. B
Chapter E Municipally Owned Utilities………………………………………………………………………….Pt.5
Article I Water and Sewer……………………………………………………………Pt. 5, Ch.1
Article II [Repealed]……………………………………………………………………………..
Chapter F Traffic
Article I Words and Phrases Defined……………………………………..….S. by Sec. 7-1001
Article II Required Obedience to Traffic S. by Sec.
Regulations and Police Officers………….……………………………..7-1021 et seq.
Article III Obedience to Official Traffic S. by Pt.7
Control Devices…………………………………………………………..Ch.1, Art. D
Article IV Stopping, Standing and Parking……………………………...S. by Pt.7, Ch.1, Art. M
Article V Operation of Vehicles…………………………………….…Pt.7, Ch.1, Art. 1, in part
Chapter G Health Protection and Disease Prevention
Article I General Regulations…………………………………………………………Pt.8, Ch.6
Article II Garbage and Refuse Collections…………………………………………….Pt.4, Ch.2
Article III Privies-Septic Tanks…………………………………………………………….Sec. 5
Chapter H Business and Trades……………………………………………………………………………Pt.6, Ch.1
Article I Privilege Licenses…………………………………………………...Pt.2, Ch.4, Art. B
Article II Taxicabs………………………………………………………….….Pt.6, Ch.1, Art. A
Article III Pool Rooms……………………………………………….........S. by Pt.8, Ch.1, Art. C
Chapter I Disorderly Conduct and Public Nuisances………………………...………………………Pt.8, generally
Article I Disorderly Conduct………………………………………………………….Pt.8, Ch.1
Article II General Nuisances……………………………………………………..……Pt.8, Ch.6
Article III Animals……………………………………………………...………Pt.8, Ch.2, Art. A
Chapter J Building Codes
Article I General Building Regulations…………………...………………….Pt.9, Ch.1, Art. A
Article II [Repealed]……………………………………………………………………………..
Article III Condemnation………………………………………….………..S. by Ord. of 11/7/68
Chapter K Penalties………………………………………………………………………………..S. by Sec. 1-1005
Chapter L Ordinance Disposition Table O-2
Chapter L Emergency Restrictions
Article I Curfews……………………………………………………………...Pt.3, Ch.3, Art. A
Article II Firebombs and Motolov Cocktails………………………………………..Sec. 8-6005
Ordinance Subject Disposition
Ord. of 9/6/68 Speed zones Pt.7; App. I, Sec.
Ord. of 4/3/69 Bird Sanctuary Sec. 8-2004
Res. Of 9/4/69 Street and sidewalk improvements Pt.4, Ch.1, Art. A
Ord. of 8/1/74 City park rules Pt.4, Ch.4
Ord. of 6/5/80 Personnel Policy Pt.2, Ch.6; App. II, Sec. 101-103
Ord. of 7/5/84 Purchasing Sec. 2-4003
Ord. of 11/1/84 Garbage collection Pt.4, Ch.2
Ord. of 11/1/84 Personnel amendment Sec. 2-6052
Ord. of 11/1/84 Personnel amendment Sec. 2-6067
Ord. of 12/6/84 Personnel amendment Sec. 2-6074
Ord. of 2/7/85 Personnel amendment Sec. 2-6072
Ord. of 8/1/85 Personnel amendment Sec. 2-6073
Ord. of 8/1/85 Speed limit App. I, Sec. 122
Ord. of 9/5/85 Speed limit App. I, Sec. 123
Ord. of 9/5/85 Stop signs App. I, Sec. 109
Ord. of 10/3/85 Water/sewer improvements Pt.9, Ch.5
Ord. of 11/7/85 No parking App. I, Sec. 101
Ord. of 1/16/86 Utility tampering Pt.5, Ch.3
Ord. of 1/16/86 Personnel amendment Sec. 2-6063
Ord. of 3/25/86 Boards and commissions Pt.2, Ch.7, Art. A
Ord. of 3/25/86 Trees Pt.9, Ch.6
Ord. of 3/25/86 Nuisances Pt.8
Ord. of 5/1/86 Subdivisions Pt.9, Ch.3
Ord. of 5/1/86 Mobile homes Pt.9, Ch.7
Ord. of 12/4/86 No parking App. I, Sec. 101
Ord. of 1/22/87 Removal of train tracks Sec. 4-1019
Chapter L Ordinance Disposition Table O-2
Ordinance Subject Disposition
Ord. of 3/5/87 Tax on motor vehicles Pt.7,Ch.1,Art.B
Ord. of 4/2/87 No parking App. I, Sec. 101
Ord. of 9/3/87 Curb and gutter policy Sec. 4-1002
Ord. of 10/1/87 Intergovernmental agreements Sec. 3-1013
Ord. of 11/5/87 Turkey shoots Sec. 8-6006
Ord. of 11/5/87 Nuisance vehicles Pt.8, Ch.3
Ord. of 12/3/87 Mobile home parks Sec. 9-7019, 9-7028, 9-7040, 9-7056
Ord. of 1/7/88 Spitting prohibition Sec. 8-6009
Ord. of 3/3/88 Extraterritorial jurisdiction Sec. 9-9001
boundary map
Ord. of 6/2/88 Handicapped parking App. I, Sec. 138
Ord. of 8/4/88 Town charter Charter, Art. III, Sec 3.2 and 3.3
Ord. of 8/4/88 Dilapidated buildings Pt.9, Ch.1, Art. B
Ord. of 8/4/88 Abandoned structures Pt.9, Ch.1, Art. C
Ord. of 8/4/88 Personnel policy Pt.2, Ch.6; App. A, B, C
Ord. of 11/3/88 Meeting times Sec. 2-1011
Ord. of 11/3/88 Minimum housing code Pt.9, Ch.8
Ord. of 12/1/88 Speed limit App. I, Sec. 119, Sec. 133
Ord. of 3/2/89 Zoning Pt.9, Ch.4
Ord. of 6/1/89 Speed limit App. I, Sec. 199
Ord. of 7/7/89 Personnel amendment Sec. 2-6074
Accountant Charter Index CI-1
INDEX TO CHARTER
(References are to section numbers)
A Ordinances, adoption of and actions
concerning, 3.8(a)
ACCOUNTANT See TOWN ACCOUNTANT Powers, general, Rel. State Laws, Sec.
160A-67
ATTORNEY See TOWN ATTORNEY Resolutions, adoption of and actions
concerning, 3.8(a)
AUDITING See also OFFICERS, TOWN
Auditor, independent BONDS, FAITHFUL PERFORMANCE
qualifications, 7.4 Officers of Town, Rel. State Laws,
selection by Board of Commissioners, 7.4 Sec. 160A-65
Availability of results, 7.4
Publication of results, 7.4 BOUNDARIES, TOWN
Requirement for, 7.4 Defined, 2. 1 (a)
Map of
AUDITOR See AUDITING, Auditor copies required, 2. 1 (b)
requirement to make, 2. 1 (b)
B Survey, required, 2.1(b)
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS C
Compensation of Town officers determine by,
Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-64 CLERK See TOWN CLERK
Composition of, Rel. State Laws, Sec.160A-66
Consolidation of functions of Town officers, COMMISSIONERS See BOARD OF
6.4 COMMISSIONERS
Creation of positions, 6.5
Hearings held by, public, Rel. State Laws, Sec. CONTRACTS
160A-81 Procedure for making, 7.3
Meetings
executive, prohibition on, 3.6(b) E
minutes, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-72
organizational, Rel. State Laws,Sec.160A-68 ELECTIONS
procedure, rules of, Rel. State Laws, Date of, 4.1
Sec.160A-7 1 (c) Voting, 4.2
public nature of, 3.6(b)
regular,3.6(a),Rel.StateLaws,Sec.160A-71(a) H
special, procedure for calling, 3.6(a), Rel.
State Laws, Sec. 160A-7 1(b) HEARINGS, PUBLIC
time of, establishment of, 3.5
Town attorney's attendance required at, 5.2 voting, 3.7(b), Rel. State Laws, Sec.160A-75 Members
compensation, 3.4
election of, 3.2
number of, 3.2
oath of office,3.5, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-61
qualifications, 3.3(b), Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-60
quorum, definition of, 3.7(a), Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-74
term of office, 3.3(a), Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-62
vacancies in office, filling of, 3.3(c), Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-63
Held by Board of Commissioners, Rel. State
Laws, Sec. 160A-81
I
INCORPORATION
Town's, 1. 1
L
LIMITS, TOWN See BOUNDARIES, TOWN
M
MAYOR
Compensation, 3.4
Mayor Charter Index CI-2
Duties, general, 3.1 Laws, Sec. 160A-175(b)
Election of, 3.1 Violations, continuing, effect of, Rel. State
Oath of office, 3.5, Rel. State Laws, Sec. Laws, Sec. 160A-175(g)
160A-61
Powers, general, Rel. State Laws, Sec. P
160A-67
Presiding officer of Board of Commissioners,
3.1
Qualifications, 3.3(b), Rel. State Laws, Sec.
160A-60
Vacancy in office, filling of, 3.3(c)
Voting privileges, 3.1
MAYOR PRO TEMPORE
Duties, general, 3. 1, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-70
Election of, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-70
Oath of office, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-61
Qualifications, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-60
Selection of, 3.1
Term of office, 3.1
MISDEMEANORS
Ordinance violations constitute, Rel. State
Laws, Sec. 160A-175(b)
MONIES
Dispensation of, 7.1
O
OFFICERS, TOWN
Bonds required of certain, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-65
Compensation, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-64
Consolidation of functions, 6.4
Oath of office, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-61
Qualifications, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-60
Term of office, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-62
Vacancies in office, filling of, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-63
ORDINANCES
Abatement, orders of, issuance for violations,
Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-175(e), (f)
Enforcement provisions, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-175
Injunctions against violations, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-175(e)
Jurisdiction over violations, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-175(d)
Misdemeanors constituted by violations, Rel.
State Laws, Sec. 160A-175(b)
Penalties for violations
authority to impose, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-175(a), (f)
civil, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-175(c)
maximum stated in ordinances, Rel. State
PENALTIES
State provisions regarding, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-175
POWERS OF TOWN
Execution of, 1.2
General, 1.1
Non-exclusivity of enumerated, 1.3
PROPERTY
Town’s rights and powers, 1.1
PURCHASING
Procedures for, 7.3
T
TAX COLLECTOR See TOWN TAX COLLECTOR
TAXES
Territory subject to, 7.5
TOWN ACCOUNTANT
Appointment by Board of Commissioners, 6.3
Consolidation of functions, 6.4
Duties, 6.3
Oath of office, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-61
Qualifications, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-60
Term of office, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-62
Vacancies in office, filling of, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-63
TOWN ATTORNEY
Appointment by Board of Commissioners, 5.1
Compensation, 5.1
Consolidation of functions, 6.4
Duties, 5.2
Oath of office, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-61
Qualifications, 5.1, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-60
Term of office, 5.1, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-62
Vacancies in office, filling of, rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-63
TOWN CLERK
Appointment by Board of Commissioners, 6.1
Consolidation of functions, 6.4
Duties, 6.1
Oath of office, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-61
Qualifications, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-60
Term of office, Rel. State Laws, sec. 160A-62
Vacancies in office, filling of, Rel. State Laws,
Mayor Charter Index CI-2
Sec. 160A-63
TOWN TAX COLLECTOR
Appointment by Board of Commissioners, 6.2 Consolidation of functions, 6.4
Duties, 6.2
Oath of office, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-61 Qualifications, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-60 Term of office, Rel. State Laws, Sec. 160A-62 Vacancies in office, filling of, Rel. State Laws,
Sec. 160A-63
Abandoned Structures Index I-1
USE OF INDEX- This index is designed for user ease. To locate information found in the code, formulate a specific question. The key words in that question then become guides for using the index. In the event you do not locate the desired information on your first attempt, the following checklist may help.
(1) Cross references (when needed) are always located at the beginning of entries. Have you overlooked any?
(2) Frequently initial questions are too general. Reformulating a more specific question may help.
(3) Information on officials can be found two ways. The entry for an official's name contains general duties as well as conditions of his office, such as compensation and tenure. Duties assigned to him by ordinances on specific subjects will be found under those subjects.
(4) Definitions can be located under the "DEFINITIONS" main heading or in specific subject areas through the subheading "Definitions of terms."
(5) The code index and charter index may contain different information on the same subjects. Check both.
A AUTOMOBILES See VEHICLES, MOTOR
ABANDONED STRUCTURES AUXILIARY POLICE See POLICE DEPARTMENT,
Repair, closing, demolition of abandoned Auxiliary division
structures
alternative remedies, 9-1039 B
cost of lien on premises, 9-1038
duties of building inspector, 9-1032 BEER
findings; intent, 9-1031 Consumption in public, prohibition,
in rem action by inspector, placarding, 8-1006
9-1037 Prohibited in pool rooms and bowling
methods of service of complaints and orders, alleys, 6-1035(3)
9-1036
powers of building inspector, 9-1033 BELLS
procedure for enforcement, 9-1035 Noise created by, excessive, prohibition
standards for enforcement, 9-1034 on, 8-8002(m)
ABANDONED VEHICLES See VEHICLES, MOTOR, BILLBOARDS, 9-4058
Abandoned
BIRD SANCTUARY
ADVERTISING Designation of, 8-2004
Licensing may be required, 8-8002(p) Killing birds in, restrictions on, 8-2005
Noise created by, excessive, restrictions on, Penalty for violation of provisions, 8-2008
8-8002(p) Signs, erection by bird clubs of, 8-2007
Outdoor, property owner's permission required Weapons within, restriction on use of,
for erection or maintenance of, 8-8004 8-2006
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Consumption of, public, prohibition on, Committees
8-1006 appointment by Mayor, 2-1002
Prohibited in pool rooms and bowling alleys, creation by Mayor and Commissioners,
6-1035(3) 2-1016
Meetings
AMBULANCES See EMERGENCY VEHICLES attendance at, required, 2-1011
minutes kept by clerk, 2-1013
AMUSEMENTS, OUTDOOR See presiding officer, 2-1014
ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR regular, time and place of, 2-1011
special, 2-1012
ANIMALS See also BIRD SANCTUARY; DOGS voting by Mayor, 2-1015
AND CATS; LIVESTOCK Members
Dead, disposal of, 8-2002 compensation, 2-1004
Fighting between, prohibition on inciting, resignation of, 2-1003
8-2003
Noise created by excessive, prohibition on, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
8-8002(d) Authority, 2-7001
Parades, prohibited in, 6-2025 Bylaws, 2-7022
Running at large, prohibition on, 8-2001 Compensation, 2-7018
Composition, 2-7013
ATTORNEY See TOWN ATTORNEY Conflicting ordinances, 2-7004
Coverage, 2-7008 Creation, 2-7009 Duties, 2-7011
Boards and Commissions Index I-2
officers, 2-7020 standards for enforcement, 9-1024
Enactment, 2-7003 BUS STOPS
Meetings, 2-7016 Designation, 7-1174
Members Use by buses, 7-1175(a) to (c)
appointment of, 2-7012 Use by other vehicles, 7-1176
attendance of, 2-7017
number of, 2-7009; 2-7010 BUSINESS LICENSES
Name, 2-7009 Definitions of terms, 2-4011
Officers, 2-7019 Display of, required, 2-4017
duties of, 2-7020 Permit required to maintain old license if
Planning Board, 2-7007 business is moved, 2-4015
Powers, 2-7011 Requirement for, 2-4013
Purpose, 2-7002 Separate business require separate, 2-4015
Reappointment, 2-7021 Tax
Separability, 2-7005 abatement, 2-4018
Terms Board’s control over, 2-4012(b)
begin, 2-7015 business subject to, 2-4012 (a)
length of, 2-7014 refunds, 2-4018
schedule maintained by clerk-treasurer,
BONDS, FAITHFUL PERFORMANCE 2-4019
Officers of Town, 2-2006 separate businesses pay separate, 2-4016
Validity, term of, 2-4014
BOWLING ALLEYS See POOL ROOMS AND
BOWLING ALLEYS C
BRIDGES CATS See DOGS
Damage to, prohibition on, 4-1017
CHILDREN See MINORS
BUDGET
Town manager's preparation of annual CHURCHES
estimates, 2-2001 (f(7)) Noises created near, excessive, prohibition
on, 8-8002(k)
BUILDING ACTIVITY See CONSTRUCTION
CIRCUSES See ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR
BUILDING CODE See also CODES OF TECHNICAL
REGULATIONS CLERK-TRESEASURER See also OFFICERS,
Adoption by reference, 9-2021 TOWN
Disburses funds, 2-2005(d)
BUILDING INSPECTOR See INSPECTIONS Duties, general 2-2005(e)
DEPARTMENT, Building Inspector Meetings, required attendance at,
2-2005(a)
BUILDING PERMITS See CODES OF Minutes of meeting to be kept by,
TECHNICAL REGULATIONS; ZONING 2-2005(a)
Ordinances, code of, upkeep 2-2005(a)
BUILDINGS Safe keeping of accounts and monies,
Moving through streets, permit and bond 2-2005(c)
required, 4-1016 Town transactions, keep records of,
2-2005(b)
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
Repair, closing, or demolition of unfit CODE OF ORDINANCES See ORDINANCES,
dwellings Code of
duties of building inspector, 9-1022
failure to comply with order, 9-1027 CODES OF TECHNICAL REGULATIONS
finding; intent, 9-1021 Adoption constitutes resolution, 9-2001(b)
powers of building inspector, 9-1023 Amendments, 9-2026
procedure after hearing, 9-1026 Applicability of provisions, 9-2001(a)
procedure for enforcement, 9-1025 Compliance with, required, 9-2027
service of complaints and orders, 9-1028 Contractors
Bond, faithful performance, may be required, 9-2003
Codes of Technical Regulation Index I-3
registration required, 9-2002 Firebomb terms, 8-8005 (a)
Copies to be kept by Town Clerk, 9-2028 Following, 1-1001
Permits Gender, 1-1001
air-conditioning, requirement for, 9-2004(c) Joint authority, 1-1001
applications Littering, 8-5001
contents, 9-2005 Livestock, 8-2030
copies of plans and specifications to be kept, Mayor, 1-1001
9-2006 (c) Mobile homes, 9-7010
plans to accompany, 9-2006 (a) Month, 1-1001
specifications to accompany, 9-2006 (b) Nuisance, 8-1010
building Number, 1-1001
bond may be required, 9-2004 (a (2)) Oath, 1-1001
requirement for, 9-2004 (a (1)) Occupant, 1-1001
changes in work require approval, 9-2011 Owner, 1-1001
electrical, requirement for, 9-2004 (d) Parade terms, 6-1021
failure to begin operations, expiration for, Peddling terms, 6-1041
9-2010 Person, 1-1001
fees, schedule of, 9-2012 Personal property, 1-1001
heating, requirement for, 9-2004 (c) Preceding, 1-1001
issuance Property, 1-1001
conditions for, 9-2007 Real property, 1-1001
inspector’s authority for, 9-2008 Sewer system terms, 5-2001
plans required in certain cases, 9-2007 Sidewalks, 1-1001
professionals required for work over Signature, 1-1001
certain cost, 9-2007 Soliciting terms, 6-1041
plumbing, requirement for, 9-2004 (b) Solid waste terms, 4-2002
revocations, 9-2009 State, 1-1001
Street, 1-1001
COMMISSIONERS See BOARD OF Subdivision terms, 9-3011; 9-3012
COMMISSIONERS Subscription, 1-1001
Taxicab terms, 6-1001
COMPRESSED AIR DEVICES Tenant, 1-1001
Noise created by, excessive, prohibition on, Time, 1-1001
8-8002 (h) Town, 1-1001
Traffic terms, 7-1001, 7-1011
CONSTRUCTION Trees, 9-6005
Debris, removal of, 8-6008 Weeds, 8-4001
Permit required for night, 8-8002 (i) Writing, 1-1001
Year, 1-1001
CONTRACTORS Zoning terms, 9-4012
Bond, 9-2003
Registration, 9-2002 DEMONSTRATIONS See PARADES AND
DEMONSTRATIONS
COURTS
Noise near, excessive, prohibition on, DEVELOPMENTS See SUBDIVISIONS
8-8002 (j)
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
D Acts constituting
drinking in public, 8-7005
DEFINITIONS drunkenness, public 8-7004
Abandoned motor vehicle, 8-3001 house of ill fame, 8-7002
Board, 1-1001 indecent language or actions, 8-7003
Business license terms, 2-4011 General prohibition on, 8-7001
Clerk, 1-1001 Penalties, 8-7006
Computation of time, 1-1001
County, 1-1001 DOGS AND CATS See also ANIMALS
Demonstration terms, 6-1021 Cats, 8-2018
Dog terms, 8-2011 Conflict, 8-2017
Definitions, 8-2011 Molesting, 8-2015
Dogs and Cats Index I-4
Number of, 8-2012 Leave
Penalties, 8-2016 civil, 2-6055
Public nuisances, 8-2014 maternity, 2-6053
Running at large, 8-2013 military, 2-6046
Teasing, 8-2015 sick, 2-6053
vacation, 2-6052
DRUNKENNESS, PUBLIC without pay, 2-6058
Prohibition on, 8-1005 Manager, 2-6003
Merit pay raise, 2-6021
E Merit principles, 2-6002
Outside employment, 2-6035
ELECTRICAL CODE See CODES OF TECHNICAL Overtime compensation, 2-6074
REGULATIONS Part-time employee, 2-6015
Pay day, 2-6073
EMERGENCY, STATE OF Pay plan, 2-6072
Conditions constituting, 3-3001 (a) Payment of debts, 2-6039
Ending of, 3-3001 (d) Performance evaluation, 2-6034; App, II
Penalty for violations during, 3-3003 Sec. 102; App. B
Proclamation of Permanent employee, 2-60017
alterations, in, 3-3001 (f) Personnel records, 2-6004; App. II,
contents, 3-3002 Sec. 101; App. A
extensions of, 3-3001 (f) Political activity, 2-6036
form of, 3-3002 Position classification plan, 2-6071
issuance by mayor, 3-3001 (b) Position review request, App. II,
Restrictions during exemptions from, Sec. 103; App. C
3-3001 (c) Probationary period, 2-6013
imposition authority, 3-3001 (b) Promotion, 2-6022
listing of, 3-3001 (b) Purpose, 2-6001
mayor’s authority to limit application of Recruiting and appointing procedures,
certain, 3-3001 (c) 2-6011
violations, prohibition on, 3-3001 (g) Recruiting area, 2-6012
Reinstatement, 2-6029
EMERGENCY VEHICLES See also TRAFFIC; Relatives, employment of, 2-6018
VEHICLES, MOTOR Residence requirements, 2-6012
Definitions of terms, 7-1001 Resignation, 2-6025
Driver’s responsibility, 7-1026 (d) Responsibility of department head,
List of privileges for, 7-1026(b) 2-6032
Times authorized for privileges, 7-1026 (a) Responsibility of employee, 2-6031
Warning equipment required, 7-1026 (c) Rest periods, 2-6057
Retirement benefits, 2-6063
EMPLOYEES Safety, 2-6042
Attendance, 2-6033 Social security, 2-6064
Christmas bonus, 2-6067 Solicitation, 2-6037
Conduct, 2-6040 Suspensions, 2-6026
Death benefits, 2-6063 Temporary employee, 2-6016
Demotion, 2-6024 Transfer, 2-6023
Dismissal, 2-6027 Uniforms, 2-065
Employee development, 2-6066 Use of Town property and equipment,
Full-time employee, 2-6014 2-6041
Gifts and favors, 2-6038 Worker’s compensation, 2-6054
Grievance procedure, 2-6044
Holidays, 2-6051 FIRE LIMITS
Hours of work, 2-6043 Alterations within city limits requires
Insurance building permit, 3-2022
life, 2-6062
medical, 2-6061
social security, 2-6064 Layoff, 2-6028
ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR
Entertainment, Outdoor Index I-5
Conduct at, licensee responsibility for, 6-1067 Definitions of terms, 8-8005(a)
Immoral conduct prohibited, 6-1067 Prohibition on manufacture, use,
Inspection of premises by officials, 6-1066 possession or transporting, 8-8005(b)
Liability insurance requirements, 6-1069 Prohibition on possession of items needed
Licenses to manufacture, 8-8005(c)
application
consideration of, 6-1062 FIREWORKS
information required, 6-1063 Noise created by, excessive, prohibition
procedure, 6-1062 on, 8-8002(r)
denials, grounds for, 6-1064
fee not charged, 6-1065 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
issuance, 6-1062 Requirements for, 8-6007
requirement, 6-1061
revocations, 6-1068 FOWL See ANIMALS; BIRD SANCTUARY
suspensions, 6-1066, 6-1068
Obscene literature and behavior prohibited, FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
6-1067 Exemptions to prohibition on driving
Safety requirements, 6-1066 through, 7-1093
Sanitation requirements, 6-1066
G
EXHAUST, ENGINE
Noise created by, excessive, prohibition on, GAMBLING
8-6002(g) Bowling alleys, prohibited in, 6-1035(1)
Pool rooms, prohibited in, 6-1035(1)
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
BOUNDARY MAP, 9-9001 GARAGES
Noise created by night operation,
F 8-6002(q)
FINANCE DIRECTOR See TOWN MANAGER, GARBAGE See SOLID WASTE
Duties, finance director
GRASS, TALL See WEEDS
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Alarms, prohibition on interference with, GUNS
3-2005 Discharging, restrictions on, 8-6003
Equipment, restrictions on following, 3-2002
False alarms, prohibition on giving, 3-2006 H
Interference with members, prohibition on,
3-2003 HEALTH, PUBLIC
Organization, 3-2001 Construction sites, removal of debris from,
Riding on equipment, restrictions on, 3-2004 8-6007
Enforcement of provisions, 8-6001
FIRE LIMITS Food establishments, requirements for,
Alterations within city limits requires building 8-6007
permit, 3-3022 Human wastes, removal of, 8-6005
Establishment of, 3-2021 Interference with health officials,
prohibition on, 86002
FIRE PREVENTION CODE Littering, prohibition on, 8-6009
Adoption by reference, 3-2011 Penalties, 8-6010
Property, requirement to maintain,
FIREARMS 8-6004(a)
Discharging, restrictions on, 8-8003 Right of entry for inspections, 8-6003
Spitting in public, prohibition on, 8-6009 Turkey shoots, 8-6006
HEATING CODES See CODES OF TECHNICAL REGULATIONS
FIREBOMBS
HORNS Loud and unnecessary noise created by,
Horns Index I-6
prohibition on, 8-8002(a) Building inspector
dangerous building duties, 9-1003
HOSPITALS enforcement duties, 9-1002
Noise near, excessive, prohibition on, inspection duties, 9-1002, 9-1008(d)
8-8002 (j) zoning permit duties, 9-1004
Certificates of occupancy, 9-1011
HOUSES OF ILL FAME Composition, 9-1001
Prohibition on keeping, 8-1003 Conflicts of interest prohibited, 9-1006
Inspections
HOUSING CODE failure to call for, effect of, 91009(b)
Minimum housing code frequency, 9-1008(a)
alternative remedies, 9-8018 point of manufacture, certification
conflict with other provisions, 9-8020 required, 9-1008(b)
costs, a lien on premises, 9-8017 reinspections, 9-1009(b)
definitions, 9-8002 requests for, 91009(a)
finding; purpose, 9-8001 stages requiring, 9-1008(c)
housing Appeals Board, 9-8019 Inspectors
in rem action by Inspector; placarding, enforcement powers, 9-1005(a)
9-8016 oversights, effect of, 9-1012
inspections; duty of owners and occupants, right-of-entry, 91005(b)
9-8013 stop orders, issuance authority, 9-1005(c)
methods of service of complaints and orders, Oversights of officials, effect of, 9-1012
9-8015 Records kept by, 9-1007
minimum standards applicable to rooming Reports made by, 9-1007
houses; exceptions, 9-8010 Stop orders issued by, 9-1005(c)
minimum standards for basic plumbing, Surveys required of street lines, 9-1010
heating, and electrical equipment and
facilities, 9-8005 J
minimum standards for control of insects,
rodents, and infestations, 9-8009 JUNKED VEHICLES See VEHICLES, MOTOR,
minimum standards for safe and sanitary Junked
maintenance, 9-8008
minimum standards for space, use, and L
location, 9-8007
minimum standards for structural condition, LICENSES See also BUSINESS LICENSES;
9-8004 ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR; Pool Rooms
minimum standards for ventilation, 9-8006 and Bowling Alleys
minimum standards of fitness for dwellings Advertising, use of loudspeakers for,
and dwelling units, 9-8003 8-8002(p)
powers and duties of Building Inspector,
9-8012 LITTERING
procedure for enforcement, 9-8014 Definitions, 8-5001
responsibilities of owners and occupants, Lakes, 8-5010
9-8011 Merchant's duty to keep sidewalks free of,
severability, 9-8022 8-5007
technical guidelines for the minimum Parks, 8-5010
housing code, 9-8023 Penalties, 6-2013; 8-5013
violations; penalty, 9-8021 Placement in receptacle to prevent
scattering, 8-5005
I Polluting rivers, 8-5003
Private property clearing by Town, 8-5012
INDECENT LANGUAGE OR CONDUCT owner's duty, 8-5011
Prohibition on, 8-1004 Prohibition on, 6-2011; 8-5013
Public places, 8-5002
Scattering rubbish, 8-5004
Sweeping litter into gutters, 8-5006 Truck loads causing, 8-5009
INSPECTIONS DEPARTMENT Vehicles prohibited from, 6-2012; 8-5008
LIVESTOCK Area requirements, 8-2032
Livestock Index I-7
Cleanliness, 8-2034 Foundation, 9-7041
Definition, 8-2030 Garbage and refuse, 9-7029
Distance to dwellings, 8-2033 Health regulations, 9-7065
Enforcement, 8-2038 Legal provision, 9-7071
Hog slaughtering, 8-2035 Lots, 9-7015
Keeping, 8-2031 number of homes per lot, 9-7016
Limit on number, 8-2032 numbering, 9-7017
Penalties, 8-2039 sizes, 9-7013
Maintenance, 9-7035
LOADING See also BUS STOPS; TAXICAB Minimum area requirements, 9-7012
STANDS; Mobile home development
Zoning completion in stages, 9-7068
Definitions of terms, 7-1001 existing, 9-7067
Noise created by, excessive, prohibition on, other permitted uses, 9-7069
8-8002(1) sign control, 9-7066
Zones Mobile home park plan, 9-7064
commercial, 7-1173 Mobile home sales, 9-7061
passenger, 7-1172 Park alterations, 9-7063
use of, 7-1171 Parking, 9-7020
street, 97021
LOUDSPEAKERS Penalties, 9-7073
Noise created by, excessive, prohibition on, Placement, 9-7014
8-8002(c), (o) Procedures, 9-7050
final approval, 9-7052
M management program, 9-7057
mobile home park, 9-7053
MANAGER See TOWN MANAGER mobile home subdivision, 9-7054
operating permit, 9-7055
MAYOR other information, 9-7051
Duties, 2-1001 Purpose of regulations, 9-7002
Committees, appointment of, 2-1002 Recreation areas, 9-7036
Presides over meetings of Board, 2-1014 Separability, 9-7006
Sewer connections, 9-7033
MINIMUM HOUSING CODE See HOUSING CODE Single mobile homes, 9-7011
MINORS Skirting, 9-7040
Bowling alleys, restricted entry in, 6-1035(4) Special facilities, 9-7056
Pool rooms, restricted entry in, 6-1035(4) Steps, 9-7043
Street design, 9-7034
MOBILE HOMES Supplemental ordinances, 9-7005
Access, 9-7028 Traffic circulation, 97034
Accessory buildings, 9-7044 Trailer storage, 9-7062
Anchoring, 9-7041; 9-7042 Utility requirements, 9-7030
Authority, 9-7001 Variance, 9-7072
Buffers, 9-7038 Violation, 9-7073
Camper spaces unlawful, 9-7070 Walks
Conflicting ordinances, 9-7004 common, 9-7018
Construction ordinances, 9-7004 individual, 9-7019
Cul-de-sacs, 9-7023 Water
Definitions, 9-7010 generally, 9-7031
Drainage services, 9-7032
generally, 97027 Zoning restrictions, 9-7060
lots, 9-7026
parks, 9-7025 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
Driveway, 97022 Noise created by, excessive, prohibition
Enactment, 9-7003 on, 8-8002
Exceptions, 9-7037
N
NOISE
Noise Index I-8
Loud and unnecessary Town attorney’s approval of form
listing of, 8-8002 required, 2-1031
prohibition on, 8-8001
Penalties, 8-8007 P
NUISANCES See also specific topics PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
Abatement, 8-1016 Animals prohibited in, vicious, 6-2025
costs, payment of, 8-1013 Definitions of terms, 6-1021
notice, 81013 Exemptions from provisions, 6-2029
Authority, 8-1001 Interference with, prohibition on, 6-2027
Civil remedies, 8-1018 Permits
Conflicting ordinances, 8-1004 application, time for making and
Criminal action, 8-1018 information required, 6-2024
Definition, 8-1010 information required, 6-2024
Enactment of regulations, 8-1003 conditions for issuance, 6-2023
Effective date of regulations, 8-1019 issuance by chief of police, 6-2024
Illustrative enumeration, 8-1011 requirement, 6-2022
Inclusions, 8-1006 revocations, grounds for, 6-2026
Notice to abate, 8-1013 Picketing, additional requirements for,
contents of, 8-1014 6-2028
service of, 8-1015 Weapons prohibited in, 6-2025
Prohibition, 8-1012
Purposes, 8-1002 PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Separability, 8-1005 Designated, 2-3001
O PARK, CITY
Disturbances, prohibition on and penalty
OBSCENE LITERATURE OR BEHAVIOR See for creating, 4 -4003
also INDECENT LANGUAGE OR CONDUCT Police, power of, 4-4004
Entertainment, outdoor, prohibited at, 6-1067 Vehicles, motor, exception to prohibition
on, 4-4001
OFFICERS, TOWN Vehicles, prohibited types, 4-4002
Bonds required of certain, 2-2006
PARKING See also ZONING
ORDINANCES Advertising, prohibited for, 7-1159
Amendments Angle
form requirements, 2-1036 areas for, prohibited, 7-1142(b)
restrictions on procedure, 2-1035 marking by Board, 7-1142(a)
Code of obedience to markings required, 7-1143
continuations of existing ordinances, Backing to curb prohibited as means of,
previous provisions considered as, 1-1002 7-1145
headings of sections, meaning of, 1-003 Congested areas, prohibited in, 7-1158
severability of parts, 1-1006 Definitions of terms, 7-1001
updating procedures, 2-1037 Engine to be cut off while, 7-1146
violations of Exceptions to restrictions, 7-1186
continuing, effect of, 1-1005 (d) Handicapped, Appendix 1 (138)
injunctions, 1-1005 (b) Hazardous areas, prohibited in, 7-1158
orders of abatement, 1-1005 (b), (c) Lights on vehicles while, 7-1144
penalties for, maximum, 1-1005 (a) Moving cars after, manner of, 7-1097
status of, 1-1005 (a) Obstruction of alleys by, prohibition on,
Copies, official, 2-1034 7-1153
Damage to, prohibition on, 1-1007 Obstruction of road by, prohibition on,
Expiration of, effect of, 1-1004 7-1152
Effective date, 2-1023 One-way streets, restrictions for, 7-1157
Form of, 2-1031 Parallel, manner of, 7-1141
Repeal of, effect of, 1-1004 Prohibited for certain purposes, 7-1155
Subject matter, confinement to one, 2-1033
Prohibited in certain places at all times list of areas, signs not required, 7-1151
designation of areas, 7-1183 Prohibited in certain places at certain times
Parking Index I-9
applicability of provisions, 7-1181
night parking restricted areas, 7-1154, PERSONNEL See EMPLOYEES
7-1187
Resident PERSONNEL DIRECTOR See TOWN
areas designated for, 7-1188 MANAGER, Personnel Director
list of areas, signs required, Appendix I
(136) PICKETING See PARADES AND
Schools, prohibited near certain, 7-1156 DEMONSTRATIONS
Time limits on
exclusivity of regulations, non-,7-1156 PLANNING BOARD See TOWN PLANNING
obedience to signs, 7-1185 BOARD
signs required for, 7-1185
Truck, areas prohibited for, 7-1160 PLUMBING CODE See CODES OF TECHNICAL
REGULATIONS
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
Badge, issuance, form, and display POLICE DEPARTMENT
requirements, 6-1043 Auxiliary division
Definitions of terms, 6-1041 chief controls, 3-1022
Noise created by, excessive, prohibition on, duties, 3-1023
8-6002(n) establishment of, 3-1021
Registration, requirement and information members
wanted, 6-1042 firearms, use of, 3-1025
identification, 3-1024
PEDESTRIANS See also TRAFFIC oath of office, 3-1022
Crossing roads powers, 3-1026
angle of, 7-1114 training, 3-1022
yielding to vehicles, 7-1115 regulations governing, establishment of,
Crosswalks 3-1023
manner of walking in , 7-1113 Chief, duties and responsibilities of,
right-of-way in, 7-1112(a) 3-1003
vehicles stopped at, passing prohibited, Designated, 2-3001
7-1112(b) Executive head, Town manager to serve
Definitions of terms, 7-1001 as, 3-1001
Driver responsibilities for, 7-1118 Intergovernmental agreements for public
Soliciting rides or business prohibited, assistance, 3-1013
7-1117 Members
Traffic-control signals apply to, 7-1111 abuse of, prohibition on, 3-1012
Walking along roads, manner of, 7-1116 aid, authority to summon, 3-1010
assistance, unlawful for citizens to
PERMITS See also CODES OF TECHNICAL refuse, 3-1010
REGULATIONS; PARADES AND compensation, 3-1007
DEMONSTRATIONS; SEWAGE DISPOSAL, duties, 3-1005
PRIVATE; SEWER SYSTEM; ZONING entry, right of, 3-1008
Building permit required to make alterations interference with, prohibition on, 3-1011
within fire limits 3-2022 qualifications, 3-1004
Buildings moved along streets and sidewalks, special, employment of, 3-1009
4-1016 uniforms, 3-1006
Businesses wishing to maintain old license Supervision by Town manager, 3-1002
when moving require special, 2-4015 Town manager as executive head of,
Construction at night, 8-8002(i) 3-1001
Excavations in streets, 4-1011
Fire hydrants, use of, 5-1015 POOL ROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS
Sidewalk construction, 4-1012 Alcoholic beverages prohibited in,
Water system connections, 5-1002 6-1035(3)
Conduct in, restrictions on, 6-1035(2)
Zoning alterations, construction or repair Devices prohibited in, 6-1035(3)
of buildings requires, 9-1004
Employees, persons ineligible as, 6-1035(5) Ground floor, location restricted to, 6-1036(4)
Gambling prohibited in 6-1035(1), 6-1036(7) Hours of operation, 6-1036(1), (3)
Pool Rooms and Bowling Alleys Index I-10
License QUIET ZONES, 8-8006
applications, 6-1032
character requirements of applicant, 6-1033 R
contents, 6-1034
expiration date of, 6-1031 RAILROAD TRACKS
posting of, required, 6-1034 Removal of, 4-1019
required, 6-1031
revocation, 6-1038 RECREATION DEPARTMENT See PARK AND
transferability, 6-1031 RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Licensee, responsibility of, 6-1037
Minors restricted in, 6-1035(4) REFUSE See SOLID WASTE
Partitions, restrictions on, 6-1036(6), (7)
Play prohibited when closed, 6-1036(2) RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE See CODES
Prohibited activities, 6-1035 OF TECHNICAL REGULATIONS
Sunday closing required, 6-1036(3)
Violation of provisions, 6-1038 RUBBISH See LITTERING
Visibility requirements, 6-1036(5), (7)
S
PRIVIES See SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PRIVATE
SANITATION DEPARTMENT
PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAXES See BUSINESS Designated, 2-3001
LICENSES, TAX
SCHOOLS
PROPERTY Noise near, excessive, prohibition on,
Maintenance requirements, 8-6004 8-8002(j)
Public areas
cleanliness, responsibility for, 6-2014 SEPTIC TANKS See SEWAGE DISPOSAL,
penalty for violations, 6-2014 PRIVATE
trash receptacles required, 6-2015
SERVICE STATIONS
PROSTITUTION Noise created by night operation,
Houses of, prohibition on keeping, 8-1003 prohibition on, 8-8002(q)
PUBLIC AREAS See PROPERTY, Public areas SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PRIVATE
Abandonment of, 5-2009
PURCHASES Exemption from prohibition, 5-2005
Contracts, certification requirements for, Health officer's requirements, 5-2011
2-4001 (b) Permit required for construction of
Disbursement requirements, 2-4001(a) application, 5-2006
Purchase orders, certification requirements, effective date of, 5-2007
2-4001 (b) restrictions, 5-2008
Surplus property, disposal of, 2-4003 Prohibition on, general, 5-2003
Town manager's duties for Public sewer, required connection if
advise Board on needs, 2-4002(4) available, 5-2009
bidders, prepare specifications and notices Sanitary operation, required, 5-2010
for, 2-4002(3) Specifications, 5-2008
inventory of Town property, 2-4002(7)
records of purchases, -2-4002(6) SEWER DEPARTMENT See WATER AND
standards to control purchases, establish, SEWER DEPARTMENT
2-4002(2)
store material in advance of need, 2-4002(5) SEWER SYSTEM See also UTILITY
supervision of purchasing, 2-4002(l) REGULATIONS
Building sewers
PURCHASING AGENT See PURCHASES, Town backfill requirements, 5-2021
manager's duties for connection, angle of, 5-2023
Q drains, lifting of, 5-2020
excavation requirements, 5-2021, 5-2025 joints, standards for, 5-2022
grades, 5-2019 old, use of, 5-2016
Sewer System Index I-11
separate, requirement for and exception to technical, 9-5009
requirement, 5-2015 for installation, 9-5007
size, 5-2018 Structures overhanging, restrictions on,
slope, 5-2018 6-2005
standards for, 5-2017 Testing of sewer lines, 9-5011
Connections
costs to be borne by owner, 5-2014 SIGNS See ZONING
required, 5-2004
Definitions of terms, 5-2001, 9-5003 SIRENS
Discharges, list of prohibited, 5-2026 Use of, restrictions on, 8-8002(b)
Improvements, construction of, 9-5006
Permits for alteration SOLICITING See PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
classes of, 5-2013
fees for, 5-2013 SOLID WASTE
inspection of sewer required, 5-2024 Assistance of owners and occupants by
requirement, 5-2012 Town employees prohibited, 4-2008
Public systems, 9-5004; 9-5005 Containers
Use required, 5-2002 ashes placed in, 4-2003(3)
businesses, specifications for, 4-2012
SIDEWALKS handling by collectors of, 4-2009
Assemblies obstructing, prohibition on, 6-2001 inspection of, 4-2007
Buildings moved along, permit and bond interference with, prohibition on, 4-2005
required, 4-1016 setting out, 4-2006
Construction near, passageways required, specifications, 4-2003(1), (2)
6-2004 Definitions of terms, 4-2002
Construction of, permit required for, 4-1012 Dumping on Town property
Driving on, prohibition on, 7-1094 exceptions to prohibition on, 4-2001 (b)
Excavations prohibition on, 4-2001(a), 4-2010
protection of public around, 4-1014 Manure removal, 4-2011
refilling of, 4-1013 Refuse collection, 4-2013
Goods displayed on, prohibition on, 6-2002 Streets, prohibition on depositing in,
Ice on 4-2004
penalty for failure to remove, 6-2017
removal of, 6-2016 SPITTING
Improvements Prohibited in public, 8-6009
assessments
failure to pay, penalty for, 4-1005 STEAM WHISTLES
procedure for, 4-1004 Noises created by, excessive, prohibition
cost borne by on, 8-8002(f)
benefited property owners, 4-1002
town, 4-1003 STREET DEPARTMENT
length of, required minimum, 4-1006 Designated, 2-3001
petition required before consideration of,
4-1001 STREETS
specifications for, 4-1007 Assemblies obstructing, prohibition on,
Littering on 6-2001
penalty, 6-2013 Bridges, prohibition on damage to, 4-1017
prohibition, 6-2011 Buildings moved along, permit and bond
vehicles, prohibited from, 6-2012 required, 4-1016
Obstruction by objects placed on, prohibition Damage to, prohibition on, 4-1015
on, 6-2003 Excavations
Signs on, prohibition on damaging, 4-1018 permit required, 4-1011
on protection of public around, 4-1014
penalty for failure to remove, 6-2017 refilling of, 4-1013
removal of, 6-2016 Improvements
Specifications assessments
purpose, 9-5001 failure to pay, penalty for, 4-1005
procedure for, 4-1004 benefited property owners, 4-1002
cost borne by town, 4-1003
Streets Index I-12
length of, required minimum, 4-1006 Interpretation, 9-3006
petition required before consideration of, Mobile homes, 9-3090
4-1001 Monuments, placement of, 9-3093
specifications for, 4-1007 Official plans, 9-3095
Obstruction by objects placed on, prohibition Planned unit development, 9-3094
on, 6-2003 Procedure
Signs on, prohibition on damaging, 4-1018 final plat, 9-3023
Structures overhanging restrictions on, 6-2005 recording of, 9-3027
Subdivisions, 9-3052 general plan, 9-3022
Toys prohibited, 7-1025 generally, 9-3020
recommendations on maintenance
SUBDIVISIONS acceptance, 9-3024
Administration, 9-3072 sketch plan design, 9-3021
Authority, 9-3001 Public hearing, 9-3077
Building permits, 9-3076 Purpose, 9-3002
Community facilities, 9-3095 Recording of plat, 9-3073
Conflicting ordinances, 9-3004 Revision of plat after approval, 9-3075
Construction and acceptance procedures Sale of land in subdivision, 9-3074
acceptance, 9-3064 Services and permits, 9-3070
as built drawings, 9-3062 Separability, 9-3005
construction procedures, 9-3060 Signs, 9-4055
defects guarantee, 9-3063 Submission, requirements
final inspection, 9-3061 final plat, 9-3034
Definitions, 9-3010; 9-3011; 9-3012 general, 9-3031
Design general plan, 9-3033
blocks, 9-3043 minor subdivisions, 9-3035
buffer strips, 9-3046 purpose of chapter, 9-3030
building setback lines, 9-3045 sketch plan design, 9-3032
connection to sewer system, 9-3049 Suitability of land, 9-3092
drainage, 9-3048 Townhouses, design standards for, 9-3091
easements, 9-3042 Variances, 9-3078
generally, 9-3040
grading, 9-3048 T
lots, 9-3044
street signs, 9-3047 TAX COLLECTOR See TOWN TAX
streets, 9-3041 COLLECTOR
traffic signs, 9-3047
Enactment, 9-3003 TAXICAB STANDS
Exemptions, 9-3010 Designation, 7-1174
Fees, 9-3079 Use by other vehicles, 7-1176
General provisions, 9-3071 Use required for taxi stops, 7-1175(d)
Guarantees, 9-3080
cost estimates, 9-3084 TAXICABS
length of, 9-3081 Certificates of convenience and necessity
reduction of, 9-3082 application for, 6-1003
renewal , 9-3083 determination of necessity
sidewalk exception, 9-3085 burden of proof on applicant, 6-1008
Improvements considerations in, 6-1006(a)
curbs and gutters, 9-3053 investigation by Board, 6-1006(b)
general, 9-3050 duration, 6-1005
monuments, 9-3051 failure to begin operations, expiration
sidewalks, 9-3055 for, 6-1009
storm drainage, 9-3054 hearings on
street lights, 9-3057 notification of applicant, 6-1007
street trees, 9-3058 notification of interested persons, 6-1007
streets, 9-3052 issuance by Board, 6-1004
utilities, 9-3056 one, each person only issued, 6-1013
renewal, 6-1005 revocations
requirement, 6-1002 grounds, 6-1011 (a)
Taxicabs Index I-13
procedures, 6-1011 (b) 2-2001 (d)
transferability, 6-1010 Residency requirement, 2-2001(a)
Definitions of terms, 6-1001 Term of office, 2-2001(b)
Parking, restrictions on, 6-1014
Substitution of vehicles, 6-1012 TOWN PLANNING BOARD
Chairman, election of, 2-7033 Composition,
TOWN ATTORNEY See also OFFICERS, 2-7032
TOWN Creation of, 2-7031
Duties Donations, acceptance of, 2-7036
condemnation proceedings, 2-2002(3) Duties
contracts draft on review, 2-2002(4) annual report, 2-7037(d)
enforcement of decrees and orders, general, 2-7037(e)
2-2002(2) hearings on comprehensive plan,
general, 2-2002(6) 2-7037(e)
legal representation of Town, 2-2002(1) plan of Town, comprehensive, 2-7037(b)
ordinances, drafting of, 2-2002(5) powers of review, 2-7037(c)
special assessment proceedings, 2-2002(3) state related, 2-7038
studies of conditions and developments,
TOWN MANAGER See also OFFICERS, TOWN 2-7037
Appointment of, 2-2001(a) Expenditures, 2-7036
Appointments Meetings, frequency and public nature of,
non-interference by Board, 2-2001(e) 2-7033
responsibility to make, 2-2001 (c) Members
Duties compensation, 2-7035
administration of Town affairs, 2-2001 (f(3)) removal of, 2-7034
advise Board of Town's financial needs, term of office, 2-7032
2-2001 (f(6)) Officers, term of office for, 2-7033
budget estimates, preparation of annual, Offices, filling of, 2-7033
2-2001 (f(7)) Records to be kept, 2-7033
enforcement of ordinances and laws, Rules, governing, adoption of, 2-7033
2-2001 (f(4)) Vacancies, filling of, 2-7032
finance director, 2-2001(f(1))
general, 2-2001(f(9)) TOWN TAX COLLECTOR See also OFFICERS,
peace, chief conservator of, 2-2001(f(2)) TOWN
personnel policies established by, 2-6003 Duties, general, 2-2003
purchasing agent, 2-2001(f(1))
recommendations to Board on Town TRAFFIC See also BICYCLES; EMERGENCY
affairs, 2-2001(f(5)) VEHICLES; LOADING; PARKING;
reports to Board, preparation of required, PEDESTRIANS; VEHICLES, MOTOR
2-2001 (f(8)) Applicability of provisions, 7-1021 Definitions
Eligibility requirements, 2-2001(a) of terms, 7-1001
Personnel director Direction by fire department officers,
assistants supervised by, 2-2004(2) 7-1023(c)
classification plan duties, 2-2004(6) Direction by police, 7-1023(b) Enforcement
compensation plan duties, 2-2004(6) duties of police, 7-1023(a) Funeral processions,
duties, general, 2-2004(10) vehicles exempted
recommendations made by, 2-2004(5), (7) from prohibition on driving through,
register of eligible persons, maintenance 7-1093
of and appointment from, 2-2004(8) Government employees subject to
regulations made by, 2-2004(9) regulations, 7-1022
reports made by, 2-2004(5) Intersections
roster of employees maintained by, 2-2004(l) blocking, prohibition on, 7-1092
service ratings developed by, 2-2004(4) stop required before entering, 7-1091 Lane
training program duties, 2-2004(3) markings, effect of, 7-1040, 7-1098 Obedience
Qualifications, 2-2001 (a) to officials required, 7-1024 One-way streets
Removal from office of, 2-2001(b) Removal of driver action on, 7-1072
officers or employees by,
signs required, 7-1071 Quiet zones, action in, 7-1041
Play streets, 71039 School zones, action in, 7-1042
Traffic Index I-14
Sidewalks, prohibition on driving on, 7-1094
Signals TRAMPS
advertising prohibited on, 7-1037(b) Prohibition on, 8-1002
interference with, prohibition on, 7-1038
legends TRASH See SOLID WASTE
colors, 7-1034
flashing signals, 7-1036 TREASURER See CLERK-TREASURER
pedestrian control signals, 7-1035
obedience required to, 7-1031 TREES
specifications, 7-1033 Arborist license and bond, 9-6021
unauthorized Conflicting ordinances, 9-6003
information signs permitted, 7-1037(c) Corner clearance, 9-6017
nuisance constituted by, 71037(d) Dead or diseased, removal from private
prohibition on, 7-1037(a) property, 9-6078
Signs Definitions, 9-6005
advertising prohibited on, 7-1037(b) Distance from curb and sidewalk, 9-6012
enforcement dependent upon, 7-1032 Distance from street corners and fireplugs,
interference with, prohibition on, 7-1038 9-6013
obedience required to, 7-1031 Enactment, 9-6002
specifications, 7-1033 Penalties, 9-6023
unauthorized Pruning, 9-6017
informational signs permitted, 7-1037(c) Public tree care, 9-6015
nuisance constituted by 7-1037(d) Purpose of regulations, 9-6001
prohibition on, 7-1037(a) Separability, 9-6004
Speed limits Spacing, 9-6011
exceptions Stumps, removal of, 9-6019
establishment of, 7-1052 Tree Board
listing of, state highways creation, 9-6006
20 mph, Appendix 1 (115) duties, 9-6009
45 mph, Appendix 1 (119) establishment, 9-6006
general, 7-1051 interference with, 9-6020
Stops operation, 9-6008
alleys, emerging from, 7-1086 organization, 9-6007
driveways, emerging from, 7-1086 responsibilities, 9-6009
hazardous intersections, signs required at, review by Board of Commissioners,
7-1083 9-6022
intersections, blocking, prohibition on, Tree species to be planted, 9-6010
7-1087 Tree topping, 9-6016
signs Utilities, 9-6014
driver action at, 7-1085
specifications, 7-1084 TRUCKS See VEHICLES, MOTOR
through streets
designation, 7-1081 U
signs required at, 7-1082
Toys prohibited on streets, 7-1025, 7-1096 UTILITY REGULATIONS See also SEWER
Turns SYSTEM; WATER SYSTEM
indicators, obedience to, 7-1062 Cut-ons, unapproved, 5-3006
intersections restricting Deletions, 5-3002
authority to make, 7-1063 Enforcement, 5-3008
obedience required at, 7-1064 Penalties
manner of making, 7-1061 illegal, unapproved or unmetered taps,
U-turns, restrictions on, 7-1065 5-3010
Vehicles, moving, prohibition on clinging to, tampering, 5-3009
7-1095 unapproved cut-ons, 5-3011
Yield intersections Pipes and meters
action at, 7-1043 interfering with, 5-3004
list of, Appendix 1 (132) tampering with, 5-3003
Purpose, 5-3001 Tampering
Separability, 5-3012 generally, 5-3005
Utility Regulations Index I-15
hydrants, pipes and meters, 5-3003 REGULATIONS
penalty, 5-3009 Access to premises for inspection, 5-1014
Taps, illegal, 5-3007 Charges
adjustments due to meter error, 5-1016
V Board determines, 5-1006(a)
owners of more than one house,
VAGRANTS responsibility of, 5-1011
Prohibition on, 8-1002 reconnection, 5-1012
Connections
VEHICLES FOR HIRE See TAXICABS permit required, 5-1002
required within corporate limits, 5-1004
VEHICLES, MOTOR See also EMERGENCY separate structures require separate,
VEHICLES; PARKING; TRAFFIC 5-1003
Abandoned or nuisance Control by Board of, 5-1001
Administration, 8-3002 Cutting off service, persons authorized to,
definitions, 8-3001 5-1006(b)
disposition of unclaimed vehicle, 8-3010 Definitions of tern , 9-5003
exceptions, 8-3013 Fire hydrants, permit required for use of,
injunctive relief, 8-3015 5-1015
notice requirements Improvements, construction of, 9-5006
exceptions, 8-3006 Meters, tasting for accuracy, 5-1017
pre-towing, 8-3005 Obstruction of, prohibition on, 5-1007
post-towing, 8-3007 Private water supply
penalties, 8-3016 analysis of, 5-1008(b), (c)
private property, conditions or removal regulation of, 5-1008(a)
of vehicle, 8-3011 Public systems, 9-5004, 9-5005
probable cause hearing, right to, 8-3008 Resale of water prohibited, 5-1013
protection against criminal or civil Specifications
liability, 8-3012 purpose, 9-5001
redemption, 8-3009 technical, 9-5008
removal, 8-3005, 8-3007 for installation, 9-5007
authorization, 8-3003, 8-3004 Superintendent, selection by Board of,
unlawful, 8-3014 5-1009
sale of unclaimed vehicle, 8-3010 Tampering with, prohibition on, 5-3005
unlawful Testing of water mains, 9-5010
abandoned, 8-3003 Use of Town water, restrictions on, 5-1005
nuisance, 8-3004 Work on, requirements for, 5-1010
Definitions of terms, 7-1001, 7-1011
Licensing WEAPONS
defacing plate or sticker, 7-1018 Parades, prohibited in, 6-2025
display of plate or sticker, 7-1014
duplicates, 7-1013 WEEDS
exemptions, 7-1016 Abatement by Town, 84004
issuance of plate or sticker, 7-1013 assessment of costs, 84009
nontransferable, 7-1015 Definitions, 8-4001
penalties for violation, 7-1019 Destruction of trees or bushes 8-4006
taxation, 7-1012 Enforcement, 8-4003
taxicabs, 7-1017 Intersections, trimming plants at, 8-4007
Noises created by, excessive, prohibition on, Nuisance conditions unlawful, 84002
8-6002(e) Penalty, 84010
Trimming plants
W extending over streets, 8-4007
intersections, 8-4005
WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT Unsafe trees, removal by owner, 84008
Designated, 2-3001
WATER SYSTEM See also UTILITY
WINE Prohibited in pool rooms and bowling alleys,
Consumption in public, prohibition, 8-1006 6-1035(3)
Wine Index I-16
Z
ZONING
Administration and enforcement
administration and enforcement, 9-4091 Board of adjustment
board of adjustment, 94101
Changes and amendments
changes and amendments, 9-4121 Conditional uses
conditional uses, 9-4111
Definitions and interpretation of terms definitions, 9-4012
interpretation of certain terms and words, 9-4011
General provisions
general provisions, 9-4041
Legal status provisions
legal status provisions, 9-4131
Manufactured park, regulations
manufactured park regulations, 9-4061 Nonconformance
nonconformance, 9-4051
Parking and off-street loading requirements off-street loading requirements, 9-4072
off-street parking 9-4071
Sign regulations
sign regulations,9-4081